    Report No: AUS5495
.




    Romania
    Component C3 of Romania Climate Change RAS
    Report on the simulation of low carbon green growth policies,
    including the results of impact assessment and final policy
    recommendations

.
    NOVEMBER 2015

.
    GEN03
    EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
.




Document of the World Bank
.
.


.
    Standard Disclaimer:
    This report is a product of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / the World Bank. The
    findings, interpretation, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the
    Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee
    the accuracy of the data included in this work.

.   This report does not necessarily represent the position of the European Union or the Romanian Government.
    Copyright Statement:
.   The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions of this work
    without permission may be a violation of applicable laws.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with the complete
    information to either: (i) the Ministry of Environment Waters and Forests, 12 Libertatii Blvd, Postal Code
    040129, 5 Bucharest, Romania or (ii) the World Bank Group Romania (Vasile Lascăr Street, No 31, Et 6,
    Sector 2, Bucharest, Romania)

    This report has been delivered under the Advisory Services Agreement, Romania: Climate Change and
    Low Carbon Green Growth Program.
        Project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund through OPTA 2007 – 2013




   Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program




  Output C 3.2
  Report on the simulation of low carbon green growth policies,
  including the results of impact assessment and final policy
  recommendations




  NOVEMBER 2015
                                                                                      [ 3.
1. [Type a quote from the document or the summary of an interesting point. You can7. 2.     [ 5.
                                                                                         [ 4.     [ [
                                                                                               [ 6.
This report corresponds to Output C3.2 “Report on the simulation of low carbon green growth policies,
including the results of impact assessment and final policy recommendations” in the Advisory Services
Agreement on “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program” signed between the
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 1 and the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development on July 23, 2013.

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of
such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.




1
    Now, Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This report is a synthesis of extensive sector and topical analysis carried out under the Romania Climate
Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) Program, at the request of
the Government of Romania, through the Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests. The project is co-
financed by the European Regional Development Fund through Operational Program Technical Assistance
2007-2013 (OPTA) and has been conducted by a World Bank team led by Erika Jorgensen (Task Team
Leader). This synthesis report was authored by Erika Jorgensen and Maria Shkaratan, with support from
Ka-Yee Ivy Lau, drawing on the analyses under the Program.

Sector and topic analysis was carried out by teams as follows:

       Leszek Kasek, leading a macroeconomic modeling team of Pantelis Capros, Leonidas Paroussos,
        Nikos Kouvaritakis, Kostas Fragkiadakis, Pelopidas Siskos, Alessia De Vita, Panagiotis Karkatsoulis,
        and Stella Tsani (ICCS), Jan Gaska, and local consultants Andrei Dospinescu, Manuela Unguru, and
        Viorel Gaftea.
       Sanjay Pahuja, leading a water team of James Neumann, Kenneth Strzepek, Brent Boehlert, Alyssa
        McCluskey, Richard Swanson, Charles Fant, Jacqueline Willwerth, and Lisa Rennels (Industrial
        Economics), Thierry Davy, Adina Fagarasan, and local consultant, Catalin Simota (National Research
        and Development Institute for Soil Science, Agrochemistry, and Environment – ICPA Bucharest);
       Hans Kordik, leading agriculture, with inputs from Catalin Simota (National Research and
        Development Institute for Soil Science) and based on technical analysis by Industrial Economics;
       Govinda Timilsina, leading an energy team of consultants, including Amit Kanudia, Sunil Malla and
        Femi Faleye;
       Carolina Monsalve, leading a transport team of Robin Kaenzig (Integrated Transport Planning),
        Cosmin Buteica, and local consultant, Otilia Nutu;
       Stephen Hammer, leading an urban team of Tatiana Peralta Quiros, Oliver Kerr and Silpa Kaza,
        and consultants Edward Leman (Chreod Ltd.), Gabriel Simion (University of Bucharest), and Octavia
        Stepan (Ion Mincu University of Architecture and Urban Planning). The team also benefited from
        the assistance of Cristiana Croituru (Technical University of Civil Engineering, Bucharest);
       Diji Chandrasekharan Behr, leading forestry, with inputs from local consultants, Bogdan Popa
        (Transilvania University of Brasov) and Marian Dragoi (Stefan cel Mare University, Suceava).

The work was carried out under the overall supervision of Kulsum Ahmed and the supervision of sector and
topic analysis by Kulsum Ahmed, Juan Gaviria, Ivailo Izvorski, Ranjit Lamech, and Dina Umali- Deininger.
Advice and support was provided by Mamta Murthi, Country Director, and Elisabetta Capannelli, Country
Manager. Thierry Davy, Cosmin Buteica, and Adina Fagarasan have served energetically and effectively as
the focal points for the Program in the Bucharest office and managed relations with the Romanian
Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests.

The work benefited from comments and suggestions from peer reviewers:
      For the overall report: Jane Ebinger, Claus Kondrup and Michael Toman;
      For macroeconomic modeling: Ulrich Bartsch;
      For water: Anju Gaur, Harshadeep Rao, Amal Talbi and Habab Taifour;
      For agriculture: Holger Kray and William Sutton;
      For energy: Morgan Bazilian Feng Liu, and Kari Nyman;
      For transport: Sameer Akbar and Andreas Kopp;
      For urban: Toshiaki Keicho, Josef Leitmann, and Victor Vergara;
      For forestry: Stig Johansson and Andrew Mitchell.

The country assessment benefited significantly from the ongoing interest, guidance, and support of Narcis
Jeler, PIU Head of the World Bank Climate Change Program at the Romanian Ministry of Environment,
Waters and Forests, and the extensive collaboration with local technical experts for each sector or topic
report. We thank the numerous government officials for their collaboration throughout the Program, and
we look forward to ongoing engagement on implementation of low carbon and green growth sustainable
development recommendations.
Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................................................... 12
CHAPTER 1. HOW GREEN IS ROMANIA? A BENCHMARKING EXERCISE .......................................................... 20
CHAPTER 2. WHERE IS ROMANIA HEADING? ECONOMIC EVELOPMENT TO 2050 AND THE IMPACTS OF
CLIMATE ACTION............................................................................................................................................. 21
CHAPTER 3. HOW CAN ENERGY SUPPLY AND DEMAND BE TRANSFORMED? ................................................ 47
CHAPTER 4. HOW CAN TRANSPORT BE LOW CARBON?.................................................................................. 73
CHAPTER 5. CAN URBAN AREAS LEAD ON GREENING?................................................................................... 90
C HAPTE R 6. HOW WILL WAT ER AVAILAB ILITY AFFEC T G ROWTH? ...................................................... 111
CHAPTER 7. CAN AGRICULTURE FLOURISH IN A CHANGING CLIMATE? ....................................................... 124
CHAPTER 8. CAN FORESTRY REALIZE ITS MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION POTENTIAL? ................. 140
CHAPTER 9. A LOOK AT MITIGATION ACROSS SECTORS: A MARGINAL ABATEMENT COST CURVE ............. 160
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ANCA       National Agency for Agricultural Consultancy
AquaCrop   an agricultural (crops and water) yield model
BIMR       Bucharest-Ilfov Metropolitan Region
CAP        Common Agricultural Policy of the European Union
CCS        carbon capture and storage
CLIRUN     Climate Runoff Model
CNP        Comisia Nationala de Prognoza, Romania’s National Commission for Prognosis
CO2        carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas
           carbon dioxide equivalent, a metric used to compare the emissions from various greenhouse
           gases based upon their global warming potential, using the functionally equivalent amount of
CO2e       carbon dioxide as the reference.
CSP        concentrated solar power
CURB       Climate Action for Urban Sustainability
EAFRD      European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development
EARDF      European Agriculture and Rural Development Fund
           Eastern Europe and Central Asia region as designated by the World Bank which includes the
           following thirty countries: Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
           Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Kyrgyz
           Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, FYR Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Russian
           Federation, Serbia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and
ECA        Uzbekistan.
EFI        European Forest Institute
EFISCEN    European Forest Information Scenario Model
           Environmental Performance Index, a joint project of Yale Center for Environmental Law & Policy
EPI        and Center for International Earth Science Information Network of Columbia University
ESDA       end-use service demand analysis (of energy demand)
ESIF       European Structural and Investment Funds
ETS        Emissions Trading System of the European Union
EU         European Union
           15 EU member states before May 2004: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
EU15       Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom.
           13 new EU member states: Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
EU13       Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia
FDI        foreign direct investment
FMP        forest management plan
GAMS       General Algebraic Modeling System computer programming language
Gcal       giga (billion) calorie
Gcal       gram-calorie
GCM        general circulation models
GDP        gross domestic product
GHG        greenhouse gases
GIS        geographic information system
         Global Trade Analysis Project database, a global database of bilateral trade patterns,
GTAP     production, consumption and intermediate use of commodities and services, and CO 2 emissions
GTMP     Romania’s General Transport Master Plan
GVA      gross value-added
GW       gigawatt (equal to one billion or 109 watts)
GWh      gigawatt hour (of electricity, equal to one billion or 109 watt hours)
ICT      information and communications technology
IEA      International Energy Agency
INDC     intended nationally determined contribution to the UNFCCC
INS      Romania’s National Institute of Statistics
IPCC     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISIC     international standard industrial classification
IUDP     integrated urban development plan
IUS      Innovation Union Scoreboard
JRC      Joint Research Centre of the European Commission
kgoe     kilograms of oil equivalent
km       kilometer
ktCO2    thousand tons (metric) of carbon dioxide
ktoe     kilotons (thousand tons (metric)) of oil equivalent
kWh      kilowatt hour (of electricity, equal to one thousand watt hours)
LCS      low carbon scenario
LULUCF   land use, land use change and forestry
m2       square meters
  3
m        cubic meters
MACC     Marginal Abatement Cost Curve
MAED     model for analysis of energy demand
MARD     Romanian Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
MARKAL   Market Allocation Model for energy supply, developed by the IEA
MBtu     millions of British thermal units
MECC     Romanian Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (through 2014)
MEWF     Romanian Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests (from 2015)
MJ       mega (millions of) joules
MtCO2e   million tons (metric) of carbon dioxide equivalent
Mtoe     million tons (metric) of oil equivalent
MW       megawatt (equal to one million watts)
NC6      Romania’s Sixth National Communication
NEMS     national energy modeling system
NFA      Romanian National Forest Administration, Romsilva
NMA      Administratia Nationala de Meteorologie (Romanian National Meteorological Administration)
NMT      non-motorized transport
NOx      nitrous oxide
         Romania’s National Rural Development Program under the “second pillar” of the EU’s Common
NRDP     Agricultural Policy
OECD       Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
PACE       Property Assessed Clean Energy
pkm        passenger kilometer
PM         particulate matter
PPP        purchasing power parity
PUG        Plan Urbanistic General
PV         present value
PV         solar photovoltaic
R&D        research and development
RACE       Rapid Assessment of City Emissions
RATB       Regia Autonoma de Transport Bucuresti (Bucharest)
RCP        reference concentration pathway
SCF        Structural Cohesion Funds
SCI        Sites of Communitarian Interest
SEAP       Sustainable Energy Action Plan
SEM        Sustainable Ecosystem Management
SFM        Sustainable Forest Management
SMEs       small and medium scale enterprises
SO2        sulfur dioxide
SOE        state-owned enterprise
SOP        Structural Operational Program
SOPT       Strategic Operational Program for Transport
SUMP       Bucharest’s Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan
tCO2       tons (metric) of carbon dioxide
TIMES      The Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System model for energy supply, developed by the IEA
TJ         tera (trillions of) joules
tkm        ton (metric) kilometers
TPD        tons (metric) per day (of solid waste)
TRACE      Tool for the Rapid Assessment of City Energy
TRANSEPT   Transport Strategic Emission Prediction Tool
           terawatt-hours. One terawatt-hour is equal to a sustained power of approximately 114
TWh
           megawatts for a period of one year.
UAA        Utilized Agriculture Area
UE         useful energy
ULEV       ultra-low emissions vehicles
           upper middle-income countries, a World Bank global country group by income, which includes
UMC        Romania
UN         United Nations
UNEP       United Nations Environment Program
UNFCCC     United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
WEAP       Water Evaluation And Planning model
WUO        Water User Organizations
          ROMANIA: A CLIMATE CHANGE AND LOW CARBON GREEN GROWTH COUNTRY ASSESSMENT POLICY
                                                                                                      BRIEF
    Romania faces requirements to cut its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as a member of the European
    Union and also opportunities for adapting to coming climate change. Like most countries, Romania
    has already set out on a greener path than in the past, and the European Union has been both supporting
    and mandating ongoing greening of its member states. A lower carbon and greener growth path for
    Romania through 2050 has been developed through extensive multi-sector modeling and analysis, to
    provide advice on how Romania might implement current, imminent, and prospective mitigation
    obligations and undertake needed adaptation while preserving growth and employment. This assessment
    will serve as an input to the government’s Climate Change and Green Growth Strategy and a related Action
    Plan.
    Even with no additional policy actions by the government, Romania is already on a declining carbon path
    because of the current EU climate and energy package. The EU’s mitigation targets and complementary
    EU emissions trading from now until 2020 will help bring Romania’s GHG emissions down by some 11
    percent compared to 2005 (when emissions trading began)2. Keeping current policies in place will continue
    pushing emissions downwards compared to where they would have been, such that emissions in 2050 will
    stand 4 percent lower despite a near-tripling of incomes.
    Central to this lower carbon path is the ongoing decarbonization of the energy sector, which today
    contributes near 60 percent of emissions. A low carbon path in energy will require Romania to abandon
    plans for new coal-based power generation capacity and life-extension of existing plants. It will also require
    a significant additional renewable generation capacity that would replace fossil fuel-fired plants. This
    implies a heavy investment burden, which is further augmented because the variability of wind and solar
    requires significantly increased peak load capacity. Ongoing participation in the current arrangements
    for EU emissions trading are estimated to drive power emissions down by 45 percent by 2050, as new
    generation focuses on renewables and nuclear power in the face of rising carbon prices in EU emissions
    trading. Investment requirements for the power sector are estimated at an average annual 0.8 percent of
                                             3
    GDP during 2015-50 (or about €28 billion of which €7.4 billion is needed before 2020).
    European Union carbon targets are tightening further with the imminent 2030 framework for climate
    and energy policies. The EU proposes that region-wide GHG emissions decline by at least 40 percent by
    2030 compared to 1990 (equivalent to -34 percent compared to 2005). Considering possibilities for
    mitigation from the key energy and transport sectors and considering economy-wide impacts and
    responses, Romania is found able to meet these more stringent targets with only modest costs to growth
    and employment. Output would be lower by 1.1 percent and employment by 1.7 percent, but emissions
    could be reduced by one-fifth by 2030 (an additional 17 percentage points beyond that achieved by current
    policies).
    A greener energy sector needs to accelerate the transition towards low carbon fuels and away from coal
    while improving energy efficiency. To push emissions even lower to meet the EU’s 2030 targets, energy
    efficiency improvements will be critical to a cost-efficient path, offering means for containing the growth

2
    All emissions reduction (within this report) are compared to 2005 unless noted
3
    In net present value terms using a five percent discount rate.
of energy demand, limiting investment requirements to meet the growing demand, and reducing GHG
emissions. With demand contained, the level of investment in power generation equaling €37 billion in
total over the period 2015-50 (or 1.1 percent of GDP on average annually) can add additional solar and
nuclear, and electricity generation from fossil fuel-based sources decreases rapidly. This would include
aggressive energy efficiency investments (or an additional €19 billion of which an additional €3 billion will
be needed before 2020).
Limiting the growth of emissions is a tough challenge for the fossil fuel-dependent transport sector,
especially as Romania’s motorization rate converges with the EU average. Transport emissions are likely
to grow under current policies by 15 percent by 2030 and 44 percent by 2050, and national policies have a
leading role in pushing transport to contribute to the likely 2030 EU target for such sectors of -20 percent.
An efficient set of measures additional to the national general transport master plan can cut transport
emissions to nine percent growth by 2030 and 33 percent by 2050. A greener transport sector can be
fostered through new taxes and charges, programs for better travel choices, effective and efficient public
transport, and good walking and cycling facilities. This set of new policies generate an investment
requirement of just €135 million through 2050, with about €61 million needed before 2020.
Urban areas, especially capital cities such as Bucharest, are often leaders on greening and can contribute
to long-term mitigation through more compact city design, transport-oriented development, and more
efficient vehicles and buildings. A low carbon pathway for Bucharest would require proactive measures to
promote smart urban development through a mixture of land-use planning and action to reduce emissions
from buildings, transport and solid waste, especially given the 30 percent growth in local population and
building stock expected by 2050. Such a policy shift can lead to less sprawl, higher densities, mixed-use,
and a coordination of transit and spatial planning. In turn, better spatial development will generate
significant improvement in energy use, energy spending and emissions, with GHG emissions projected at
more than 40 percent below baseline levels in 2050, PM10 emissions 20 percent lower, and nearly €500
million in thermal energy savings that will accrue to the municipal budget.
At the same time, Romania has opportunities to adapt to coming climate change, especially in the water
and agriculture sectors. A warmer dryer climate will threaten water availability in many river basins in
Romania in summer when irrigation demands are high and rising, also threatening supply reliability for
industrial and domestic use and posing constraints on new hydropower. Also, changes in precipitation and
temperature will undermine crop yields directly. Modest and affordable adaptation actions include
investment in enhanced fertilizer application and in increased crop varieties and would cost about €2 billion
over 2015-50.
Romania’s forests warrant a greater role in climate action. Romania’s expansive forests are critical to
removing emissions, but a changing climate threatens forests’ ability to sequester carbon. Although EU
climate policy does not currently consider forestry, the sector presents a very attractive option to reduce
GHG emissions as additional voluntary action, especially given other benefits of afforestation and strong
public support. A greener path for the forestry sector would include afforestation, intensive management,
and increasing sustainable harvesting, focusing on both state and private forest lands.
The upcoming EU 2030 framework for climate policy is affordable although challenging for Romania, but
the prospective EU Roadmap 2050 will prove expensive and demanding. Aiming for GHG emissions
reduction of two-thirds by 2050 (or 80 percent compared to 1990) would likely push GDP about four
percent lower than otherwise and employment down by five percent. Going to zero in the power sector
requires energy efficiency measures complemented by expensive new renewables and nuclear, with
required investments of an average annual 1.7 percent of GDP during 2015-50 or a total €54 billion over
this time period. The transport sector, through measures such as electric vehicles, can cut its emissions
to five percent growth by 2030 and 27 percent by 2050, but with a required investment requirement of
€1.7 billion through 2050. Last, more ambitious water sector adaptations add investment in irrigation
rehabilitation, pushing total costs to over €11 billion for the period.
An overview of the costs of this low carbon green growth path may assist with government planning.
Drawing together the investment costs for the period 2015-2050 across four key sectors–electricity,
energy efficiency, water, and transport--elicits an average annual 1.5 percent of GDP in the less ambitious
Green scenario (built on the basis of the EU 2030 targets) and 2.4 percent of GDP in the more ambitious
Super Green scenario (built on the basis of the prospective 2050 targets). Investments needed before 2020
total €11 billion in the Green scenario and €14 billion in the Super Green scenario. The corresponding
investment for the period 2015-2030 constitutes 1.3 percent of GDP in the Green and 2.0 percent of GDP
in the Super Green scenario. Across sectors, the highest share of the total investment is required for the
power sector. Importantly, the likely share of public investment is modest, at less than ten percent of the
total under the 2030 targets and just over one-quarter for the 2050 targets.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
    This assessment presents a synthesis of analysis to contribute to the definition of a lower carbon and
    greener growth path for Romania to 2050. The objective of Romania’s green growth path is to implement
    mitigation actions and undertake needed adaptation while preserving growth and employment. Sectoral
    analysis of energy, transport, urban, water, agriculture, and forestry is complemented by economy-wide
    modeling. To bring together the findings, three multi-sector scenarios for Romania’s economic
    development to 2050 are developed: the first without any additional greening actions but including current
    European Union (EU) climate policy—the Baseline; the second with modest effort at further action framed
    around implementation of the imminent EU 2030 low carbon targets and modest adaptation efforts—
    Green; and the third with ambitious action to align Romania with the EU’s prospective Roadmap
    2050 accompanied by ambitious adaptation—Super Green. Despite its technical depth, this report takes a
    practical approach to identifying specific challenges and opportunities Romania faces in building its green
    growth future and to present them in a form useful for decision makers. (See Table on the methodology
    followed for each sector or approach.)

    Romania has maintained a steady growth in output while containing the growth of its greenhouse gas
    (GHG) emissions. The country grew faster than the rest of Europe during 2000 to 2008 and recovered
    quickly from the international financial crisis. Meanwhile, Romania’s greenhouse gas emissions continued
    on their steady long-term path of decline. While emissions per capita are currently the lowest in the EU,
    Romania has among the highest levels of energy and emissions intensity (the energy or emissions per euro
    of GDP) in the European Union (EU) despite ongoing improvements; and the energy sector4 in Romania is
                                                                 5
    responsible for near 60 percent of emissions in the country. Energy is, therefore, an obvious and necessary
    sector to lead on mitigation action (See Figure ES.1).




4
  The energy sector is the standard IEA/IPCC definition and includes electricity and heat production and energy sector
own-use.
5 Excluding LULUCF (land use, land use change, and forests).
 Figure ES.1: Growth and energy consumption have been decoupling and energy intensity
              continuously declining since the early 1990s
                 Trends in growth, energy use, and energy intensity.




 Source: calculations based on WB data from 2015.


From now to 2050, real incomes in Romania are expected to continue to grow, and its carbon emissions
are expected to continue declining. Romania’s per capita income is converging towards EU averages
albeit at a modest pace. Growth overall will be dampened by the ongoing decline in Romania’s population
and labor force, but continuing improvements in total factor productivity will keep growth positive.
Expanding output and incomes will be sufficient to bring about higher energy demand, which in turn will
support rising per capita and overall emissions. Compliance with the current EU ‘2020 climate and energy
package’ and participation in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) will offset this trend, with total
emissions rising only slowly after 2020. Pressure to reduce energy intensity going forward will hasten the
underlying momentum towards service sectors and away from heavy industry. At the same time, it is
assumed that the country will tackle the many inefficiencies that keep it off its best possible growth path
by pursuing reforms and investments to improve the overall performance of key sectors, apart from moving
to greener growth paths (See Figure ES.2).
 Figure ES.2: Steady but modest total factor productivity improvements can keep growth positive
                             Solow decomposition of GDP growth in Romania, 1997-2050




 Note: The chart is based on the standard Solow analysis with a Cobb-Douglas production function ( Y = AK α L1−α ).
       Consequently, GDP growth can be decomposed as ∆ln(Yt ) = ∆ln(At ) + α ∆ln(K t ) + (1 − α) ∆ln(Lt ). The first
       component is contribution of TFP, the second-capital and the third – labor. Capital is calculated on the basis of
       investment data, labor force comes from employment statistics. TFP was calculated implicitly, assuming that share of
       capital in GDP (α) is equal to 40 percent and depreciation rate (δ) is equal to 6 percent.
 Source: World Bank staff calculations based on CNP (Romania Commission for Prognosis) forecast and ROM-E3 model.


Romania can meet the targets of the Green scenario with only modest costs to growth and employment,
EU emissions trading for energy-intensive sectors sets a uniform price for GHG allowances, which generates
an efficient allocation across countries of mitigation actions in those sectors. (See Figure ES.3). Even with
no additional policy actions by the government, Romania is already on a declining carbon path because of
the current EU climate and energy package. The tighter (likely) targets of the Green scenario will reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in all sectors further, by more than one-fifth by 2030 compared to 2005
(an additional 17 percentage points beyond that achieved by current policies) at a cost of only 1.1 percent
of output.

The Super Green scenario, in contrast, seems likely to prove expensive and demanding at the economy-
wide level. By 2050, emissions could be more than two-thirds below 2005 levels, but at a likely cost of
GDP four percent lower than otherwise. Employment impacts are similar. Importantly, the cost to Romania
of either greener path is higher than the EU average. This outcome reflects that fact that Romania is already
on a downwards trend for carbon emissions, and modest additional mitigation is not overly burdensome
despite Romania’s starting point of relatively high energy intensity. However, mitigation as dramatic as that
under the Super Green 2050 scenario is difficult and expensive. Moreover, since the shift to lower carbon
will not be uniform across the economy, it will be important for the government to monitor sectoral,
regional, and social impacts of the green transition, as labor and capital move across sectors, and stand
ready with safety nets as warranted.
 Figure ES.3: EU emissions trading allocates needed mitigation efficiently across countries
             Total GHGs under each scenario for Romania and the rest of the EU, as % change from 2005




 Source: World Bank ROM-E3 model developed under this project.


A greener energy sector needs to continue the transition towards low carbon fuels and away from coal.
Achieving emission reduction targets beyond the EU 2020 targets-the Green (likely EU 2030 targets) and
the Super Green (possible EU 2050 targets)–will require Romania to abandon plans for new coal-based
power generation capacity and life-extension of existing plants. It will also require a significant additional
renewable generation capacity. Replacement of obsolete fossil-fuel electricity plants poses a heavy
investment burden irrespective of mitigation targets; and switching to renewable power to reduce energy
sector emissions at the same time will augment those costs, especially because the intermittency of wind
and solar requires additional peak load capacity. Ongoing participation in EU emissions trading will drive
power emissions to 45 percent below 2005 levels by 2050, without any new policies (the Baseline scenario),
as new generation focuses on renewables and nuclear power in the face of rising carbon prices. (See Figure
ES.4(a) on how the structure of baseline power generation evolves.)
Figure ES.4: Electricity Generation is increasingly dominated by renewables with demand
contained by energy efficiency




Source: World Bank TIMES/MARKAL modeling outcomes as developed under this project.


The difficulty of meeting the tighter targets for mitigation set out in the Green and Super Green scenarios
will be eased significantly by improvements in energy efficiency. Improving energy efficiency across the
board in all economic sectors, but especially in the residential sector and district heating, offers the most
effective and also viable means for containing the growth of energy demand, limiting investment
requirements to meet the growing demand, and reducing GHG emissions. Major measures include use of
more efficient lighting and electric appliances, retrofitting buildings with wall, window and roof insulation,
heating system improvement in residential, commercial and public buildings, and use of efficient electric
motor and thermal energy equipment in the industry sector. These energy efficiency measures can reduce
energy demand for space heating in buildings, promote energy efficiency in industry, and moderate household
demand for electricity. Residential energy consumption can be reduced by more than one-quarter by 2050
(compared to Baseline levels); service sector energy use by almost one-third (because of the impact of
efficiency measures in non-residential buildings); and more than one-sixth decline in industrial sector energy
consumption. The investment costs for these measures is substantial, totaling €19 billion through 2050;6
however, they deliver significant abatement, are cost efficient, and require a modest implementation effort.

Investment in lower carbon power generation is the most expensive part of either green scenario. Under
the Green scenario, in which power emissions are pushed to 45 percent of the 2005 level by 2030 (rather
than by 2050 as in the Baseline), aggressive energy efficiency measures contain demand such that a nearly
unchanged level of investment in power generation can add additional solar and nuclear, and electricity
generation from fossil fuel-based sources decreases rapidly. Investment costs would rise from an average
annual 0.8 percent of GDP of investment for the power sector in the Baseline scenario during 2015-50 to 1.1
percent for supply-side capital as well as demand-side energy efficiency measures under the Green scenario



6
    Discounted at five percent.
    (or €28 billion of investment to €36.540 billion7). Going to zero in the power sector— as in the Super Green
    scenario--requires energy efficiency measures complemented by expensive new electricity generation from
    renewable sources and nuclear, which would eliminate electricity generation from coal-based sources by
    2030. Romania’s power sector emissions could be driven close to zero by 2050 by investing an average
    annual 1.7 percent of GDP in the power sector during 2015-50. (See Figure ES.7 and ES.8). Critically, for a
    successful shift towards low carbon energy, today’s government must accelerate needed sector reforms in
    several areas: pricing, restructuring of lignite and coal power- generating companies, and support
    mechanisms for energy efficiency, renewable energy, and shale gas investment.

          Figure ES.7: The share of renewables grows, mostly at the expense of lignite and coal,
          especially in Super Green scenario
                             a. Renewable energy                                             b. Lignite and coal




         Source: World Bank TIMES/MARKAL modeling outcomes as developed under this project


The challenges for mitigation in the fossil fuel-dependent transport sector are significant, especially as
Romania’s motorization rate converges with the EU average. Transport emissions are likely to grow under
current policies by 15 percent by 2030 and 44 percent by 2050 as more people drive more cars more
kilometers, and national policies have a leading role in pushing transport to contribute to the likely 2030 EU
target for such sectors of -20 percent (compared to 2005). Policies for the transport sector face the challenge
of containing the pressure on emissions coming from continuing growth in vehicle ownership and road travel
and the fossil fuel dependence of the sector. The ongoing shift towards road transport for both passenger
and freight traffic derives from pricing that does not reflect the full costs of transport, technologies that are
fuel inefficient, and the influences of spontaneous transition of the urban form (due to relaxation of land
development controls, encouraging low-density development). Intertwined challenges are traffic congestion,
poor parking management, declining public transport patronage, increasing private vehicle usage, an old
taxi fleet, and lack of pedestrian and cycling infrastructure in urban areas. (See Figure ES.9)




7
In net present value terms using a five percent discount rate
 Figure ES.9: Passenger car use is expanding quickly
                     Passenger Transport Mode Share (land-based modes)




 Source: Eurostat.

A greener transport sector will require new and coordinated national policies and investments and will
yield many additional benefits beyond GHG reduction. Since transport is not part of European emissions
trading, mitigation policies are the responsibility of national governments. Romania already has a national
transport plan which includes commitments to rail investment, as well as an existing set of taxes and
incentives and traffic management measures. A greener transport sector can be fostered through new
taxes on fuel and vehicles, and programs for eco-driving and ‘smarter choices’ in personal travel planning.
The disincentive of high parking charges should be combined with an effective and efficient public
transport system, and good walking and cycling facilities. Transport service provision needs to be
addressed holistically to ensure that public transport is able to attract new users and realize the full climate
and economic benefits. As shown in the marginal abatement cost analysis, transport options have very
high calculated net costs in the absence of inclusion of important co-benefits such as reduced air pollution,
diminished congestion, and fewer road accidents. Although challenging given the underlying trends, the
growth in transport emissions can be slowed by implementing Green or Super Green packages. (See Figure
ES.10 and ES.11)
 Figure ES.10: Transport emissions under                 Figure ES.11: Transport GHG Emissions and Real
         alternative carbon abatement scenarios                         GDP Trends, 2010-2050 (2010 =
                                                                            100)




Source: TRANSEPT.                                             Source: TRANSEPT.


Urban areas, especially Romania’s largest city of Bucharest, have the potential to lead on many green issues,
starting with energy efficiency. Urban areas represent a concentration of population, economic activity, energy
use, and GHG emissions, especially Bucharest. Low density development on the periphery of Bucharest with no
integrated transport and land use planning has contributed to more inefficient urban form. Today, buildings
account for the largest share of energy consumption, and residential buildings in particular use the majority of
energy for heating. (See Figure ES.12).

           Figure ES.12: The Bucharest-Ilfov region dominates the landscape and the economy

    a. Population Distribution in Romania, 2011       b. Bucharest-Ilfov Region’s share of Romania’s GDP and
                                                                              population




Source: Urban technical paper calculation based   Source: Urban technical paper calculation.
on 2011 Population and Housing Census
Proactive measures to promote smart urban development in Bucharest and other urban areas, including
more compact city design, transport-oriented development that changes modal-split, upgrades to a more
efficient vehicle stock, and policies promoting building efficiency upgrades, can deliver sizable reductions
in annual energy spending and emission levels. Such a package of urban low carbon measures would
consist of a mixture of land-use planning and action to reduce emissions from buildings, transport and solid
waste, especially given the 30 percent growth in local population and building stock expected by 2050.
Promotion of mixed land use, up-zoning and transit-oriented development are part of the recommended
policy package, along with congestion pricing and district heating upgrades. Preferential land space for
public transport, creation of pedestrian-only zones, parking policies and completion of ring roads are
complementary transport actions. At the same time, energy efficiency can be fostered through various
financing support and capacity-building programs. Such a policy shift can lead to less sprawl, higher
densities, mixed-use, and a coordination of transit and spatial planning. In turn, better spatial development
will generate significant improvement in energy use, energy spending and emissions, with GHG emissions
projected at more than 40 percent below baseline levels in 2050, PM10 emissions 20 percent lower, and
nearly €500 million in thermal energy savings that will accrue to the municipal budget. The solid waste
sector, currently mostly landfills, can achieve the highest proportional emissions reduction, with 80 percent
below the baseline possible by 2050 if Bucharest-Ilfov meets all EU targets on recycling and biodegradable
waste diversion. Finally, a successful shift to a low carbon pathway for Romania’s capital city, and then for
other municipalities as the lessons of Bucharest’s experience emerges, demands strong local leadership to
steward Bucharest to a low carbon future. (See Figure ES.13).

 Figure ES.13: Smart urban development can save energy and emissions
                Carbon emissions reductions under low carbon scenario relative to BAU, 2050 (metric tons of
                CO2e)




Source: World Bank staff calculations. Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015

A changing climate will affect water and water-using activities and sectors in Romania, but there are
numerous adaptation actions that make sense. Water demand for agriculture has decreased in
correspondence to the long trend of reduction in irrigated area, but water scarcity is serious in many
basins during summer droughts, and climate change will threaten water availability during the primary
growing months while raising irrigation water demand. At the same time, crop yields will be affected by
climate-driven changes in soil moisture, direct temperature effects on crop growth, and changes in the
evapotranspiration requirements of the crop, among other effects. Similarly, supply reliability for industrial
and domestic use is most challenged for basins with lower endowment during summer months. A possible
increase in hydropower generation as part of a lower carbon energy sector will both constrain and be
constrained by changes in river runoff. (See Figure ES.14).

 Figure ES.14: Climate change leads to changes in river runoff
                   Sum of mean monthly runoff across the 91 sub-basins, baseline (1961-2000) versus the
                  three climate projections (2031-2050)




 Source: World Bank staff calculations.
A greener water sector should pursue adaptation investments with the greatest potential. These
investments include optimizing agronomic inputs, including fertilizer inputs, and rehabilitating irrigation
infrastructure to restore irrigation production to currently rainfed areas. Expanded irrigation should be
targeted to the Southeast and South-Muntenia regions. These measures would require complementary
investment in high-quality extension services, as well as increased and/or subsidized availability of
fertilizers, with the payoff being a significantly increased crop yield. To ensure consolidation of the smallest
farms is encouraged while also avoiding an unnecessary subsidy to the largest farms which are already quite
productive, fertilizer programs should be targeted for farms of medium size (roughly 10 ha),
Recommendations also include encouraging windbreaks and soil management to reduce soil erosion,
    promoting renewable energy sources, promoting organic farming, improving good farming practices,
    improving awareness of climate change and the need for adaptation, and strengthening policy and
    institutional capacity is vital to support the recommended interventions. Modest adaptation actions in the
    water sector under the Green 2030 scenario, including investment in enhanced fertilizer application and in
    increased crop varieties, would cost about €2 billion over 2015-50 while more ambitious water sector
    investments in the Super Green 2050 scenario add investment in irrigation rehabilitation, pushing costs to
    over €11 billion for the period.8

    Romanian agriculture requires adaptation actions, and the sector can also contribute to mitigation goals.
    Agriculture has average crop yields 30-50 percent below the EU average and labor productivity four times
    lower than the EU average, at least partly due to the large share of subsistence agricultural holdings. The
    ageing farm population and out-migration of the younger generation could trigger a significant change in the
    structure of the sector in the next 15 years. Effective policies will be essential to address the risk of land
    abandonment and address the issue of land fragmentation. As noted above, the main adaptation actions
    in Romanian agriculture include a reliable irrigation infrastructure, adjusted crop varieties, and improved
    fertilizer application, all of which will improve revenues more than sufficiently to cover costs. Emissions
    from the agriculture sector can be addressed through a number of mitigation actions. Currently supported
    mitigation measures are minimum tillage and manure management. Financing needs for these measures
    are low, although small farms are ineligible for the related EU support. The measures are also highly
    beneficial from the point of sector efficiency. Moderating methane emissions from livestock through
    changes in feed may also prove important, especially if this part of the agricultural sector continues to
    expand into the future at recent rates of growth. (See Figure ES.15).

     Figure ES.15: Agricultural trade balance is recovering, but production is flat
                     Agricultural output and trade balance
     Source: calculations based on data from Eurostat and Food and Agriculture Organization, 2015




8   In net present value terms using a five percent discount rate
    Romania’s forests warrant a greater role in climate action. Romania has the largest intact tract of
    contiguous natural and naturally regenerated forests in Europe. LULUCF9 activities (and mostly forestry
    activities) removed more than one-quarter of Romania’s emissions during 2000-11. Climate change,
    however, is negatively affecting forest health and growth through drying and biological risks such as pest
    infestation and increased frequency of forest fires. This compromises forests’ ability to sequester carbon,
    unless they are appropriately managed. Romania’s forest holdings are a mix of private, public, small and
    large, and have uneven road accessibility, requiring concerted efforts to promote sustainable management
    of forests. With investments, forestry appears a very attractive option for Romania to reduce its emissions.
    Although, EU climate policy does not currently consider forestry, investments are warranted as additional
    voluntary action given the co-benefits they can generate and the level of public support. A greener path for
    the forestry sector would include afforestation, shorter rotations for harvesting timber, and conservation
    actions. To ensure the long-term health of forests, sustainable management has to occur on both state and
    private forest lands and a simplified regulatory regime for forest management is required. Intensive
    sustainable management of forests and increasing afforestation can increase the level of CO2 sequestered.
    Romania’s forests can provide significant mitigation contributions at low cost, particularly through
    afforestation, but some public financing and good use of EU funds will be needed. (See Figure ES.16).

         Figure ES.16: Forestry is an important contributor to mitigation
                        Emissions removal by LULUCF




         Source: Chandrasekharan Behr and Popa, 2014


An overview of the costs of this low carbon green growth path for Romania is informative for government
planning. Drawing together the analysis of investment costs during 2015 to 2050 elicits an average annual 1.5
percent of GDP of additional investment needed for the Green 2030 scenario during 2015-50 and 2.4 percent
for the Super Green 2050 scenario across four key sectors–electricity, energy efficiency, water, and transport.


9
    Land use, land-use change and forestry sectors.
These numbers are equivalent to €3.5 and €5.2 million per year in the period 2015-50, in the Green and the
Super Green scenarios respectively.10 The estimated costs from now until 2020 are €11 billion under the
Green scenario and €14 billion under the Super Green 2050 scenario. The costs of building new power plants
dominates investment needs in both scenarios. Funding from the EU could prove key for financing some
of these investments, in particular in energy efficiency and in forestry (the costs for which are additional to
these aggregates). Importantly, the likely share of public investment is modest, at less than one-sixth of the
total and less than one-quarter for the Green 2030 and Super Green 2050 scenarios respectively. Figure ES.17
provides an estimate of the sector contribution to the overall abatement and also of the cost each sector
would have per unit of CO2 abated. (See Figure ES.17). Marginal Abatement Curve for Romania (Figure ES.18)
shows abatement potential and unit costs of each of the evaluated measures, across sectors. In year 2050,
when all measures will be implemented in full, actions across the four mitigation sectors in this assessment
will reduce emissions in the country by 38 Mt CO2 eq./year. It should be kept in mind that such costings are
snapshots based on available data and the technology set that today is considered practical for such
assessments. New technologies will certainly emerge over coming decades that will change these costs and
benefits, providing an important reason why governments need to update such analysis periodically.

   Figure ES.17. Mitigation possible by 2050 requires measures across many sectors

                   Emissions reduction by sector, 2050, Super Green scenario, and average cost of the green
                   measures, 2015-2050




 Source: MAC Curve Technical Paper, Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015




  10
       In net present value terms using a five percent discount rate.
Figure ES.18. A Marginal Abatement Cost Curve for Romania
              Cross-sectoral, cost per ton of CO2e abated and abatement potential, 2050




Note: How to read the MACC. The height of each column shows the average cost of abating one ton of CO 2 by 2050. The chart is ordered from left to right from the measures with
       the lowest cost to the ones with the highest cost. The width of each column shows the GHG emission reduction potential of the measure in year 2050, when all the measures
      have been fully implemented.

Sources of data: Sector Technical Reports; calculations are done using a tool developed at the World Bank.
Executive Summary Table. Methodologies for the Green Growth Country Assessment

                                                                                                                     Analytic Framework
 Sector or issue         Objective
                                                         Models used and modeling framework                                     Modeling outcomes
                   To capture complex       The Romania Energy-Environment-Emissions (ROM-E3) model), a                Growth, employment, fiscal, and
 Macroeconomic     linkages between         recursive stochastic general equilibrium model, was developed,             investment impacts of mitigation

 Modeling  mitigation and                   drawing on the well-known GEM-E3 model, and applied to simulate            actions, as well as impact on sectoral
                   adaptation policies      green scenarios. Sector as well as macro outcomes, in particular,          structure.
                   and economic             carbon prices from emissions trading, were then used in sector             Serves as the baseline scenario for other
                   performance; and to      analysis to ensure consistency. As a global model, ROM-E3 can              sector and macroeconomic analysis.
                   set out a detailed       simulate the economic interactions of Romania with the rest of the
                   economic baseline
                   Mitigation options: To   EU and the rest
                                            Supply-side     of the (TIMES
                                                        modeling   world. EU climate and
                                                                           MARKAL),      energy policies
                                                                                     demand-side         can be scenario.
                                                                                                  modeling                represented
                                                                                                                    Capacity          in detail
                                                                                                                             and generation     fuelcomplexity
                                                                                                                                            byand    source
                   in the model.
 Energy      find optimal solutions         (ESDA), coordinated with the macroeconomic model (ROM-E3).                 in power generation under different for
                   power supply mix         The ROM-E3 model projected basic economic indicators which drive           scenarios. Emissions from the energy
                   to cover demand at a     energy demand: GDP, energy sector value-added, and energy prices           and power sectors. Required investment
                   minimum cost while       as well as emissions allowance prices needed to attain the green           and other costs for each scenario.
                   reducing emissions of    scenarios. TIMES MARKAL found a least-cost mix of power sources
                   the power sector.        to meet power demand projections (using ESDA), while accounting Included potential for constraints such as
                   resources, technology, user constraints and a reduction in power cap on GHG emissions (the allowance prices). The ESDA modeling
                   demand as a result of    estimates energy sector end-user service demand and projected the energy efficiency        penetration of a set
                   of green technologies that could reduce energy measures in industry,  demand.
                   household, and non- residential sectors.
                   Mitigation options: To TRANSEPT (Transport Strategic Emission Prediction Tool)                Road travel demand and road transport

 Transport   estimate the cost of           developed. Included Romanian General Transport Master Plan in the          fleet composition and performance (fuel
                   proposed green           baseline scenario, as well as certain existing pricing instruments and     consumption and emissions) as a result
                   investments and          regulations. TRANSEPT model evaluated the impact of various                of green policy implementation.
                   emissions reduction.     transport and environmental policies on the transport sector               Sectoral indicators (vehicle population
                                            outcomes.                                                                  and age, vehicle-kilometer traveled, ton-
                                                                                                                       kilometer transported, volume of rail
                                                                                                                       travel). Sectoral outcomes used to
                                                                                                                   Analytic Framework
    Sector or issue         Objective
                                                           Models used and modeling framework                                    Modeling outcomes
                                              Applied multi-criteria analysis to select transport measures for         project the level of fuel consumption
                                              scenarios.                                                               and emissions including CO2, NOX, and
                                                                                                                                                           PM10.8
                      To assess the impact    Rapid Assessment of City Emissions (RACE) model is a geospatial          Population and development patterns
    Urban       of urban green                model that compares population and development patterns for a            and the implications for emissions under
                      policies and            region under different scenarios, in order to develop technical          different scenarios. Energy demand,
                      investments under       estimates of how they differ in terms of energy use, energy spending GHG emissions, PM10 and other
                      two green growth        levels, air quality emissions, and GHG emissions. By changing            emissions for each scenario. Fiscal
                      scenarios.              assumptions about current and future land use patterns, the design       savings for municipal government.
                                              and location of different public transport system options, the energy and emission factors assigned to different land
                                              use patterns in a city, and the solid waste management system design, it is possible to compare a “baseline”
                                              scenario with one or more alternative scenarios in terms of energy demand, energy spending, energy- related air
                      Adaptation options:     qualityCirculation
                                              Global               Models
                                                       emissions (PM10     (GCMs),
                                                                         and  NOx), Water  Evaluation And
                                                                                    and energy-related CO2Planning
                                                                                                            emissions. Intermediate outcomes:
    Water and   To assess the impact          (WEAP) model, CLImate and water RUNoff model (CLIRUN) and a              - Climate projections
                                                                                                                                        on competing uses of
    Agriculture of a changing climate         crop water productivity model (AquaCrop).
                                                                                                                       - Water runoff
                                              1. GCMs produced climate projections, which were used as inputs in
                      water, especially by                                                                             - Irrigation water demand
                                              CLIRUN to estimate streamflow runoff and in AquaCrop to estimate
                      the agriculture and     crop yield and irrigation water demand.                                  - Crop yield
                      power sectors.                                                                                   - Water availability
                                              2. Runoff and irrigation demand estimates from CLIRUN and
                                              AquaCrop were used as inputs in the WEAP tool, where water               - Hydropower potential
                                              storage, hydropower potential, and water availability were modeled.      - Water storage
8                                              3. To refine the AquaCrop estimates of crop yield in irrigated areas,         outcomes:
                                                                                                                       Mainand
  NOx is a generic term for mono-nitrogen oxides, in particular, NO2. NO2 forms quickly from emissions from cars, trucks        buses, power plants, and off-road
                                               the unmet   demand   for irrigation water from WEAP , together with
equipment. In addition to contributing to the formation of ground-level ozone, and fine particle pollution, NO2 is linked with a number of adverse effects on the
respiratory system. NOx are distinct from nitrous oxide (N 2O), a greenhouse gas emitted from agricultural lands. PM10 is atmospheric particulate matter smaller
than 10 microns.
                                                                                                                      Analytic Framework
Sector or issue         Objective
                                                       Models used and modeling framework                                        Modeling outcomes
                                          statistical data on irrigated crop sensitivity to water availability, was     - Projected revenues from crop
                                          fed back into Aquacrop.                                                       production and hydropower generation
                                          4. Finally, the WEAP hydropower generation and AquaCrop crop                  - NPV of investments
                                          yield results are analyzed to produce estimates of their economic             Financial evaluation of infrastructure
                                          implications: projected revenue from crop production and                      investment options for water and
                                          hydropower and NPV of investments in these sectors.                           agriculture:
                                                                                                                - Net present value of the cash flow of
Forestry    Mitigation: options for       MAC curve analysis was undertaken for 3 mitigation measures: afforestation, sustainable management of
                                                                                                                benefits and costs
                  GHG removal             production forests, and sustainable management of protection forests.

Benchmarking      To provide an initial   Using a broad set of indicators of green growth available for most countries to identify important elements of
                  portrait of the         green growth for Romania. Key areas for indicators are: (i) Sustainable use of natural resources, including
                  country’s status,       minerals, water and clean air, and biodiversity; (ii) mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions; (iii) adaptation to a
                  prospects, and          changing climate, and (iv) innovation and green jobs. For any individual country, endowments and history
                  challenges with         matter for current ‘greenness’ and potential greening of growth paths. A framework of key questions with three
                  respect to green        aspects: (i) “how green?”, (ii) “going green,” and (iii) “riding a green wave,” is used to guide a benchmarking
                  growth.                 exercise in which Romania is mapped against comparator countries and country groups using a dataset of more
                                          than 100 indicators for 69 countries for 1990 to 2009.
Marginal   Mitigation options:            Marginal abatement cost (MAC) analysis is commonly used as a tool in evaluating emission reduction
Abatement Cost effectiveness of each      technologies in terms of their potential mitigation impact (emissions abated) and unit cost (cost per ton of CO2e
Curve      proposed abatement             abated). They are also considered to be a most efficient communication instrument used in discussions of the
                 measures by              abatement policies. MACC charts are designed to be a “brief”: they compare technologies to be considered for
                 measuring its marginal   implementation in a simple (easy to comprehend in a limited time) but informative way. The technologies can net
                 cost (present            be presented one by one or at various levels of aggregation, including by blocks of technologies, by economic
                 value of net cost per    sector, or even by groups of sectors. In the MACC, each technology has two characteristics: the level of
                 unit of CO2e             abatement, Mt CO2e, which equals to the difference in emissions produced by the new technology as compared
                 abatement) and the       to the technology it replaces (abatement potential) and the cost of the technology per unit of abatement, €/t
                 related abatement        CO2e. Electricity supply, energy efficiency, forestry, agriculture and water, and transport green measures were
                 potential.               used in the MAC analysis.
CHAPTER 1. HOW GREEN IS ROMANIA? A BENCHMARKING EXERCISE

 CHAPTER SUMMARY

 Using a broad set of indicators of green growth, Romania is compared to international and regional
 benchmarks to provide an initial portrait of the country’s status, prospects, and challenges with
 respect to green growth. Green growth starts with a traditional concern about sustainable use of
 natural resources, including minerals, water and clean air, and biodiversity, and then adds consideration of
 mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions, attention to adaptation to a changing climate, and more focus
 on innovation and green jobs. For any individual country, the nature of a greener growth path will depend
 on endowments and history, which position countries quite differently with respect to current ‘greenness’
 and potential greening of their growth paths. A framework to define a list of questions key to
 understanding how Romania or any country compares in an international context is constructed with three
 aspects — “how green?”, “going green,” and “riding a green wave,” and used to guide a benchmarking
 exercise in which Romania is mapped against comparator countries and country groups using a dataset of
 more than 100 indicators for 69 countries for 1990 to 2009. This benchmarking exercise aims to define,
 “What is green growth, and how green is Romania?”

 Romania is endowed with several types of natural resources, which, if used productively, can support
 economic growth: fuel and mineral deposits; hydropower resources; wind power resources, and
 agricultural land. However, management of water resources requires improvement; including water
 resource management, significant reforms in agriculture aimed at increased productivity, and improved
 management of the forests. While both emission intensity of the economy and energy intensity of the
 economy have been decreasing since 1990, they are still among the highest in the EU. However, within the
 comparator country list selected on economic development grounds for this Benchmarking analysis 11 ,
 Romania’ emission intensity and energy intensity are moderate. The energy sector in Romania is
                                                                     12
 responsible for 58 percent of emissions in the country                   and is therefore most important sector for
 mitigation.

 Romania’s growth model needs to be strengthened: in the past, it was based on consumption and
 short-term capital inflows rather than on sustained productivity increases in tradable sectors, which led to
 a stagnant growth. Romania is moving closer to the rest of the EU in economic development: per capita
 GDP is closer to the EU average as a result of institutional reforms and market liberalization; increased FDI
 inflows and other financial inflows supported growth in manufacturing and pushed up demand; increasing
 investments in education have led to growth in tertiary education enrollment. However, Romania still
 needs to remove constraints to productivity gains and growth; to re-start the convergence process, it

11
   See a detailed description of the comparator list and the selection approach in the methodology section in this
chapter and in the Benchmarking technical paper.
12
   Energy sector statistical definition in this chapter is based on the standard IEA/IPCC definition and includes electricity
and heat production and energy sector own use.
 should increase productivity in areas where it has comparative advantage.

 Romania’s outcomes in innovation and knowledge economy are one of the weaknesses the country has.
 Romania is ranked last in the EU by the EC’s Innovation Union Scoreboard (IUS). However, when Romanian
 innovation performance is considered within a wider set of countries, the picture is not so grim.
 According to the Global Innovation Index 2014, Romania ranks 55th within 143 countries evaluated.


 CHALLENGES FOR GREENER GROWTH
         Overview
 Green Growth Benchmarking is a country green growth diagnostics, which helps define the country’s
 strengths and vulnerabilities in assuming the path to greener growth. Green growth is growth in economic
 output that preserves the ability of natural assets to provide the resources and services on which human
 welfare depends.13 While most countries agree that such growth is a worthy goal, determining what a
 green growth path might mean for a particular country is a significant challenge. A starting point in the
 process of defining the country’s green growth path should be analysis aimed at mapping the country’s
 current position on a multi-dimensional chart of green growth, with each dimension defined by a green
 growth indicator. The purpose of such analysis is to understand what the country needs to do to pursue
 green growth and what policy decisions, investments and institution building need to be made to support
 green growth. Green growth benchmarking is a methodology proposed here for such analysis.

 Green growth starts with a traditional concern about sustainable use of natural resources. The
 efficient exhaustion of nonrenewable resources such as energy and mineral deposits and the sustainable
 use of renewable resources such as forests and fisheries, water and clean air have been considered part of
 a sustainable growth agenda for decades. Natural resources are necessary to economic activity, providing
 raw materials and environmental services essential for production to continue. Some components of
 natural resources have become of greater concern in recent years, among them freshwater resources
 affected by overexploitation, pollution, and climate change; and biodiversity under threat from habitat
 alteration and pollution.

 Mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions is a critical additional component of environmental
 sustainability, with rising prominence and particularly difficult challenges for countries . The growing
 imbalance of greenhouse gases (or ‘carbon’) in the atmosphere is a clear example of the breeching of
 planetary boundaries and of a global public good. As such, individual countries can reap only local co-
 benefits such as reduced suspended particulates in the air if fossil fuel burning is reduced. Since the bulk
 of the benefits do not accrue to an individual country, a decision to move to low carbon generally must be
 motivated by other considerations, including access to carbon finance and other external funding, in
 response to regional standards and requirements such as those of the European Union, or driven by a
 decision to lead on global issues and prepare for an eventual global agreement.


 13
    Green Growth Knowledge Platform website. Developed in partnership between the Global Green Growth
Institute, the OECD, UNEP, and the World Bank: www.ggkp.org.
 Adaptation to a changing climate must also be part of a country’s sustainable growth path. Regardless
 of future greenhouse gas emissions, climate is already changing, with more extreme weather events,
 rising sea levels, and overall warming. Some countries, sectors, and populations will be strongly affected,
 although with major impacts in most places not materializing for some decades. For many countries, it
 makes sense to consider how adaptation needs can be incorporated into decisions about long-lived
 infrastructure such as new hydropower plants. More generally, countries that will face significant impacts
 need to factor such shifts—in frequency of droughts, in crop yields, in coastal and riverbank flooding—
 into thinking about sustainable and greener development paths.

 The newest element of the green growth agenda is the strong emphasis on innovation and green jobs.
 This dimension of green growth proposes that a shift towards greener growth will spur technological
 innovation, especially in the energy sector, promote the emergence of new industries and increase the
 number of jobs in green industries. Innovation can help decouple growth from natural resource depletion
 and greenhouse gas emissions by shifting out global production possibilities and allowing more production
 with fewer and more environmentally- friendly inputs. Environmental considerations don’t necessarily
 constrain growth, but, to the contrary, a dynamic technical change towards low carbon and low pollution
 technologies could drive growth and generate jobs at all skill levels (Figure 1.1).14

              Figure 1.1. Elements of environmental sustainability that together constitute green growth




 Source: Benchmarking Technical Paperș Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015




14
  Such an argument is consistent with mainstream economic thinking if there is close substitutability between
clean and dirty technologies. In that case, temporary government subsidies or other supportive policies can push the
economy towards a clean solution, causing the sector with clean technology to become large enough to be self-
sustaining. In such a situation, the shift to greener technologies will support growth rather than limiting it. See Aghion,
Philippe, Daron Acemoglu, Leonardo Bursztyn and David Hemous. 2011. The Environment and Directed Technical
Change. Growth and Sustainability Policies for Europe (GRASP) project of the European Commission (EC). Working
Paper 21. Brussels: EC. See also the quick overview in Jamus Lim. May 23, 2010. “Environmentally- Friendly
Growth Without the Pain.” Prospects for Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/prospects/environmentallyfriendly-growth-without-the-pain#1.
        Where Should Countries Start?

A greener growth path must address these four aspects and balance greening with growth of output and
incomes, but the details of a country’s path will depend on country specific conditions and policy choices.
Each country starts with a set of endowments, natural and man-made. While some aspects of any country’s
current condition are driven by recent policy choices, much derives from exogenous characteristics such as
geography or endowments of fossil fuels, hydropower potential, or forests; and the myriad of distant policy
decisions that drove national development to where it is today. These characteristics position countries
quite differently with respect to the current ‘greenness’ and potential greening of their growth paths. In
considering the complex task of assessing green growth at the country level, the starting point is
fundamental to the costs and tradeoffs the country faces in choosing a greener path forward.

One holistic approach to sustainability is national wealth accounting and the measurement of natural
capital, which aims to capture a good part of the green challenges to orthodox growth measurement.
Part of the determination of an optimal green growth path for a country involves proper valuation of
environmental costs and benefits, an approach which has been part of the sustainability agenda for
many years. Recent international agreement to support wealth accounting or green national accounts is
moving this effort into the mainstream. A correct costing of depreciation of natural resources such as
mineral deposits and of externalities such as air and water pollution will take countries who adopt such an
approach a good distance to maximizing a greener type of GDP. However, some elements of greenness are
not easily costed, among them greenhouse gas emissions, biodiversity and the non- income benefits
(or happiness) that comes from living in a country with a healthy and well-protected natural
environment. A simpler starting point in such assessment is benchmarking against comparator countries—
using indicators that measure various dimensions of green growth. This quick mapping can help identify
challenging areas, as well as easy wins. It can create a balanced portrait of a country’s green issues,
and, as set out below, it can have an analytic rather than monitoring objective.


METHODOLOGY

The scheme below (Figure 1.2) helps to define a list of questions key to understanding how Romania
or any country compares in an international context. Firstly, how important are natural resources to
current growth, and how productively has the country made use of them? Is pollution a major problem?
Has Romania made any progress in decoupling economic growth and greenhouse gas emissions? Is the
country preparing for the impacts of a changing climate? Secondly, is Romania’s economy flexible
enough to succeed in the transition towards green growth? Is Romania’s economy well-diversified and
ready to reap emerging opportunities? What will be Romania’s greatest challenges in greening its economy,
and what will be its biggest payoffs from ‘going green’? Thirdly, how can Romania be ready for a surge
of innovation and be competitive in new and growing green industries? These three aspects of measuring
‘green-ness’ capture a country’s status, prospects, and challenges with respect to the four elements in
Figure 1.1.
 Romania was benchmarked against comparator countries using a specially-constructed database.
 Information on more than 100 indicators across 69 countries for 1990 to 2009 was collected. Romania was
 compared to a subset of these countries selected based on economic, social and policy criteria and also
 against three country groups: the European Union (EU), the ECA region, and all upper middle income
 countries (UMC).15

 Acknowledging that attempting to measure green growth is not a new effort, the design of the database
 draws on lessons from recent OECD and Environmental Performance Index (EPI) publications.16Data is
 derived from a variety of sources, including the World Bank’s Development Data Platform. The selection
 of relevant indicators balanced data availability and reliability. Some indicators are proxies or correlated
 variables such as using life expectancy to capture environmental health impacts. Unfortunately, there
 are important areas of environmental performance where reliable, internationally comparable data is
 missing, e.g., waste production and management, toxic substance concentrations, and water and soil
 quality.


                         Figure 1.2. A framework for green growth benchmarking




                                                                        Riding a
             How                        Going
         • Natural
                                        • Structure of                  •
                                                                          global
             •           use            • Labor market
             natural                                                    • Getting ready     the
                                          and human
             •                          • Business
                                          and capital                   • Green     and
                                        • Energy                          green            and
         •              to
             changing                   • Global links:
                                          emissions embodied




15
   For more detailed analysis and comparisons to selected comparator countries, see the Benchmarking technical paper.
The ECA region is the Eastern Europe and Central Asia region and includes the following thirty countries: Albania,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary,
Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Kyrgyz Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, FYR Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Poland, Romania,
Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.
16
   One of the best known approaches to country environmental performance is the Columbia-Yale Environmental
Performance Index. For the newly-emerging area of green growth, the OECD, the EU, and the UN have pioneered work
on indicators, and the World Bank’s new Green Growth Knowledge Platform, a joint effort with OECD, UNEP, and the
Global Green Growth Institute, will focus on further development and harmonization of indicators of green growth
 MAIN FINDINGS

 How green?

 Romania is endowed with several types of natural resources, which, if used productively, can support
 economic growth: fuel and mineral deposits (including oil, gas, lignite, iron ore, copper, bauxite,
 manganese, lead, and zinc), which now comprise shale gas; hydropower resources; wind power
 resources, and agricultural land. The fuel and mineral resources support energy security and are used as
 industrial inputs. However, the oil and gas resources have been declining over time and Romania now is a
 net oil and gas importer; and extraction of shale gas is discussed, but has not started yet. Agricultural land
 in Romania is a valuable resource and the sector can potentially create significant value added – after
 all, Romania used to be considered “the bread basket of Europe”. However, currently agriculture is highly
 inefficient - a sector with almost 30 percent of employment accounts for 5 percent of GDP, resulting in the
 lowest farm labor productivity and the lowest agricultural income in the EU – and the country imports
                          17
 70 percent of its food. The direct reason for inefficiency is land fragmentation and prevailing subsistent
 farming. Reviving agriculture will involve, among other efforts requiring significant investment and
 considerable policy measures, increased irrigation, which will put additional pressure on Romania’s limited
 water resources. Production of food in the country also suffers from dilapidated stocks of fish –
 Romania’s fish resources are in the worst condition within the comparator sample. On the positive side,
 Romania implements policies to protect its resources and is characterized by productivity of their usage:
 it has a very high share of marine protected areas, a low level of PM pollution, and a low level of
 water withdrawals.

 Benchmarking analysis shows the main Romania’s strengths and weaknesses in the area of natural
 resource endowment, usage, and productivity of natural resource usage relative to the comparator
 countries and country groups (Figure 1.3). According to the conceptual framework of the benchmarking
 analysis, the indicators used here concern four basic natural assets –land, water, air, and sources of energy.
 Natural resource usage include the consumption of the resource – e.g., water withdrawals, air pollution,
 forest loss – and productivity of usage is measured by resource consumption per unit of GDP or, in a reverse
 format (depending on indicator availability), by GDP per unit of resource consumption. The main strengths
 of Romania in this area are significant endowment with agricultural land, low level of water withdrawals,
 moderate level of air pollution (PM10), and moderate level of forest loss. The main weaknesses are low
 productivity of agriculture reflected in cereal yields, dilapidated seafood resources (fish stocks collapsed)
 and low water resources per capita. These indicators need to be interpreted with caution, within a broader
 context, to avoid assigning a positive meaning to essentially negative events, which seem positive when
 just one indicator is observed (e.g., see indicator of agricultural land described below, which should
 be considered in the context of productivity of land usage) and vice versa.




17
  World Bank. 2013. A Country Economic Memorandum. Romania: Reviving Romania’s Growth and Convergence
Challenges                 and                  Opportunities.                Available            at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/18028709/reviving-romanias-growth-convergence-
Water withdrawals are close to the lowest point in the comparator sample and are much lower than the
international benchmark for pressure on available water resources (water stress is defined at 10 percent
of water withdrawal as share of water resources and Romania’s level is 3.2 percent). This indicator needs
to be interpreted in the context of the country endowment with water resources because the
importance of water resource management is higher in countries with limited water availability. Romania’s
water resources are far from being abundant – their level of 1,969 m3 per capita is only slightly above the
international benchmark for water stress of 1,700 m3 per capita. Considering this relatively low level of
water availability, Romania’s current overall rate of water withdrawals is reasonable.

Particulate matter (PM10) air pollution in the Romanian large cities is average for the comparator
sample. Romania’s performance according to this indicator is better than the average performance of
the ECA countries and worse than the average EU performance. Considering Romania’s status as an EU
member and the EU environmental requirements, Romania is aiming at reducing the air pollution level and
at moving closer to countries like Finland, Estonia, Ireland, UK and Sweden, which have the lowest levels
of the PM 10 pollution in their large cities among the EU countries. However, currently Romania is close to
the bottom of the EU ranking in PM10 pollution, just behind Poland and performing better than only five
countries: Greece, Latvia, Bulgaria, Malta, and Cyprus.

Romania has significant share of agricultural and forest land. Forest loss in Romania averaged a low 4
percent of forest stock over the period 2000-2010, significantly below the EU average of 10 percent
during the same time and below the comparator sample average of 5.4 percent. Romania’s forest covers
28 percent of its land area and the total growing stock is estimated at 1,413 million cubic meters. The
annual allowable cut is 22.3 million hectares, but forest cuts are much lower -- in 2012, they amounted to
15.3 million hectares or 48 percent of the growing stock.18 Agricultural land occupies 59 percent of the
country’s area and almost two-thirds of it is arable. Romania has one of the highest shares of rural
population and of agricultural employment within the EU: rural population amounts to 45 percent of the
total population (compared to the 26 percent in the EU) and agricultural employment constitutes 29
percent of total employment (compared to 5 percent employment in the EU). Despite its high share of
employment, agriculture in Romania adds only 5 percent to GDP, making Romania the lowest ranking in
the EU in farm labor productivity. It also has the lowest agricultural income, which amounts to only 22
percent of the average EU farm income per unit of full time employment. Forty-five percent of the
agricultural land in Romania is used for subsistent agriculture and another 21 percent – for semi-
subsistent agriculture. The country, which used to be considered “the bread basket of Europe”, now imports
                      19
70 percent of its food .

Low productivity of agriculture in Romania reflects in its cereal yields, which are significantly below
the ones in the EU comparator countries: while Romania produces 2.8 tons of cereal per hectare, the


18
   World Bank. 2013. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program. Forest Sector Rapid
Assessment.
19
   World Bank. 2013. A Country Economic Memorandum. Romania: Reviving Romania’s Growth and Convergence
Challenges and Opportunities.
EU average production is 5.0 tons per hectare and the top EU levels are 7.2 tons per hectare (Germany)
and 6.1 tons per hectare (Denmark); the only countries in the comparator sample that rank below Romania
according to the indicator of cereal yield are Turkey, Azerbaijan, Russia and Kazakhstan. However, these
numbers have to be interpreted in the context of the farm size (this is specifically relevant for cereal
production): while two-thirds of the agriculture are subsistent and semi-subsistent farms with very low
productivity, there is a small number of large and efficient farms with higher yields; the national number is
therefore the average of the two extremes.

              Figure 1.3. Natural resource endowment and productive use of natural resources
                                                                           a. Romania’s strengths




                                                                      b. Romania’s vulnerabilities




Note: How to read the chart: the higher the indicator value, the better the outcome with respect to green growth. This is a result
of data rescaling to make indicators measured in different units comparable and of the data sign (+, -) adjustment to reflect the
interpretation of the indicator. See footnote 17 for details.

Sources: (1) WB DDP (agricultural land, PM10, water resources, water withdrawals, cereal yield, forest land); (2) EPI (forest loss,
pesticide regulation, SO2 per capita).
 Within the comparator sample, Romania is characterized by moderate level of both emission intensity
 of the economy and energy20 intensity of the economy, it falls behind most of the EU countries and is
 ahead of most of the ECA countries in its performance according to these two indicators (Figure 1.4);
 there is room for improvement. Comparison with the mostly high income EU and OECD countries shows
 that emissions intensity of the Romanian economy in 2010, while having dropped 3.3 times from its
 1989 level, was still 2.8 times above the EU level and 2.1 times above the OECD average. While Romania
 has a relatively large share of low carbon generation, ranking 14th among the EU’s 29 countries
 according to the share of zero-carbon generation and 13th according to the share of renewable generation,
 fossil-based generation, still dominates its electricity production.

 Carbon intensity of the Romanian economy is close to the median level for the comparator sample and
 below the sample mean. However, because there are a few countries in the sample with very high emission
 intensity levels (Kazakhstan, Serbia, Russia and Ukraine are the top of the list) and many countries with low
 to moderate emission levels, averages hide national differences. Romania falls between the good and the
 bad performers: it has twice as high emission intensity as such countries as Sweden and Switzerland and
 less than one-third of emission level of Serbia and Kazakhstan. The same applies to the energy intensity
 of the Romanian economy: it is slightly below the sample average and falls exactly between the energy
 intensive group and the group of countries that have achieved low energy intensity; it constitutes one-half
 of the ECA average and twice the EU average.

                                         Figure 1.4. Energy and emission intensity of the economy




       Note: How to read the chart: the higher the indicator value, the better the outcome with respect to green growth. This is a
       result of data rescaling to make indicators measured in different units comparable and of the data sign (+, -) adjustment to
       reflect the interpretation of the indicator. See footnote 17 for details.
       Sources: World Bank databases: Development Data Platform, Poverty and Inequality Database, and Worldwide
       Governance Indicators.




20
  Energy sector statistical definition in this chapter is based on the standard IEA/IPCC definition and includes electricity
and heat production and energy sector own use.
Currently, the energy sector in Romania is responsible for 58 percent of emissions in the country
(excluding LULUCF)21 and is therefore most important sector for mitigation. While emissions per capita
are the lowest in the EU, economic growth will bring about higher energy demand, accompanied by
increased per capita and overall emissions. In fact, the growth in power demand is already significant. Since
increasing demand will require building new supply capacities, this is an opportunity for “greening”
the energy sector by increasing the share of less emission intensive sources of energy in primary energy
supply, particularly in power sector. While Romanian energy sector has already lowered the share of lignite,
oil and gas in primary supply and diversified toward hydro, nuclear and renewable energy (mostly biomass),
there is still room for improvement. On the demand side, energy efficiency measures will bring high
benefits, especially in the industry. On the supply side, a further increase in renewable generation,
including hydro and wind (the country has a high hydro potential and the best potential for wind generation
development in Southern Europe), to achieve the target of 38 percent of renewable in power supply by
2020, will support mitigation.


        Going green: structure of the economy and labor market

Romania’s growth model needs to be strengthened: in the past, it was based on consumption and short-
term capital inflows rather than on sustained productivity increases in tradable sectors, which led to a
stagnant growth. Reversing this pattern will be challenging. Romania is making progress moving closer to
the rest of the EU in economic development: per capita GDP is moving closer to the EU average as a result
of institutional reforms and market liberalization; increased FDI inflows and other financial inflows
supported growth in manufacturing and pushed up demand; increasing investments in education
have already led to growth in tertiary education enrollment. However, the 2008 crisis led to slower growth
and stagnant progress.

Currently, Romania needs to remove constraints to productivity gains and growth to be able to
reverse its current stagnation and resume its convergence with the EU. In particular, it needs to attract
significant amounts of FDI to further develop manufacturing, IT, transport, food, and energy industries,
as well as services, such as tourism; to reverse high level emigration of the working age and capable
population, including highly skilled professionals; to promote production of high-technology tradable
goods, to reverse the drop in ratio of exports to GDP; and to invest in its labor force through better quality
education.22

To re-start the convergence process, Romania should increase productivity in areas where it has
comparative advantage: exports of sophisticated manufacturing products (building on, for instance, the
automobile value chain that was created by FDI inflows in the past, as well as the food and beverage
industries), key tradable services (including those related to the transport logistics and the information,
communication and technology industries), and different energy products (such as gas and electricity).


21
  World Bank. 2013. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program. Energy Sector Rapid
Assessment: Low-Carbon Investment Priorities and Policy Support.
 The starting areas of focus would be removing constraints to private sector growth in the following
 areas: (i) macroeconomic and public-sector policies for growth, which have a crucial role in mitigating
 external shocks and ensuring that price, wage and interest rate signals are clear to investors and, thus,
 induce reallocations of labor and capital from lower to higher productivity uses; (ii) capital and labor
 markets policies for growth, where key issues are to ensure that a sound business and investment
 environment is created and it facilitates competition, entry and exit, to increase labor market flexibility, to
 promote improvement in labor quality, and to improve safety nets. In Romania, three regulated sectors are
 key for restoring growth - energy, transport, and agriculture, and policy attention to these sectors can
 rapidly attract private investments.23

 Figure 1.5a reflects the main strengths and vulnerabilities of the Romanian economy and labor market
 reflecting the level of flexibility of its economy. The signs of flexibility of Romania’s economy are a high
 level of Gross Capital Formation, a high share of manufacturing in industry, a low rate of unemployment, a
 moderate tariff rate, and a moderate share of energy imports in energy use, as compared to other
 countries in the comparator sample. The weaknesses include a low trade to GDP ratio and a low level of
 urbanization.


 Riding the green wave: innovation and knowledge economy


 Data show that Romania’s outcomes in innovation and knowledge economy are one of the
 weaknesses the country has: Romania significantly underperforms, as compared to the EU, on such
 indicators as broadband subscribers as share of the population, percentage of researchers as share of
 the population, R&D expenditures to GDP, and high-tech exports in manufacturing exports. At the same
 time, Romania is slightly above the ECA average according to the same indicators (Figure 1.5b). More so,
 two of the innovation and knowledge economy indicators place Romania in the middle of the
 comparator country ranking: patent applications per mln population residents and share of green and close
 to green exports in total exports. The polarization of performance of the EU countries and the non- EU ECA
 countries in innovation and knowledge economy makes it difficult to do analysis of this particular
 area of Benchmarking using the entire comparator list. Since Romania is part of the EU and is aiming at
 converging with the EU countries on a wide range of performance indicators including those reflecting
 innovation, it is reasonable to compare it in this area with the EU.

 Romania is ranked last in the EU by the EC’s Innovation Union Scoreboard (IUS). Research has been
 consistently underfunded for twenty years, which, together with “brain drain”, caused a crisis in Romania’s
 research. R&D expenditures currently constitute only 0.6 percent of GDP, compared with 1.51 percent
 EU average and 3.7 percent of GDP in Sweden, 3.0 percent of GDP in Switzerland and 2.9 percent in
 Denmark (top levels in the comparator sample), which indicates that the prospects for improvement are
 bleak. As a result, Romania’s gap with most of the EU countries in innovation has been increasing and in

23
 World Bank. 2013. A Country Economic Memorandum. Romania: Reviving Romania’s Growth and Convergence
Challenges and Opportunities.
 2014 Romania was the worst performer on the IUS innovation index in the EU. Most of individual IUS
 innovation indicators (the ones that form the innovation index) place Romania either last or second to
 last in the EU ranking; this relates to the following indicators: research and innovation policy, non-
 public R&D spending24, and patent applications.25

Figure 1.5. Structure of the economy and labor market. Innovation and knowledge economy.
                                                                 a. Romania’s strengths




                                                             b. Romania’s vulnerabilities




24
  Romania ranks third from the bottom in public R&D spending.
25
  Bertelsmann Stiftung: Sustainable Governance Indicators (SGI). 2014. Georgy Ganev, Vesselin Dimitrov, Frank Bönker
(Coordinator). Romania Report. Gutersloh, Germany
 Note: How to read the chart: the higher the indicator value, the better the outcome with respect to green growth. This is a result
 of data rescaling to make indicators measured in different units comparable and of the data sign (+, -) adjustment to reflect
 the interpretation of the indicator. See footnote 17 for details.


 Sources: (1) WB DDP (agricultural land, PM10, water resources, water withdrawals, cereal yield, forest land); (2) EPI (forest loss,
 pesticide regulation, SO2 per capita).


However, when Romanian innovation performance is considered within a wider set of countries, the
picture is not so grim. According to the Global Innovation Index 201426 Romania ranks 55th within 143
countries evaluated, with the Innovation Input sub-rank of 65 and the Innovation Output sub-rank is 44. The
indicators that drive the ranking down include ICT & organizational model creation (rank 111); ICT & business
model creation (rank 100); intensity of local competition (rank 109); FDI net inflows as percent GDP (rank
105); ease of paying taxes (rank 99); market capitalization as percent GDP (rank 90); government
effectiveness (rank 88); ease of resolving insolvency (rank 88); growth rate of PPP$GDP/worker (rank 84);
and expenditures on education (rank 83). The indicators driving the total up include ease of getting credit
(rank 13); cultural & creative services exports as percentage of total trade (rank 17); creative goods exports
as percentage of total trade (rank 28); high- and medium-high-tech manufactures as percentage of total
(rank 27); ease of starting business (rank 33); press freedom (rank 37); and high-tech imports less re-imports
(rank 39).




26
   The Global Innovation Index (GII) 2014 is the 7th publication by Cornell University, INSEAD, and the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO, an agency of the United Nations). The Index ranks 143 world economies,
accounting for 92.9% of the world’s population and 98.3% of the world’s Gross Domestic Product (in US Dollars), in
innovation capabilities and results. The GII is the average of two sub-indices: Input Sub-Index and Output Sub-
Index. The Input Sub-Index evaluates five elements of the economy that enable innovative activities: Institutions,
Human capital and research, Infrastructure, Market sophistication, and Business sophistication. The output index
captures evidence of innovation: Knowledge and technology outputs and Creative outputs. Indices are composed of
81 individual indicators.
CHAPTER 2. WHERE IS ROMANIA HEADING? ECONOMIC EVELOPMENT TO
2050 AND THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE ACTION

 CHAPTER SUMMARY
The focus for Romania’s low carbon green growth path is to implement mitigation actions and undertake
needed adaptation while preserving growth and employment. Thinking through this path at the
macroeconomic level can be simplified into three main scenarios for analyzing the impact of green
interventions. The necessary horizon to assess the costs and impact of a new growth path is long, and 2050
is chosen as the endpoint for assessment. The backbone of the analysis is macroeconomic modeling, which
provides both a consistent foundation for sector analysis and an overarching analysis of impacts economy-
wide.

Romania’s recent history of economic performance provides important clues about future directions but
climate action will become more prominent, requiring both mitigation and adaptation measures. The
country grew faster than the rest of Europe during 2000 to 2008 and recovered quickly from the international
financial crisis. Meanwhile, Romania witnessed its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions decline by almost one-
third. Since Romania’s economy does not yet match the typical pattern in the rest of the EU, the path to
2050 is likely to feature convergence towards Europe in income levels and economic structure. The path is
also likely to include intensified climate action. Although the country’s GHG emission levels are not large on
a global scale, Romania faces current, imminent, and prospective limits on emissions of GHGs. Reducing
these emissions will both require government action and affect Romania’s growth path. At the same time,
newly-developed climate scenarios show rising temperatures and falling precipitation in future decades,
increasing the likelihood of water shortages which will harm agriculture and other water users.

The baseline scenario for Romania’s economy through 2050, generated by a newly-built macroeconomic
model, indeed finds real incomes in Romania likely to converge towards European Union averages albeit
at a modest pace. Growth is dampened by the ongoing decline in Romania’s population and labor force. The
story the sector level is of divergence, rather than convergence. Part of those developments are driven by
compliance with the current ‘2020 climate and energy package’ and participation in the European Union (EU)
Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), which generate pressure to reduce energy intensity going forward. This
baseline scenario constitutes a critical first phase of the analysis, serving as a benchmark for comparisons of
economic outcomes before and after policy actions or investments.

A computable general equilibrium model was developed for Romania, in collaboration with local experts,
designed to address the complex and overlapping elements of the EU’s climate and energy policy
framework. Drawing on the well-known GEM-E3 model, the ROM-E3 model is capable of quantifying the
first and second round effects of the many regulations related to multiple sectors as well as the feedback
and spillover effects within Romania and across countries through the trade channel. The model has been
applied to assess a Green and Super Green scenario against the baseline. The Green scenario imposes
compliance with the main features of the EU climate and energy package, while the
Super Green assumes the Roadmap 2050 will be implemented. (See Box 2.1).
Implementing the imminent EU 2030 climate framework imposes only modest costs on Romania’s
economy, but fulfilling the prospective EU Roadmap 2050 will impose a heavy burden. EU emissions
trading allocates mitigation efficiently across EU member states via a uniform carbon price (the emissions
allowance price that clears the ETS market). Likely 2030 obligations will require cutting GHGs by 34 percent
by 2030 compared with 2005 at a cost of 1.1 percent of GDP overall, but with high variability across sectors.
By contrast, meeting the EU’s proposed 80 percent mitigation goal in 2050 would leave Romania’s output
four percent lower.

Policymakers should find this analysis of interest. The analysis recommends that the government be
prepared to monitor the cross-sectoral impacts of the green transition, as labor and capital move across
sectors. Policymakers should consider, within the boundaries set by EU rules, a reduction in labor taxes
funded by rising revenues from the auctions of emissions allowances, thereby reaping a ‘double dividend’.
Further, Romania has much to gain through the inclusion of stronger equity considerations into EU-wide
climate policy discussions. Last, the macroeconomic model constructed for this analysis remains available
for further development and application by the government for current and future policy questions related
to low carbon and green growth.

 CHALLENGES FOR GREENER GROWTH

         Overview
 Although green growth can be a broad concept, the main concern for Romania is moving onto a low
 carbon growth path while addressing key adaptation deficits. Romania already has obligations on
 mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions as a member of the European Union (EU), and upcoming and likely
 future obligations further render mitigation action an inevitable part of Romania’s future. The impacts on
 Romania’s economy for the years to come, some negative and some positive, merit investigation. This
 chapter summarizes analysis from the application of a macroeconomic model to provide important insights
 about the achievement of the EU’s proposal for climate action for 2030 and also for 2050, as well as a
 framework for the sector analysis presented in subsequent chapters (in particular, energy, transport,
 forestry, and urban analysis). The other key element in Romania’s greener future is understanding possible
 climate damages and what adaptation actions warrant analysis (in sectors such as water, agriculture, and
 forestry).

 To assess the costs and impact of a lower carbon and green growth path for Romania, economic
 developments over a long horizon (to 2050) need to be considered despite the uncertainty inherent in
 such scenarios. For climate mitigation actions, such as building power plants with cleaner fuels or improving
 energy efficiency through new building standards, the benefits of action will materialize over decades. For
 climate adaptation actions, the horizon must be at least as long. Climate damages for most countries
 become more significant 30 and 40 years into the future although the appropriate adaptive response may
 require action today. The horizon for the scenarios and analysis for Romania extends to
2050—40 years is just about long enough to consider long-lived infrastructure needed for either mitigation
or adaptation. Thinking so far into the future is inevitably associated with large uncertainty; but sensitivity
analysis around key assumptions, transparency in methodology, and close collaboration with the client and
local experts can all act as counterweights.

Macroeconomic modeling constitutes the backbone of the analysis, providing a consistent picture of
economic impact, taking into account domestic sectoral inter-linkages and international trade flows.
General equilibrium models set up a coherent economy-wide framework and allow economic decision
making to be the outcome of decentralized optimization by producers and consumers. They simulate the
functioning of a market economy, including markets for commodities, for labor, and for capital. They
provide a detailed look at how changes in economic conditions are mediated through prices and markets
while assuring that all economy-wide constraints are respected. They also enable quantitative examination
of how shocks or policies move through the economy and influence its performance and structure.
Dynamic processes can be captured, which is important if the time horizon of the modeling is long (as is
required for low carbon and green growth analysis). The modeling emphasizes the key economic
relationships within Romania and with the EU and the rest of the world. As such, the CGE (computable
general equilibrium) model constitutes a backbone for the harmonization of the sectoral work in a
consistent and rigorous manner, providing key economic variables needed for sector analysis while
assessing multi-sectoral impacts of low carbon and green actions on growth, sectoral output, employment,
and fiscal revenues and expenditures.

A baseline scenario serves as a benchmark for comparisons of economic outcomes before and after policy
actions or investments--a hypothetical path that envisages what would happen under ‘business- as-usual’
or no policy change. Business-as-usual projections are often based on extrapolation of historical trends or
adoption of steady-state GDP growth. The simplest of baselines would be a steady-state baseline, in which
all physical quantities grow at an exogenous uniform rate while relative prices remain unchanged; this
scenario would have the virtue of providing a transparent reference path for the evaluation of policy
options. However, such a path is unrealistic, especially over a long time period, limiting the usefulness of
the scenario results to policymakers, who need more realistic comparisons. For example, when a country
decides on a target for mitigating greenhouse gases, the target is generally defined against a base year,
as a certain percent reduction compared to that year. But such a definition provides little indication of the
degree of challenge involved in meeting the target. What matters is the size of the reduction compared to
the level of emissions in the target year, which lies in the future. This expected level is a matter for
projections, determined by assumptions about the growth rate of emissions in the absence of additional
policy--the business-as-usual emissions baseline. Faster expected growth translates to faster rising
emissions, and the higher is the future emission level in the absence of climate policy, the more stringent
are the effective reduction targets and, thus, the costs of abatement. (See Box 2.1 comparing the baseline
scenario to the alternative low-carbon green scenarios used in this analysis).
      Box 2.1. Two low-carbon scenarios provide choices about a greener development path 27 Main
      scenarios for analyzing the impact of green interventions
      A macroeconomic model for economy-wide analysis generated scenarios for Romania’s economy through
      2050. Sectoral modelling for six overlapping sectors--water, agriculture, forestry, energy, transport, and
      urban—identified baseline paths for each sector and explored mitigation and adaptation actions. An initial
      scenario (or baseline) and then two green policy scenarios have been constructed for the analysis, generated by
      the macroeconomic model and then confirmed by a bottom-up formulation based on sectoral analysis. Energy
      and transport are the key sectors for mitigating GHGs, along with urban areas, agriculture, and forestry.
      Adaptation needs were examined at the sectoral level in water, agriculture, and forestry.
      Baseline scenario. A baseline (or business-as-usual) scenario extrapolates current economic development
      trends and current policies for Romania to 2050, generating a consensus economic growth path that does not
      consider any additional mitigation obligations beyond the policies already in place nor the need for
      adaptation to climate change. Implementation of the EU 2020 Climate and Energy Package, which requires
      mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions by 20 percent by 2020 compared to 1990, and maintenance of the
      emissions trading system after 2020 are part of the baseline scenario. This scenario serves as a comparator for
      the green scenarios.
      Green scenario. This first low carbon and green growth scenario entails Romania’s meeting the (proposed)
      2030 Framework for Climate and Energy requirements which include EU-wide GHG mitigation by 2030 of 40
      percent compared to 1990. The sector analysis sets out government policies and investments to meet the
      targets of the 2030 Framework. This scenario also includes modest adaptation actions (investments and
      policies) to counter future climate damages. The Green actions constitute a package of ambitious but practical
      policies and investments to abate emissions and counter climate change.
      Super Green scenario. The second green scenario requires that Romania contribute appropriately to the
      (tentative) Roadmap 2050 EU-wide mitigation target of 80 percent compared to 1990. Both mitigation and
      adaptation actions are examined The Super Green actions are very ambitious and more expensive packages,
      generally requiring more aggressive implementation of green measures or wider coverage of such measures.



           Romania’s economy today and looking ahead to 2050
 Romania grew faster than the rest of Europe between 2000 and 2008, and from 2010 its economy
 bounced back following the international financial crisis. Per capita GDP (measured in purchasing power
 parity) rose from 26 to 47 percent of the EU average in the years preceding EU accession in 2007. Markets
 opened and institutions were reformed. Legal and institutional reforms were advanced through the process
 of adopting the acquis communautaire. Generous foreign direct investment and other financial inflows
 contributed to consumer demand, built up key industries, modernized wholesale trade, and spurred the
 movement of labor from low-productivity activities like agriculture towards high- productivity activities like
 manufacturing. Public and private investment in education pushed tertiary education enrollment from 12
 to 23 percent. The income of the bottom 40 percent of the population grew by 5.5 percent on average
 during the 2000-2011 period, a pace slightly above the 4.8 percent growth in the income of all households


 27
    Most of the comparisons for GHG reductions in this report are reported against 2005 levels because that is the year
  European emissions trading was established; thus, all practical rules and targets are formulated against 2005.
  1990 is cited in the original broad policy statements because it is the EU’s base year for Kyoto and other
international obligations
 and the 4.1 percent average growth. After plunging by near 7 percent in 2009, growth had recovered by
 2013, as robust industrial output and an abundant harvest led to double-digit export growth. GDP is
                                                      29
 expected to expand by more than 3 percent in 2015. 28 (See Figure 2.1)
  Figure 2.1. Romania’s growth in the 2000’s was strong while GHG emissions declined
                      GDP and GHG emissions, in billions of 2010 euros and Mt CO2e, 1990-2014




     Source: GDP 1995-2014 from Eurostat: GDP 1990-1995 staff calculations from ESA 1995 data and ESA 2010 data. GHGs from
             European Environment Agency (via Eurostat).


 Economic growth has been boosted since 2000 by the shift in output and employment toward more
 productive sectors. Romania has experienced a major change in allocation of workers--the proportion of
 the workforce in agriculture, which is comparatively unproductive, fell from 35 percent in 2002 to 26
 percent by 2010. Workers tended to move to sectors that drove economic growth: between 2002 and 2010,
 the share of employment increased from 4 to 9 percent of GDP in construction and from 16 to 21 percent
 of GDP in the wholesale/retail sector. These sectors continued to absorb labor through 2010 despite steep
 declines in output, and workers continued to leave agriculture. Between 2002 and 2010 labor reallocation
 contributed an average of about 2 percent a year to total growth; the rest was generated by increases in




28
   World Bank. 2013. A Country Economic Memorandum. Romania: Reviving Romania’s Growth and Convergence
Challenges and Opportunities. Available at:
 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/18028709/reviving-romanias-growth-convergence-
challenges-opportunities-country-economic-memorandum
29
   World Bank. 2015. Strengthening Recovery in Central and Eastern Europe - EU11 Regular Economic Report. July
2014
 output per worker within sectors.30
  Figure 2.2. Services are not yet as important as is typical in the EU
                                       Sector shares of production in Romania, 2010




     Notes: Sectoral production includes value added plus intermediate consumption.
            Services: Market Services, Non Market Services; Transport: Transport-Air, Road-Freight, Road-Passenger, Rai–Freight,
            Rail–Passenger, Water–Freight, Water–Passenger; Other industries and extractives: Coal, Crude Oil, Gas Extraction, Metal
            products, Electrical goods, Transport equipment, Other Equipment goods, Consumer goods industries, Electric Vehicles;
            Energy intensive Industries (ETS): Ferrous metals, Non-ferrous metals, Chemical products, Paper products, Non-metallic
            minerals; Energy (ETS): Oil, Gas, Electricity Supply.
     Source: World Bank ROM-E3 model data. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015


 Yet the structure of Romania’s economy remains more concentrated in less productive and more energy-
 intensive sectors than the EU and the OECD despite success in reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
 Comparing Romania’s structure of value-added to other groups of countries, the biggest difference is the
 weight in total value-added of agriculture--almost double compared to other EU new member states and
 three times higher than the EU15.31 The services sector (including both market and non-market services) is
 relatively small in Romania, below 40 percent of output while, for example, the EU15 has more than half of
 output from services. Production from energy-intensive sectors exceeds that of the OECD average by some
 50 percent. Nevertheless, between the mid-1990s and the late 2000s, greenhouse gas emissions in Romania
 declined by almost one-third (see Figure 2.1). The country’s success in mitigation was mainly driven by
 changes in the structure of output towards less polluting sectors as well as sectoral improvements in energy
 efficiency. Figure 2.3: decomposes the decline in emissions according to the well-known Kaya identity.32

30
   World Bank. 2013. A Country Economic Memorandum. Romania: Reviving Romania’s Growth and Convergence
Challenges and Opportunities. Available at:
 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/18028709/reviving-romanias-growth-convergence-
challenges-opportunities-country-economic-memorandum
  31
     The EU15 are the 15 member countries in the European Union prior to the accession of ten candidate countries
on 1 May 2004. The EU15 comprise Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom
 32CO emissions = Population x GDP/Population x Energy/GDP x CO2Emissions/Energy; Derived from Kaya, Yoichi
 and Keiichi Yokoburi. 1997. Environment, Energy, and Economy: Strategies for
Sustainability. Tokyo: United Nations University Press
 A decline in the carbon intensity of energy, from fuel switching away from fossil fuels, contributed to a
lesser extent. These three factors fully offset the increase in emissions stemming from increased output.
As a result, overall carbon dioxide emissions fell during 1995 to 2009 by almost over 40 million metric tons.

 Figure 2.3: Romania’s carbon emissions fell sharply in the past because of structural shifts
                 Decomposition of reduction in carbon dioxide emissions in Romania, 1995-2009




 Notes: Decomposition uses the logarithmic mean Divisia index (LMDI) approach.
 Source: World Bank staff calculations based on World Input Output Database (WIOD) database, www.wiod.org).


The path for Romania’s economy to 2050 is likely to feature growing similarity in income levels and
economic structure to the rest of Europe. Such a path continues the trends of the past two decades and
the convergence processes observed across the EU. Since 1990, as noted above, Romania’s economy has
transformed its sectoral structure, moving strongly towards services, and it has become far less energy-
intensive. Going forward, the shift away from agriculture and energy-intensive and polluting heavy industry
towards lighter manufacturing and services should continue. Energy intensity should decrease in line with
the shifting structure of the economy. Although there is no agreement over whether economic convergence
of nations holds overall, the European Union has demonstrably fostered strong convergence among its
members and also, to some extent, on candidate countries. The ‘catch-up’ hypothesis is driven by the
assumption that productivity growth rates vary inversely with productivity levels. Then it follows that the
convergence process stems from lower initial income levels, higher returns on capital, and substantial
potential to improve labor participation and productivity, while the country benefits from a diffusion of
global technological progress. Over a long forecasting period, such as the 40-year horizon used in this
analysis, convergence is a convincing and practical approach to predicting what any individual economy
might look like in the distant future.
                                                       Romania’s mitigation obligations
Romania contributes only marginally to the global carbon footprint with a share in GHG emissions of less
than one-half of one percent (See Figure 2.4). The EU as a whole is responsible for about 13 percent of
global emissions, while China and the US, the largest emitters, are responsible for almost 40 percent of
global emissions between them. However, production in Romania is energy intensive, and energy used for
each unit of output is the high compared to Europe. The average energy intensity in the EU was 142 in
2013, close to the world average, while Romania stands at 335.22 However, irrespective of Romania’s own
carbon footprint, as a member of the European Union, it faces three sets of emissions mitigation
obligations: one current; one imminent; and one prospective.
 Figure 2.4. Romania provides a small contribution to world GHG emissions
                                     Global GHG emissions by country, % of total


                     Mexico, 1.7
                                             Other, 28.9
                                                                                          Czech Rep, 0.4
                               Canada, 2.0                                                Estonia, 0.1
                                   Brazil,                                                Hungary, 0.2
                                     2.7                                                  Latvia, 0.0
                                                            EU15, 11.0                    Lithuania, 0.1
                                                                         EU10
                                                                                          Poland, 1.0
                                                                         ,

                     Japan, 3.6                                           2.4       Poland, 1.0


                      India, 5.0                           China, 19.2                                    Slovakia, 0.1
                                                                                                         Slovenia, 0.1
                                                                                                         Bulgaria, 0.2
                     Russia, 5.2
                                                                                                         Romania, 0.3
                                         US, 18.4



 Source: WRI. Total GHG Emissions in 2005 (excludes land use change) (CO 2, CH4, N2O, PFCs, HFCs, SF6)


The ‘2020 climate and energy package’ is under implementation until 2020. Approved in December 2008,
the EU’s current policies on GHG emissions require comprehensive action by EU members on overall
emissions reduction across all sectors in the economy. The 2020 targets include a 20 percent reduction in
emissions compared to 1990 levels (a 14 percent reduction compared to 2005); a 20 percent renewable
energy target as a percent of gross final energy consumption, including a 10 percent share of biofuels in the
transport fuel market; and a 20 percent indicative reduction in primary energy use compared to projected
levels under a business-as-usual scenario, to be achieved through energy efficiency improvements. Large
installations in energy-intensive sectors are covered by the EU-wide Emissions Trading System (ETS), a cap
and trade arrangement33. The overall target of -14 percent for emissions is further divided into a target of -
21 percent for the ETS sectors and -10 percent for all other sectors (non-ETS). The non-ETS targets were


33
  Energy intensity is measured as gross inland consumption of energy divided by GDP, or kg of oil equivalent per
€1000 of GDP at 2005 prices. Data is from Eurostat.
 translated into differential national targets varying by income level. Romania is under obligation for
 emissions from the non-ETS sectors to grow by no more than 19 percent relative to 2005. (See Box 2.2 for
 details of the ETS).34

 The 2030 framework for climate and energy policies was approved in October 2014. The new policy
 package proposes a binding target to reduce EU domestic greenhouse gas emissions by at least 40 percent
 below 1990 levels by 2030. This target aims to ensure that the EU is on the cost-effective track towards
 meeting its objective of cutting emissions by at least 80 percent by 2050. To achieve the overall 40 percent
 target, the sectors covered by the EU ETS would have to reduce their emissions by 43 percent compared to
 2005. Emissions from sectors outside the EU ETS would need to be cut by 30 percent below the 2005 level,
 and this EU-wide target will need to be translated into Member State targets. A 43 percent greenhouse gas
 reduction target in 2030 in the ETS translates into a cap declining by 2.2 percent annually from 2021
 onwards, instead of the rate of 1.74 percent up to 2020.

     Table 2.1. The EU plans to cut emissions dramatically by 2050
                Proposed emissions reduction for the EU under the 2050 Roadmap


             GHG reductions compared to 1990                           2005           2030          2050
             Total                                                        -7%      -40 to -44%   -79 to -82%
             Sectors:
               Power (CO2)                                                -7%      -54 to -68%   -93 to -99%
               Industry (CO2)                                          -20%        -34 to -40%   -83 to -87%
              Transport (incl. CO2 aviation, excl. maritime)           30%         +20 to -9%    -54 to -67%
               Residential and services (CO2)                          -12%        -37 to -53%   -88 to-91%
               Agriculture (Non-CO2)                                   -20%        -36 to -37%   -42 to -49%
               Other Non-CO2 emissions                                 -30%        -72 to -73%   -70 to -78%

     Source: http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/roadmap/perspective/index_en.htm
 The European Union has laid out a vision for mitigation through 2050. A “Roadmap for moving to a
 competitive low carbon economy in 2050” was published in March 2011 by the European Commission.35
 Scenarios were created by combining the four main decarbonization options – energy efficiency, renewable
 energy, nuclear and carbon capture and storage. Overall emissions for the EU are to drop by 79 to 82
 percent, while emissions in the power sector are to disappear (-93 to -99 percent reductions). The Roadmap
 remains a long-term vision, not a policy proposal, although the 2030 package is consistent with an emissions
 path that could get the EU to -80 percent by 2050. (See Table 2.1)

34
   As noted above, most of the comparisons for GHG reductions in this report are reported against 2005 levels because
that is the year European emissions trading was established; thus, all practical rules and targets are formulated against
2005. 1990 is cited in the original broad policy statements because it is the EU’s base year for Kyoto and other
international obligations
35
   European Commission (EC). 2011. A Roadmap for Moving to a Competitive Low Carbon Economy in 2050.
COM/2011/0112            final.      Brussels.      Available          at:                http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52011DC0112
     Box 2.2. The centerpiece of EU climate policy is European emissions trading
              The EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS)

     The ETS provides an EU-wide limit on greenhouse gas emissions. First launched in 200536, the EU ETS
     system is an international system for trading GHG emission allowances. It is the first and largest
     greenhouse gas (GHG) trading scheme in the world, now covering about 45 percent of the EU’s GHG
     emissions. The system works on the “cap and trade” principle, in which a limit is set on the total amount
     of GHG emissions and the 11,000 or so heavy energy-using installations, who are required to
     participate, must secure emission allowances to cover their own emission and can trade with one
     another as needed.

     The EU ETS system is divided in three trading periods. The first period covered the period 2005-2007
     and constituted ‘learning by doing’ by establishing national caps and mostly free allocation of
     allowances. In phase two (2008-2012) which coincided with the first commitment period of the Kyoto
     Protocol, three additional countries (Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway) joined. Additional greenhouse
     gases were included. The system was extended to the aviation sector (in 2012). More auctioning of
     allowances occurred. The third phase of EU ETS runs from 2013 to 2020 and cuts allowances to reduce
     GHG emissions by 2020 by 21 percent compared to 2005. More harmonized rules have been put in
     place, in particular:
             i) a single, EU-wide cap on emissions (replacing national caps);
            ii) for each year after 2013, the overall cap decreases annually by 1.74 percent of the average
                total quantity of allowances issued annually during 2008-2012;
            iii) auctioning (rather than free allocation) as the default method for allocating allowances (and
                 up to half of allowances are expected to be auctioned during phase three); and
            iv) about 90 percent of allowances will be distributed to EU member states (based on
                emissions shares in 2005), and at least half of auctioning revenues must be used by member
                states for climate and energy related purposes such as energy efficiency, renewables,
                research, and sustainable transport.
     Source: European Commission (2015), “The EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS)”, Climate
     action,http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/index_en.htm.
            Projections of climate change in Romania to 2050

 Future climate scenarios were developed, showing rising temperatures and falling precipitation. Climate
 baselines were developed using climate data for each of Romania’s river basins, derived from daily
 historical temperature and precipitation observations provided by the Romanian National Meteorological
 Administration (NMA, or Administratia Nationala de Meteorologie). NMA has developed a gridded 10km
 x 10km dataset using the 160 stations of Romania. These gridded meteorological data are available from
 1961 to 2013 and were developed using a model to fill in spaces between stations. The baseline climate
 data are combined with projections of changes in temperature and precipitation obtained from GCMs to


36
  The ETS was set out in Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003
establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community
create daily and monthly time series of future climate from 2015 to 2050. In this assessment, three climate
scenarios are developed (low impact, medium impact, and high impact). These climate scenarios were
developed for Romania based on the most positive, the median, and most negative changes in irrigation
water requirements for maize, estimated by running the crop model through 2050 across 17 available
combinations of GCMs and Reference Concentration Pathway (RCP) scenarios employed by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The climate scenarios are presented in Table 2.2 and
the impact on precipitation and temperature is shown in Figures 2.5 and 2.6. All three scenarios show rising
temperatures over coming decades. The pattern for precipitation is less clear. But it is important to
remember that annual national averages are not what matter for water availability and agricultural
production.

Table 2.2. Climate Scenarios Used to Develop Future Climate for Romania


   CLIMATE           GLOBAL GENERAL CIRCULATION MODEL BASIS FOR THE                                 RELEVANT IPCC
  SCENARIO                              SCENARIO                                                  EMISSIONS SCENARIO


                    Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate
High Impact                                                                                    RCP 8.5
                     (MIROC) ESM
Medium
              Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) ESM2M                               RCP 4.5
Impact
Low Impact          Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) ESM2G                         RCP 8.5
Notes: RCP is a Representative Concentration Pathway as used in the fifth Assessment Report from the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. AN RCP is gas concentration trajectory, and each is named after a possible range of radiative
forcing values in the year 2100 relative to pre-industrial values. RCP 8.5 is a ‘business-as-usual’ pathway with no mitigation so
emissions continue to rise throughout the 21st century. Emissions in RCP 4.5 peak around 2040, then decline.
Source: Water sector technical paper.
Figure 2.5: Average temperatures under three climate scenarios through 2050




Source: Water sector technical paper.

Figure 2.6: Average precipitation under three climate scenarios through 2050




Source: Water sector technical paper.
                               Baseline scenario for economic development to 2050

The likely path for Romania’s economy through 2050 before considering low carbon and green growth
actions is generated by a macroeconomic model. Baseline scenarios can be created in different ways. Here
the baseline relies mainly on the official long-term forecasts prepared by the government’s National
Commission for Prognosis (CNP, Romanian acronym). It also draws on economic convergence theory and
utilizes information from empirical studies, reviews of sector strategies, and consultations with experts and
stakeholders. A consistency framework is provided by the computable general equilibrium model, including
consideration of Romania’s links to the rest of the world. (The methodology section that follows provides
details about the model.)


Real incomes in Romania are expected to converge towards the European Union average but at a modest
pace, averaging 3 percent annual growth during 2010-2050. These growth rates are higher in earlier year
and then moderate, from just below 3 percent during 2010-20 to 1.6 percent during 2040 -
2050. But Romania’s rate of expansion remains twice as fast as the EU as a whole and ahead of those of the
OECD although below those in the rest of the world (non-OECD countries). (See Figure 2.7). Projected
growth comes from the official long term forecasts of the National Commission for Prognosis (CNP,
Romanian acronym), which reflect a broad consensus that income per capita in Romania is set to catch up
gradually to EU levels. Total factor productivity gains and capital accumulation are expected to be the main
growth drivers, consistent with the Solow model. Romania’s total factor productivity (TFP) growth is
projected to decline from 1.7 percent annually at the beginning of the period towards 1.5 percent at the
end, higher rates than in the EU because Romania farther from the technological frontier, making it easier
to adopt innovations from abroad and to benefit from foreign direct investment which will bring both
organizational and technological innovations. (See Figure 2.8).

 Figure 2.7: Romania’s growth projected to outpace the EU and the OECD through 2050

                                        GDP growth rates in the baseline during 2010-2050




 Source: Projections in ROM-E3 model.
     Figure 2.8: Steady but modest total factor productivity improvements keep growth positive

                      Solow decomposition of GDP growth in Romania, 1997-2050




     Note: The chart is based on the standard Solow analysis with a Cobb-Douglas production function ( Y = AK α L1−α ).
     Consequently, GDP growth can be decomposed as ∆ln(Yt ) = ∆ln(At ) + α ∆ln(K t ) + (1 − α) ∆ln(Lt ). The first component is
     contribution of TFP, the second-capital and the third – labor. Capital is calculated on the basis of investment data, labor force
     comes from employment statistics. TFP was calculated implicitly, assuming that share of capital in GDP (α) is equal to 40 percent
     and depreciation rate ( δ) is equal to 6 percent.
     Source: World Bank staff estimates based on CNP forecast.

 Romania’s population and labor force are continuing to shrink. Population, depleted by emigration, is
 projected to decline by 11.8 percent by 2050 (compared to 2010).37 The labor force, affected by aging, will
 receive only a small boost from improving labor force participation from its current low levels but not
 enough to offset the shrinking number of workers. The unemployment rate is forecast to remain close to 7
 percent. Labor productivity is estimated to grow by more than 3 percent annually up to 2040 and more
 than 2 percent thereafter.

 In the baseline, almost all economic sectors are projected to grow, but their growth rates will be quite
 diverse. These projections took into account the constraints imposed by possible developments in global
 markets (both in the EU and outside the EU). Overall, the trend away from energy-intensive sectors and
 towards higher productivity sectors will continue. Agriculture’s share will fall due to reallocation of
 resources to low-end services such as trade and transport. According to CNP forecasts, services will gain
 about 3 percentage points during 2010- 2050 period, remaining much below the EU average. Meanwhile,
 industry is to maintain its value-added share due to existing comparative advantages. The economy should
 follow the general historical growth pattern observed in more advanced EU countries alongside rising
 incomes. However, since sectoral transformation is a slow process, sectors such as agriculture and
 industry will continue to have a higher share in the Romanian economy than in the EU, and this will also
 be reflected in employment. Romania is to keep its specialization in selected primary sectors in comparison
 to the EU. (See Figure 2.9).

37
     2015 Ageing Report prepared by DG ECFIN (DG ECFIN, 2014).
     Figure 2.9. Output shifts from agriculture to services to 2050
                 Romania’s production by sector in the baseline scenario




     Notes: Notes: Sectoral production includes value added plus intermediate consumption.
            Services: Market Services, Non Market Services; Transport: Transport-Air, Road-Freight, Road-Passenger, Rai–Freight,
            Rail–Passenger, Water–Freight, Water–Passenger; Other industries and extractives: Coal, Crude Oil, Gas Extraction, Metal
            products, Electrical goods, Transport equipment, Other Equipment goods, Consumer goods industries, Electric Vehicles;
            Energy intensive Industries (ETS): Ferrous metals, Non-ferrous metals, Chemical products, Paper products, Non-metallic
            minerals; Energy (ETS): Oil, Gas, Electricity Supply.
     Source: ROM-E3, using CNP projections on Value added at basic prices.


 Under the baseline scenario, EU countries comply with the 2020 climate and energy package, which
 requires participation in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS). The package sets a target of 20 percent
 reduction in GHG emissions for the EU as a whole from 1990 levels (equal to a 14 percent reduction
 compared to 2005 levels). Also, an increase to 20 percent in final energy consumption produced from
 renewable resources is required, and an indicative target was put in place for improvement of energy
 efficiency by 20 percent compared to the EU baseline level for 2020. Post-2020, the rules underlying the
 third phase of the EU ETS are assumed to continue (although they are only legally binding until 2020, the
 probability of the ETS disappearing completely after 2020 seems low). These rules include: a harmonized
 single EU-wide cap instead of national caps, harmonization of monitoring and reporting, and full auctioning
 of allowances within the EU ETS. Post-2020, the emissions cap decreases annually by 1.74 percent of
 the average annual total quantity of allowances issued by the Member States in 2008-2012.38 As a result,

38
  For non-EU countries, in the baseline scenario, they commit to their 2020 emission pledges. There have been several
actions at global level with the aim to commit countries to emission reductions. In 1992, countries joined the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to cooperatively consider what can be done to limit average global
temperature increases and the resulting climate change, and to cope with whatever impacts were, by then, inevitable.
In 1995, countries launched negotiations to strengthen the global response to climate change, and two years later,
adopted the Kyoto Protocol. The Kyoto Protocol legally binds developed countries to emission reduction targets. In
 greenhouse gas emissions related to ETS entities declines to 21 percent below 2005 levels in 2020 to 34
 percent lower in 2030 and 53 percent in 2050. (See Figure 2.10). The main policy assumptions on climate
 and energy in the baseline scenario are summarized in Table 2.3:

 Table 2.3: Overview of the main assumptions in the baseline scenario


   Regions        Targets                                2020                    2030                2040           2050
                    GHG/Renewable Energy Sources/Energy Efficiency targets in the EU compared to 2005
                                                   ETS          -21%           1.74% annual reduction in CAP of 2020
   Other EU           GHG          14%       Non - ETS          -10%           Constant carbon value of 2020 (if any)
   Romania            GHG                    Non - ETS          +19%           Constant carbon value of 2020 (if any)
   Other EU            RES                               20%                             constant share 20%
   Romania             RES                               24%                             constant share 24%

                  Energy
        EU       Efficiency                                                             no requirement

                                                                       GHG targets outside of the EU
  Non-EU              GHG           Copenhagen COP-15 pledges                        constant carbon tax (if any)
                                                                               Other assumptions
                                                                                Fossil Fuel Prices

                 Fossil fuel
    World          prices                      2014 IEA World Energy Outlook - Current Policies scenario

                                                                        Recycling Carbon Revenues

                   Recycling
        EU       Carbon Rev.                                                 Reduction of general taxes (GT)

 Source: World Bank staff.




2009 the Copenhagen Accord was drafted. Countries submitted emissions reductions pledges or mitigation action
pledges.
  Figure 2.10: The European Union’s GHG emissions will continue to fall with no additional policy action
                     ETS GHG emissions relative to 2005 during 2020-2050 in the baseline scenario




 Source: ROM-E3 model simulations.


Over the 40-year horizon, the energy intensity of the Romanian economy is projected to continue to
decline, offsetting expanding output such that GHG emissions are close to stable. The energy intensity of
production and the carbon intensity of energy are projected to decline. The reduction of energy intensity
of GDP can be attributed to autonomous energy efficiency gains, structural changes of the economy away
from energy intensive activities and sectors (such as ferrous and non-ferrous metals, chemicals, and cement
industries), take-up of more efficient energy equipment by consumers, and the reaction of energy
consumers to higher energy prices. The next most important factor is the ongoing shift in the structure of
value-added towards less energy-intensive sectors—away from agriculture and industry to services--which
was the main driver of emissions decline in the EU over the last two decades. Third is the reduction in
energy-related CO2 emissions compared to final energy demand, which corresponds to a higher penetration
of carbon-free energy sources into the energy mix and substitutions within the fossil fuel mix towards less
carbon-intensive fossil fuels, for example, natural gas substituting for coal or oil (that are more carbon-
intensive and have lower energy efficiencies when used in final demand sectors and for electricity
production). Figure 2.11 provides a decomposition of energy-related CO2 emissions during 2010-2030 and
2030-2050.
 Figure 2.11: Romania’s carbon emissions will be close to stable going forward
    Decomposition of reduction in carbon dioxide emissions in Romania, changes in 2010-2030 and 2030-
                                                  2050, in
                                                                           MtCO2e




 Notes: Decomposition uses the logarithmic mean Divisia index (LMDI) approach. Source: World Bank calculations based on
 projections from ROM-E3 model.




     METHODOLOGY AND MAIN FINDINGS

              Methodology

     The macroeconomic modeling was undertaken using a customized CGE model, built on the blueprints
     of the GEM-E3 model39 and in collaboration with the Romanian Government. The “ROM-E3” model
     (Romania Economy-Energy-Environment model) is a recursive dynamic computable general equilibrium
     model that covers the interactions between the economy, the energy system and the environment.
     The model is Romania-specific but also captures the interaction of the country with international
     markets--aggregated into five countries/regions (Romania, the EU-15 and other EU new member states,
     other industrialized countries, and developing countries). The international features allow it to analyze
     both the impact of EU policy choices on global markets and international spillovers triggered by
     emission abatement policies of other major industrialized regions.40 The model contains 28 economic
     activities or sectors. While in standard global CGE models only CO2 from combustion is modeled, in

39
   For detailed documentation, see Capros P., Van Regemorter D., Paroussos L., Karkatsoulis P., Fragkiadakis C., Tsani S.
and       Charalampidis     I.      The       GEM-E3        Model       Reference        Manual.      Available      at:
http://www.e3mlab.ntua.gr/manuals/GEMref.PDF
40 The non-EU regions do not participate in carbon trading or offsets but rather set a uniform domestic carbon tax.
      ROM-E3 all greenhouse gases are modeled, including process-based emissions from agriculture and
      industry. The model’s horizon stretches to 2050, and institutional settings and policy instruments for
      climate policy implementation are included, including the complex rules for the EU Emissions Trading
      System (ETS) and non-ETS sectors.

 Key sectors driving emissions are energy and transport, and a detailed bottom-up representation of each
 is included in the model.41 Power supply is modelled by ten representative generation technologies whose
 market shares and cost structures are consistent with energy balances. The market shares and capital costs
 of power generation technologies have been harmonized with the results of energy modeling (see Chapter
 3). For transport, major categories of transport 42 are represented, with two different categories
 distinguished by purpose: i) private, including households’ expenditures for transport equipment (cars,
 motorcycles) and for public transportation (leisure trips, commuting trips), and ii) business, including firms’
 expenditures for transportation of goods (freight transport) and employees (passenger transportation paid
 by business).

 Data sources and main assumptions are important to note, and the model includes some key market
 imperfections. The ROM-E3 model is calibrated to a base year (2010) dataset that includes full Social
 Accounting Matrices for each country/region represented in the model.43 The key exogenous variables of
 the model are: total factor productivity, technical progress, fossil fuel prices, labor force, minimum
 consumption of households (adjusted based on population changes), public consumption, taxes and
 subsidies, shares of different technologies in power generation, and sectoral growth expectations. The
 labor market includes involuntary unemployment and fiscal instruments such as indirect taxes, subsidies,
 duties, and income taxes are modelled. Figure 2.13 explains how the baseline and policy scenarios are
 run.




 41
     In the macroeconomic model, only electricity generation is modelled in detail, rather than the entire energy sector
  which also includes heat production and energy sector own-use (under the standard IEA/IPCC definition).
  42 Public road transport (for passengers), road transport (for freight), rail transport (for passengers), rail transport
                                                                                                                           (for
  freight), maritime transport (inland), and air transport.
  43
     The model is calibrated on the GTAP v8.1 database, with a base year of 2007. The Input-Output tables for
  Romania were updated to 2010 using national statistical data, and 2010 was the base year used in ROM-E3. GTAP
is Purdue University’s Global Trade Analysis Project database
  Figure 2.13. Modelling scenarios follow a careful and detailed procedure
               The modeling steps for the baseline and policy scenarios in ROM-E3 model


Source: Macroeconomic modeling technical paper. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program,
2015
       Baseline scenario                                     Policy scenarios



       1. Data and software                                    5. Policy measures
       • GTAP8.1, Eurostat,                                    and shocks
       • NSO, CNP, UNFCCC                                      • Emissions constraints and carbon taxes
       • Programmed in GAMS                                    • Taxes, subsidies, transfers
                                                               • Exogenous shocks


       2. Algebraic formulation of
       ROM-E3 model                                              6. Policy scenarios

       • Dimensions: sectors, regions                            • Changes in model parameters, policies or
       • Markets, agents, bottom up                                exogenous assumptions
       • Production functions and nests                                         • New optimal paths
                                                                 • Green 2030 and Super Green 2050 as reference
                                                                   scenarios
             3. Calibrations to the base
             year 2007 (2010)
             • Reflection of the base year                         7. Sensitivity analysis
               data, especially I-O flows
                                                                   • Fiscal scenarios
             • Deriving parameters from
                                                                   • Equity scenarios
               data
                                                                   • Fossil fuel shocks
                                                                   • Sensitivity to external parameters e.g. elasticities
            4. Dynamic calibration to the                            of substitution
            future (2050)
            • Based on external projections
            • Optimal path, given
              constraints from adopted
              policies
 The ROM-E3 model has been used to evaluate alternative GHG emission reduction scenarios-- the Green
 and Super Green scenarios, in addition to the baseline. The baseline was presented above. The two
 green scenarios are defined below. The Green package aims to quantify what is already agreed about EU
 commitments for mitigation in 2030, specifically the 40 percent emissions reduction by that year, but
 numerous details remain to be decided, in particular the national targets that will aggregate to the overall
 non-ETS abatement effort. The Super Green package aims to quantify implementation of the Roadmap
 2050, which is a broad strategy document with no legally binding power.

 The Green scenario imposes compliance with the main features of the 2030 framework for climate and
 energy policies. As determined in the October 2014 decision of the European Council, the 2030 framework
 sets an all-EU target for emissions reduction of 40 percent compared to 1990. For ETS sectors, EU-wide
 carbon trading ensures equal prices of emissions abatement across the EU in all scenarios. The sectors
 covered by the EU emissions trading system (EU ETS) would have to reduce their emissions by 43 percent
 compared to 2005.44 Emissions from sectors outside the EU ETS would need to be cut by 30 percent below
 the 2005 level on average. While the EU ETS operates as a single market, differential emission reduction
 targets are to be imposed for the non-ETS segments of the respective EU economies. For non-ETS sectors,
 the model assumes that each EU country imposes a domestic CO2 tax which equalizes marginal abatement
 costs only across each country’s domestic non-ETS emission sources. This assumption is a shorthand for the
 most efficient possible way for each EU member state to meet its individual non-ETS target. In reality,
 countries will likely use a mix of policy tools, including taxes, subsidies, standards and other regulation, and
 other measures. In the Green scenario, the revenues from auctioned ETS allowances and domestic taxation
 of non-ETS emissions are recycled through general taxes (because no restrictions on use of auction revenues
 have yet been set; however, it is likely that the EU will restrict use of revenues as it does under the 2020
 climate package.)45

 A more ambitious mitigation scenario--Super Green --reflects the reduction of emissions by almost 80
 percent compared to 1990 levels for developed economies. In order to stabilize GHG concentrations at
 safe levels (i.e., 450 ppm according to the UNFCCC), there is a need for global action. The Super Green
 scenario imposes an emissions constraint on richer countries (the EU and OECD) for 2050 while emissions
 are allowed to increase in line with the baseline path for developing countries. According to the milestones
 set in the March 2011 “2050 Roadmap for the EU”, the EU should prepare for reductions in its domestic
 emissions by 80 percent by 2050 compared to 1990. Further, all reductions of EU emissions should come
 from within the EU itself and not result from carbon offsets.




44
   2005 was the first year of ETS trading and so is the year against which emissions reductions are measured
45
   Under the current 2020 package, at least 50 percent of auctioning revenues are to be used by Member States for
climate and energy related purposes.
Table 2.5. GHG mitigation for the EU under the alternative scenarios quantified by the ROM-E3 model

 % changes from 2005                              Target for 2020           Target for 2030            Target for 2050
 Baseline                                                                 34% (ETS only)
 Green                                          14% (EU28 target)         43% (ETS only)
 Super Green                                                                                         78% (EU28 target)
Note: The 78% GHG reduction target relative to 2005 is equivalent to 80% relative to 1990. Source: World Bank staff based on EU
documents.


         Main Findings

The Green scenario imposes only modest costs on Romania’s economy . EU emissions trading in the
model determines how the overall EU ETS reduction of 43 percent compared to 2005 will be most
efficiently allocated across countries. (See Figure 2.14). For Romania, energy-intensive sectors must reduce
emissions by 24 percent by 2030 or about 12 percentage points more in 2030 compared to the baseline
pattern of ETS emissions. Total emissions for Romania will decline by 21 percent by 2030. Together, this
additional mitigation compared to the baseline will reduce GDP by 1.1 percent in 2030 compared to
baseline. (See Table 2.6). Employment is harmed more, with a reduction of 1.7 percent.

 Figure 2.14: EU emissions trading allocates needed mitigation efficiently across countries
             Total GHGs under each scenario for Romania and the rest of the EU, as % change from 2005




 Source: ROM-E3 model; Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015


Moderate effects at the economy-wide level mask significant output, employment, and trade effects at
the sectoral level, but energy-intensive and trade-exposed industries are not devastated by emissions
abatement. Energy, extractive and energy-intensive sectors lose in output terms, while services and light
industry win. Declines in output of over 10 percent are recorded for fossil fuel extraction, agriculture, oil
products, and power supply. The higher costs of production for those sectors in which (fossil fuel) energy
inputs represent a significant share of direct and indirect costs leads to a loss in competitiveness, depressing
production. The strongest boost comes to production of electrical goods, other equipment, transport
equipment, and non-ferrous metals. In the new equilibrium, real wages are lower, and unemployment rises.
Two alternatives within the Green scenario generate positive differences in GDP and employment impact,
but their scale is not sizeable.

  Table 2.6. Macroeconomic impacts of the green scenarios compared to the baseline, in % of GDP


                                           Green               Super Green
                                    in 2030     in 2050     in 2030    in 2050
  Impact on GDP:                         -1.1        -2.1       -1.4        -4.0
  w/ Double Dividend w/ Low              -1.0        -2.0       -0.7        -3.2
  Fuel Price                             -1.0        -1.8       -1.3        -4.0

  Impact on Employment:                  -1.7        -1.4       -2.2        -5.3
  w/ Double Dividend w/ Low              -1.5        -1.3       -0.9        -4.1
  Fuel Price                             -1.2        -1.0       -1.7        -5.3

 Source: ROM-E3 model. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015



If the revenues from auctioning ETS allowances in Romania were recycled through a reduction in labor
taxes, the output and employment impacts would be smaller, but the improvement would be moderate.
The standard tax recycling option used in the Green scenario is that public revenues are used to reduce
general taxation. A variant has been quantified—Double Dividend--where tax revenues are used to reduce
social security rates for employers. This implies lower labor costs, which partly offsets the cost impacts of
carbon prices on production costs and mitigates upward pressure on prices overall. Thus, loss of
competitiveness is partly offset, and domestic demand is less depressed. The decrease in the cost of labor
sustains demand for labor and, as a consequence, the reduction in wage income is less. Together, the
impact of the Green emissions targets on private consumption is lower than in the alternative taxation case.
This option also slightly benefits employment, by 0.2 percentage points when compared to the Green
scenario. Importantly, any such recycling option would have to follow EU guidelines and rules, which
are not yet determined for the 2030 framework.


Romania benefits only slightly from halving of oil prices through 2030 as compared to the baseline
scenario. The gains of the Low Fuel Price alternative relative to the Green scenario are much bigger outside
Romania—for the other new member states or for the EU15. This is because terms-of-trade effects are
more pronounced for larger net energy importers. If Romania were to perform the same emissions
reduction effort in 2030 under lower fossil fuel price, the country would benefit from access to low cost
energy resources. However, product prices in other countries would decrease and so Romania will increase
its imports, hence reducing the positive effect of low fossil prices on its GDP. The positive effects for private
consumption are much more significant (a difference of 1.5 percentage points).
Maintaining the 2030 framework through 2050 allows assessment of the continuing impact of unchanged
2030 policies. Overall emissions for Romania will continue to decline, reaching 26 percent below 2005
levels by 2050 while the EU as a whole would reduce emissions by 44 percent. Romania’s emissions from
ETS sectors would shrink by 60 percent by 2050 with no additional actions but only the maintenance of the
2030 framework (and the ongoing reduction of ETS allowances by 2.4 percent each year). The cost to
Romania in GDP in 2050 is estimated at 2 percent while employment will be lower by 1.7 percent.


The Super Green scenario imposes distinctly larger costs on Romania’s economy. For the EU overall to
cut emissions by 78 percent by 2050, Romania’s contribution will be similar: -72 percent. By 2030,
Romania’s GHGs will need to be 37 percent below 2005, (See Figure 2.14) and its energy-intensive sectors
must reduce emissions by more than 50 percent below 2005 or 26 percentage points below the baseline
pattern of ETS emissions in 2030. In 2050, GDP losses for decarbonizing the EU economy are around 1.6
percent and almost four percent for Romania. Employment losses for Romania come to above five percent.
Romania suffers a much larger adjustment cost than the EU average mainly because: i) it provides larger
potential for cost-effective abatement options, and ii) in the baseline scenario, the energy sector of Romania
is still dominated by fossil fuels; hence, it must be restructured more thoroughly than the EU average. At
the same time, a large part of the equipment required to decarbonize the Romanian economy is to be
imported.

In the Super Green scenario, lower fossil fuel prices could marginally mitigate the adverse impacts of
rising carbon prices. Compared to the Super Green scenario with higher fuel prices, lower energy costs
do not affect GDP, while private consumption could gain around one percent as consumers would benefit
from lower energy bills for imported fuels. In the Super Green scenario, it has been assumed that developed
countries globally undertake intense GHG mitigation action consistent with a 450 ppm target. It can be
expected that this action will have an impact on fossil fuel prices. The reduction of fossil fuel prices due to
global climate action decreases overall prices and costs, allowing consumers to maintain demand and
compensate for the additional investment costs needed for energy restructuring purposes. Thus, lower
fossil fuel prices mitigate the adverse impacts of carbon prices and can even offset the depressive demand
effect due to decarbonization. This holds mainly in developed countries which have high fossil fuel prices
and less so in developing countries where fossil fuel prices are subsidized and taxation is low.

The Double Dividend scenario for 2050 lightens the impact of the Super Green scenario by around one
percentage point on growth. Instead of recycling back to the economy through reductions in general
taxation, carbon tax revenues are used to reduce labor costs (through reduction in employers’ social
security contributions). Labor cost reductions result in net competitiveness gains for labor intensive
industries (e.g. services), and they support employment delivering a solid 1.4 percentage points of
improvement.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

After accounting for economy-wide impacts and feedback as well as interactions globally, the costs of
implementing the imminent EU 2030 climate framework are modest for Romania’s economy. EU
emissions trading allocates mitigation efficiently across EU member states via a uniform carbon price (the
emissions allowance price that clears the ETS market). Romania can meet the 2030 obligations by cutting
GHGs by 34 percent by 2030 compared with 2005 or by 10 percentage points compared to baseline
emissions at a cost of 1.1 percent of GDP and 1.7 percent of employment. Simply maintaining likely 2030
policies until 2050 will reduce emissions to about one-third below 2005 levels by 2050 for Romania and
to near 45 percent lower for the EU. Importantly, the relatively modest overall cost masks highly variable
impacts across sectors, with more energy-intensive sectors suffering much higher dislocation.

The same approach to assessing the prospective EU Roadmap 2050 finds a heavy burden in costs for
Romania’s economy. Reducing overall emissions by more than 70 percent and ETS emissions by near 80
percent by 2050 will leave Romania’s output four percent lower and employment almost five percent lower.
This path represents a radical shift compared to the current EU 2020 policies or even the upcoming
2030 framework.


The government needs to be prepared to monitor the cross-sectoral effects of the green transition and
consider measures aimed at facilitating the reallocation of labor and capital from one sector to another.
Mitigation measures induce differing economic repercussions across sectors, and the costs of adjustment
are borne mainly by energy-intensive and trade-exposed sectors. The estimated value-added patterns in
energy-intensive sectors, such as power and heavy industry, reveal higher declines in output and
employment than in the rest of the economy through 2030/2050. These sectors play an important role in a
small and open economy such as Romania, and the government may wish to consider appropriate
measures to assure targeted assistance for displaced workers.

A reduction of labor taxes seems to be a smart option to channel rising revenues from auctioning of ETS
allowances, given its positive impact on GDP, sectoral output, and employment, if such a policy falls
within EU rules. While economy-wide models are designed to focus on real sector developments over long
horizons, they also offer insights on fiscal issues. The ROM-E3 model assumes fiscal neutrality so that the
impact of mitigation options on fiscal expenditures or revenues must be financed by offsetting changes in
spending or taxes. However, a choice can be made of which taxes to reduce. A reduction in social security
contributions (labor taxes) is supportive of job creation and a reduction of the unemployment rate. This
phenomenon is referred to as the ‘double dividend,’ i.e., that a tax on a ‘bad’ (GHG emissions) allows the
reduction of a tax on a ‘good’ (employment). However, the government’s ability to recycle revenues is
likely to be constrained by upcoming EU guidelines and rules under the 2030 framework. Such rules, if
similar to those under the EU 2020 climate policy, will require revenues to be invested in low-carbon urban
mobility, energy efficiency measures and renewables support.

From the viewpoint of cost efficiency and economic performance, Romania has much to gain through the
inclusion of stronger equity considerations into EU-wide climate policy discussions. Because the
Romanian economy is projected to expand faster than the EU and because Romania remains one of the
poorest EU countries, the constraints on emissions in its non-ETS sectors for 2030 should be looser on
equity grounds.
Last, the macroeconomic model constructed for this analysis remains available for further development
and application by the government for current and future policy questions related to low carbon and
green growth. The ROM-E3 model was built in collaboration with Romanian government experts, and it is
being transferred to the National Commission for Prognosis. The government has the opportunity to apply
this model to numerous questions about EU, global, and national policies related to emissions mitigation
and other green growth issues. The model also can be applied to a large set of policy questions not related
to green growth. There is also the possibility of developing this model further to strengthen its ability to
answer questions of interest to the government.
CHAPTER 3. HOW CAN ENERGY SUPPLY AND DEMAND BE TRANSFORMED?

CHAPTER SUMMARY

Romania’s emissions have dropped significantly from their peak in the late 1980s as a co-benefit of
structural transformation and due to the growth in the share of low carbon energy sources. The energy
sector in Romania46 is characterized by a relatively high share of zero-carbon sources, which constitute
one-quarter of primary energy supply and 45 percent of electricity generation and include hydro-
generation, nuclear, wind, biofuels, and solar photovoltaic. Romania participates in EU emissions trading
(the Emissions Trading System, EU-ETS) for energy-intensive sectors which is designed to secure mitigation
across the EU of 21 percent compared to 2005 for those sectors, as the centerpiece of the European
Union’s (EU) current climate rules. Those rules are expected to tighten for 2030 and further for 2050. In
addition, while the energy intensity of Romania’s economy has been decreasing, it is still one of the highest
in the EU. However, continuing de-carbonization of Romania’s energy sector is a challenging process and
will requires further transformation of power generation: 46 percent of primary energy and 40 percent of
generation still depend on coal47 and oil. As a result, the energy sector remains responsible for almost 60
percent of Romania’s total emissions (excluding LULUCF48), and climate change mitigation targets beyond
EU2020 cannot be achieved without significant action in the energy sector. Moreover, the country faces
substantial investment needs irrespective of mitigation obligations to replace obsolete fossil-fueled
electricity plants; and switching to renewable power to reduce energy sector emissions at the same time
augments those costs. Nonetheless, with good policies and appropriate investments, the energy sector in
Romania has the potential to become an engine of economic growth.

Analysis and modeling aimed to find the best solutions for Romania’s energy supply mix given the
country’s current, imminent, and prospective mitigation obligations. Such solutions were modeled as
satisfying future energy demand at a minimum cost while meeting emissions mitigation requirements. A
TIMES/MARKAL model was used for energy supply modeling while the potential for reduction of energy
demand in end-use services through energy efficiency measures was estimated using a tool--Energy Service
Demand Analysis (ESDA)--developed for this purpose. Green policy measures were evaluated under three
scenarios: Baseline (current EU policy with 2020 targets), Green (likely EU 2030 targets), and Super Green
(possible EU 2050 targets). The findings identify optimal power generation and energy efficiency measures
to meet the emissions mitigation requirements of the Green and Super Green scenarios. Under the Baseline
scenario, energy sector emissions are found to fall to two percent below 2005 levels by 2050, while this
reduction is 26 percent in the Green scenario, and 43 percent in the Super Green. Within the energy sector,
electricity emissions will drop by 36, 72, and 97 percent respectively. Inclusion of a set of selected energy
efficiency measures is critical for the implementation of both the Green and Super Green scenarios, as these


46
   The energy sector is defined here based on the standard IEA/IPCC definition and includes electricity and heat
production and energy sector own-use. Note that the energy sector model applied to Romania includes both energy
supply and energy demand (or end-users).
47
   Note that coal includes lignite (or brown coal), sub-bituminous, bituminous, and anthracite (hard coal).
48 Land use, land-use change and forestry
measures deliver significant abatement, are cost efficient, and require a modest implementation effort.

Romania can meet the mitigation obligations likely under the EU 2030 framework in energy and
electricity at moderate costs; but the prospective requirements of the EU 2050 Roadmap, which requires
at least 80 percent reduction in emissions and the virtual elimination of emissions from the power sector,
are likely to be both expensive and challenging to implement. The investment effort in the power sector
(including demand management) required for the implementation of the Green scenario (to meet 2030
requirements) is estimated at €37 billion (present value) 49 or an average annual 1.1 percent of GDP through
2050, while the investment costs of the Super Green scenario (to meet 2050 requirements) are projected
to amount to €54 billion (present value) or an average annual 1.7 percent of GDP. The required investments
shift upwards after 2030 in both green scenarios, as remaining fossil-based plants are replaced with
renewable and nuclear capacity. A lower carbon path for Romania’s energy sector will impose significant
costs and complex planning challenges on the sector, in particular on power generation. Achieving
emission reduction targets beyond the EU 2020 targets will require Romania to abandon plans for new
coal-based power generation capacity and life-extension of existing plants. It will also require significant
additional renewable generation capacity and, therefore, a regulatory environment that would promote
it. Nevertheless, the government cannot be distracted from critical near-term sector reforms, many of
which lay essential conditions for the success of the long-term green transition. Although the costs of
greening are projected to rise significantly over time and as requirements for emissions reduction tighten, a
lower carbon energy sector needs to be part of Romania’s long-term planning. In support of that enduring
objective, the TIMES MARKAL supply model and the Energy Service Demand Analysis tool constructed for
this analysis remain available for further development and application by the government.



CHALLENGES FOR GREENER GROWTH

         Overview
Romania's economic growth and energy consumption have been decoupling since the early 1990s, and
the energy intensity of the economy50 has been continuously decreasing. However, a significant increase
in energy demand is expected to accompany future growth. After the large contractions of the economy
and energy consumption in the 1990s, Romania’s GDP recovered, expanding by 53 percent during 2000 to
2011, while energy demand remained flat. This slow growth of energy demand was in large part due to
structural shifts of the economy toward higher-value-added manufacturing and services and away from
energy-intensive industries, as well as significant improvements of energy efficiency within industries. As a
result of these two factors, energy intensity of the economy has been continuously decreasing for more than
two decades and is now 240 percent below its 1989 level (Figure 3.1). In the medium- to long-term, energy
consumption patterns are expected to converge toward those of high-income EU countries and energy
demand will increase, in particular, due to growth in demand for transportation and services. These changes


49
   At a five percent discount rate. The discount rate was selected as a mid-range social discount rate (the typically used
social discount rates range from 4 to 6 percent).
50 Energy intensity is measured as primary energy consumption (g of oil eq.) per $1 GDP (constant 2005 US$).
are already occurring: from 2000 to 2011, energy used in transport grew by 25 percent and in the services
sector by 260 percent (although from a relatively small base), while residential and industrial demand
declined by 6 and 21 percent, respectively.51


 Figure 3.1. Growth and energy consumption have been decoupling and energy intensity
             continuously declining since early 1990s
                Trends in growth, energy use, and energy intensity




 Source: calculations based on WB data from 2015.


At present, primary energy consumption is characterized by a relatively high and growing share of zero-
carbon energy sources, leading to a shrinking carbon footprint of the energy sector. This trend has been
supported by Romania’s high renewable energy potential and production, as well as by nuclear power
production. From 1990 to 2012, the share of primary energy supply from the zero-carbon sources (nuclear,
hydro, wind, solar, and geothermal) increased from under two to 12 percent, and the share of renewable
sources grew from 2.5 to 15 percent of the total. At the same time, natural gas declined slightly, from 46 to
31 percent of the total (Figure 3.2.a). This trend continues to be supported by the country’s rich renewable
energy potential: hydropower technical potential of 36 TWh per year, wind generation potential of 23 TWh
per year (the highest in Southern Europe),52 high solar potential with an average solar radiation level of
1,400 kWh/m2/year, and rich forestry resources promising to cover 19 percent of total demand.

Electricity production also uses, to a large extent, zero-carbon sources and a growing share of
renewables. Total installed capacity at the end of 2013 was 22,947 MW, and total production was 59,045
GWh, consisting of 55 percent fossil fuel-based generation, 19 percent nuclear and 26 percent renewables


51
   Total energy supply needs to satisfy total energy demand in the economy including the transport sector; however,
transport GHG mitigation measures are not addressed as part of the energy sector since separate transport sector
modeling was undertaken (see Chapter 4).
52 World Energy Council, 2013
 (Figure 3.2.b). Romania has one of the largest wind capacities in Eastern Europe. It ranks 14th among the
 EU’s 29 countries according to the share of zero-carbon generation and 13th according to the share of
 renewable generation. However, fossil-based generation, still dominates electricity production. About one-
 third of the fossil fuel-fired capacity is co-generation. The fossil fuel-fired plants consist of predominantly
 obsolete, high-emission coal and gas-fired generation units, most of which need to be decommissioned
 or modernized. Over the period 2005-2011, Romania decommissioned 3,000 MW of thermal generation
 capacity. Further decommissioning is expected because many plants do not meet EU requirements. Overall,
 many generation assets are beyond their useful life: 30 percent are approximately 40 years old.53


     Figure 3.2. The share of non-fossil sources of energy is large and fossil fuels are dominated by
                 gas
           a. Primary energy supply by fuel, 2012                  b. Electricity generation by source, 2012




                                                     Source: IEA


 Romania is a net exporter of electricity, with a fast growing volume of power exports. In 2013, it exported
 4.7 TWh of electricity, about 8.5 percent of its electricity production, transporting it to Bulgaria, Serbia, and
 Hungary. Electricity exports, after dropping in the first years of transition and reaching its lowest point in
 1995, surged almost eleven-fold between 1995 and 2011, when the power sold abroad amounted to 5.3
 TWh, while imports increased 3.3 times over the same period. However, the trend is characterized by
 variability, reflecting economic and climatic conditions. Going forward, the country is planning to further
 increase its power exports, responding to the growing demand in neighboring countries.

 Romania is a significant producer of oil and natural gas, and most of gas consumption is covered by
 domestic sources; it uses domestic coal entirely for heat and power generation. It has the fifth-largest
 proven natural gas reserves in Europe, 3.9 trillion m3, and the fourth-largest proven crude oil reserves in
 Europe, 600 million barrels.54 A significant proportion of gas demand is met from domestic supplies.



53
  Jorge Morales Pedraza. Electrical Energy Generation in Europe. Springer. 2015
54
     As   of    the   end      of     2012. BP      Statistical Review of       World Energy. June 2013.
http://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/about-bp/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy.html
 However, production of these fuels has been declining.55 Romania also holds 51 trillion cubic feet of
 technically-recoverable shale gas resources, and there are plans to develop the domestic shale gas
 industry. 56 However, these plans remain uncertain because of public concerns regarding related
 environmental issues and perceived potentially high costs of production. Currently, all imported natural gas
 comes from Russia and is delivered via Ukraine. Romania is exploring the possibility to diversify and import
 natural gas from other producers (mainly, Azeri gas) and is discussing various transporting options. Importing
 LNG (liquefied natural gas) is also a possibility, depending on how global LNG prices evolve over time.
 Romania's total hard coal (anthracite) resources are estimated at near 2,500 million tons, of which about
 11 million tons are commercially exploitable reserves. Lignite resources amount to 9,640 million tons,
 including reserves of 280 million tons.57

 Romania has achieved significant progress in reforming energy sector pricing in recent years. One
 achievement is completing the regulatory reform in relation to non-residential electricity and gas prices,
 which happened in January 2014 and January 2015, respectively. Resulting gas price increases to industries
 have contributed to a significant reduction in gas consumption. While the regulatory reform in concerning
 the residential electricity prices is progressing, the same process with respect to residential gas prices
 stalled in mid-2014. Pricing of district heat is the second remaining pricing issue in the energy sector. Heat
 prices are defined by the regulator, and municipalities can either charge these prices to the consumers or
 reduce them using subsidies from local budgets. However, non-payment of subsidies by municipalities is
 common. A law allowing the Ministry of Public Finance to deduct non-payments from the municipalities’
 allocation of central transfers was enacted in 2011 but proved politically unfeasible to implement.

 Romania has also undertaken important reforms that promote good governance, managerial and
 operational efficiency, and financial improvements in the power and gas sectors. Following restructuring
 and privatization measures taken during the previous decade, several measures were implemented
 recently: the Government Emergency Ordinance on State-Owned Enterprise Governance in 2011, a new
 Electricity and Gas Law, and new regulator (ANRE) Law in 2012, initial public offerings of shares of
 Nuclearelectrica, Romgaz and Electrica and secondary public offerings of the shares of Transelectrica and
 Transgaz during 2012-2014, as well as mandatory competitive electricity trade by the generators through
 OPCOM (the electricity and gas exchange).


 Romania’s support mechanism for renewable energy (a Green Certificate System, with centralized
 trading at OPCOM) was implemented, but later scaled back because it pushed up end-user tariffs. The
 support mechanism attracted substantial investment (estimated €7-8 billion), resulting in construction of
 approximately 5,200 MW of renewable energy capacity, mostly during the last four years and including
 3,221 MW of wind, 1,293 MW of solar, 586 MW of mini-hydro, and 102 MW of biomass. Originally


55
   From 1990 to 2012, crude oil production in Romania declined from 169.1 thousand to 83.1 thousand barrels per day
and natural gas production decreased from 2.74 billion to 1.06 billion cubic feet per day. The reserve to production ratio
is estimated at 6 years (BP 2014: http://www.worldenergy.org/data/resources/country/romania/gas/).
56
   Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources. http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/worldshalegas/
57
   EURACOAL, 2012.
 envisioned support levels were doubled when the support system was approved by the Parliament, making
 the system highly attractive to investors – and very expensive to electricity consumers, triggering protests.
 The energy regulator (ANRE) concluded that the system over compensated producers and scaled it back in
 2013.

  These measures have put Romania’s coal power-generating companies under operational and financial
 stress, depressing their share in total power generation and bringing Romania closer to its emissions and
 renewable energy targets. Electricity price liberalization, mandatory use of OPCOM for trading, and the
 renewables support scheme, against a backdrop of subdued demand for electricity following the 2008- 2009
 crisis, led to a drop in the market share of coal power-generating companies. In some European electricity
 markets, most notably in Germany, the increase in renewable energy at a time of flat electricity demand has
 led to a decrease in gas-fired power generation and the shutdown of gas-fired generating units. In Romania,
 this impact was softened by the country’s rising electricity exports, and coal power plants have largely
 absorbed it, losing competitiveness against existing hydro and nuclear power plants.58 However, they are
 provided financial support by the government. As a result of the decreased coal power production, Romania
 now expects to exceed its EU-mandated renewable energy target of 20 percent renewable energy in
 gross final energy consumption.


          Challenges

 The energy supply sector is the largest contributor to the country’s carbon footprint, being responsible
 for 58 percent of total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (excluding LULUCF)59, and the emissions intensity
 of the economy significantly exceeds the EU average. Romania’s total and per capita emissions60 have
 dropped significantly from their peak in the late 1980s as a co-benefit of structural transformation, a
 pattern typical for transition economies, and the growth in the share of non-emitting energy sources. Total
 CO2 emissions in Romania amounted to 78.7 million metric tons in 2010, accounting for a modest 2.1
 percent of total European Union emissions and 0.23 percent of the world emissions. Per capita CO2
 emissions were also low, at approximately half of the EU average and just over one-third of the OECD
 average. However, the emissions intensity of the economy61, while dropping 3.3 times from its 1989 level,


58
  Use of gas in power is concentrated in municipal power and heating plants.
59
  Emissions from electricity and heat production, the sum of three IEA categories: (1) emissions from electricity
generation, combined heat and power generation and heat plants (emissions from own use of fuel in power plants are
included), supplying the public; (2) emissions from generation of electricity and/or heat by auto -producers (in whole
or partly for their own use as an activity which supports their primary activity), these emissions would normally be
distributed between industry, transport and "other" sectors; (3) Other: emissions from fuel combusted in petroleum
refineries, for the manufacture of solid fuels, coal mining, oil and gas extraction and other e nergy- producing
industries. (IEA Statistics © OECD/IEA, http://www.iea.org/stats/index.asp), International Energy Agency electronic files
on CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion; Catalog Sources World Development Indicators).
60
   Total emissions include emissions from the following sectors: energy (electricity and heat production and energy
sector own use), transport (all transport activity regardless of the economic sector), residential (fuel combustion in
households), and “Other” (commercial/institutional activities, fishing and emissions not specified elsewhere) (IEA/IPCC
definition).
61
   Kg CO2 per $1 GDP (constant 2005 US$).
 was still much higher in 2010 than in many other countries: 2.8 times above the EU level, 2.1 times above
 the OECD average, and seven percent higher than the world average.

 The expense of reducing energy sector emissions comes on top of already high investment needs to
 address obsolete fossil-based plants and is further augmented by the intermittency of the renewable
 plants that are replacing them. Eighty percent of existing fossil fuel-fired generation plants and 60 percent
 of the power distribution networks in the country are already old; and retrofitting of fossil fuel- fired power
 plants in the last 20 years has yielded scant returns. Replacing such massive existing capacity with new
 capacity is financially challenging. This capacity will be partially replaced by renewable energy, which
 creates another challenge. Expansion of wind and solar is expensive but also technically difficult. Since wind
 and solar are variable resources and do not provide capacity commitments against peak load, increase in
 their penetration will require complementary peak load capacity.

 The continued deterioration and decline of district heating systems is particularly wasteful of existing
 assets and undermines the quality of life in Romanian cities . Many of the remaining operators are no
 longer economically viable because a substantial number of dissatisfied customers have disconnected
 from the systems and chosen alternative heating options. Inefficiency and high losses in the district heating
 systems also make them among the most costly to operate in the EU. A multi-year comprehensive program
 is needed to modernize those district heating systems that are economically viable: improve efficiency
 and service quality on the one hand and implement sector reforms to restore district heating company
 financial sustainability on the other, while ensuring that subsidies are well targeted to poor households.

 Despite substantial progress, Romania still lags significantly behind most EU countries in the broadest
 measure of energy efficiency and in key end-user sectors. Its energy intensity was 40 percent higher than
 the EU average62 in 2011. The efficiency gap is most pronounced for residential space heating where
 specific heat consumption (kgoe/m2) is 32 percent higher than comparable best EU practice. For the two
 dominating industrial energy users, chemicals manufacturing has a value-added energy intensity over 4
 times higher than the EU average (indicating structural issues), and steel making has an energy intensity
 per ton of steel that is 70 percent higher than the EU average. These three areas of end-use together
 account for roughly 40 percent of Romania’s final energy consumption.


 Thermal retrofit of residential buildings is both a financial and an implementation challenge. Only about
 one percent of the 150 million m2 of apartment buildings which were determined in need of thermal
 retrofit had been retrofitted as of 2012. Despite very high capital subsidies (up to 80 percent) provided by
 the national and local governments, many low income households are still reluctant to participate.
 Subsidized energy prices create disincentives. In addition, a lack of incentives, information, necessary skills
 upgrades, and administrative improvements such as strategic planning, prioritization, systematic
 evaluations and coordination between different levels of government are to blame.




 62
  Measured in GDP US$. When energy intensity of the economy is measured using GDP in PPP terms, the
Romanian energy intensity exceeds that of the EU by 5.3 percent only
 METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS

          Methodology

 The analysis in this study aims at understanding how energy supply and demand can contribute to
 Romania’s current, imminent, and prospective obligations under the EU to reduce GHG emissions. How
 would meeting EU and global obligations alter Romania’s overall energy63 and electricity supply mix over
 the next 35 years? What would be the costs of meeting these obligations? The main objective of the
 analysis is to find best solutions for Romania’s energy supply mix that would satisfy future energy demand
 at a minimum cost under the different scenarios that represent EU mitigation obligations. Complementary
 to the supply analysis, the study also investigates the possibility of reducing energy demand in end-use
 services (such as space heating, lighting, and electrical machines) through energy efficiency measures in
 the household, non-residential, and industry sectors.

 The analysis was done in three steps: demand-side modeling, supply-side modeling, and Marginal
 Abatement Cost Curve (MACC) analysis.64 Green policy measures were evaluated using three scenarios:
 the Baseline scenario, the Green scenario, and the Super Green scenario. The outcomes of Green and Super
 Green scenarios were compared with the outcomes of the Baseline scenario to assess the cost of green
 measures and their emission-reducing impact. For each of the three scenarios, demand side modeling
 projected the level of overall demand through 2050 and calculated related emissions. Detailed demand
 modeling was done for three sectors--residential, non-residential, and industrial—for which the level of
 investment needed to implement proposed green demand side measures was estimated. Supply- side
 modeling provided the best solution for the electricity supply mix at the minimum possible cost for all three
 scenarios, ensuring that the volume of power supplied should be sufficient to meet the level of overall
 demand projected in the demand-side analysis and that the GHG emissions reduction target should be met.

 The supply and demand modeling was linked to macroeconomic modeling and to the Marginal
 Abatement Cost analysis. The analysis was implemented in the following sequence (Figure 3.3):

         Step 1. The Macroeconomic model produced projections for basic macro indicators, which are
          considered the key factors of energy demand: GDP, energy sector value added, and energy prices.
          These projections were used as input in the Excel-based model which projects energy demand.

         Step 2. The demand model used macroeconomic projections from Step 1, together with other
          input data, to project Baseline energy demand for three sectors—residential, non-residential, and
          industrial—over the period from 2015 to 2050 using the end-use demand model described below.
          The demand model also estimated potential energy efficiency reductions for various end-uses. Two
          demand cases were developed—demand without considering energy efficiency improvement and


63
   In this analysis, energy sector includes electricity supply, non-electric energy supply, and end-use sectors (residential,
industry, services/non-residential, and transport). Detailed transport modeling was undertaken separately (see Chapter
4)
64 The outcome of the MACC analysis is described in Chapter 9.
            demand with energy efficiency improvement.


     Figure 3.3. Energy modeling of supply and demand was linked to macroeconomic analysis
                  Overall analytic framework for energy analysis




     Source: Energy supply technical paper; Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015


           Step 3. To meet power demand projected at Step 2 and using macroeconomic variables from Step
            1, the energy supply model, TIMES/MARKAL, develops an energy supply plans for the Baseline
            scenario and the Green and Super Green scenarios, with considerations for relevant green
            measures on both the energy demand and supply sides. The incremental costs under the green
            energy supply plans on top of Baseline plans are calculated. Also, reductions of GHG emissions
            under the green scenarios are derived.

           Step 4. At the last step of the analysis, a marginal abatement cost curve is developed for all
            generation sources included in the Green and Super Green scenarios and for selected energy
            efficiency measures.

 Energy Demand side modeling
 A tool, Energy Service Demand Analysis (ESDA), was developed for demand projections. This easy to
 implement, Excel-based bottom-up framework serves the purpose of estimating long-term energy sector
 end-user service demand (see Figure 3.4). It makes use of key demand variables such as sectoral outputs,
 household income, and GDP, the projections of which are provided by the macroeconomic model (see
 Chapter 2). These variables are linked with energy consumption through parameters such as specific end-
 use energy consumption, intensity of energy services (e.g., liters of hot water per person; joules of heat
 needed per square meter of living area for space heating), and utilization factors of energy service
 appliances.65 The demand modeling exercise can assess energy efficiency options in different end-uses.

65
     See the Energy Sector Demand Technical Report for details
 The energy efficiency analysis is designed to reflect the EU’s energy and climate strategies, including the
 2030 framework for climate and energy policies and the Roadmap 2050 for moving to a low carbon
 economy. Major energy efficiency improvement measures include use of more efficient lighting and electric
 appliances, retrofitting buildings with wall, window and roof insulation, and heating and air conditioning
 system improvements.

     Figure 3.4. The demand analysis tool addressed key elements of all end-users and energy efficiency
                  options
                   Demand model: simplified sector and end-use service classification




     Note: For residential, services/nonresidential, and industry, demand and emissions were modeled. For transport, detailed
            modeling was undertaken separately and is reported in Chapter 4.
     Source: Energy Demand Technical Report. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015


 Supply side modeling


 With the end-use energy demand forecasts, TIMES66/MARKAL, the energy supply model, determines the
 optimum mix of final energy (e.g., coal, gas, LNG, electricity, district heat) to meet the end-use energy
 service demand. To meet the projected final energy demand, TIMES then optimizes the energy supply
 system accounting for all potential resources (such as coal, crude oil, natural gas, and hydropower),
 production/transformation facilities and transportation/transmission/distribution networks, satisfying
 various resource, technical, socio-economic, environmental and other constraints.
  Figure 3.5. Supply modeling selects optimum mix of final energy and power generation
               The structure of the supply side model, TIMES MARKAL


66
     The Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System
                                                                                     INPUT VARIABLES

                     DEMAND                      SUPPLY               PN
                                                                    IRO   ICI
                                                                        OL& SE EEL
                                                                              TS          TECHNO-ECONOMIC




                 •Drivers                   • Existing            • Taxes                  • Commodity
                 •Demand curves             energy                • Subsidies              transformation
                 • Sectorial demand         sources               • Limitation on          technologies:
                 • Energy services          • Potentials          installed capacities     electricity
                 consumption                • Imports                                      generation, services
                                            • Costs                                         consumption
                                            • Availability of                              • Costs
                                            resources                                      • Efficiencies
                                            • Storage


                                                                                  OUTPUT

                                      Installed capacities for each supply and demand technologies, energy fluxes,
                                                         final energy prices, total system cost, GHG emissions

 Source: Energy Supply Technical Paper; Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015


The following characteristics of TIMES/MARKAL are of essence to understanding its functioning:


       It is an optimization model. It computes the least cost (optimized) path of an energy system for
        the specified time frame. It aims to supply energy services at minimum global cost (more
        accurately, at minimum loss of surplus) by simultaneously making equipment investment,
        operating primary energy supply, and making energy trade decisions by the region.
       It is an equilibrium model. It is important to note that the TIMES energy economy is made up of
        producers and consumers of commodities such as energy carriers, materials, energy services, and
        emissions, and, like most equilibrium models, it assumes competitive markets for all commodities.
        Thereby, it ensures that there is a supply-demand equilibrium that maximizes the net total
        surplus: based on prices, suppliers produce exactly the quantities demanded by
        consumers, in each time period.
         It uses a scenario approach that consists of a set of coherent assumptions about the future
          demand trajectories and their determinants, leading to a coherent organization of the system
          under study. A scenario typically consists of four types of inputs: energy service demands, primary
          resource potentials, a policy setting, and a descriptions of the set of technologies.

 The structure of TIMES is defined by the data input provided by the user. Qualitative data includes lists of
 energy carriers, the technologies that the modeler feels are applicable (to each region) over a specified time
 horizon, as well as the environmental emissions that are to be tracked. Quantitative data contains the
 technological and economic parameter assumptions specific to each technology, region, and time period
 (Figure 3.5).

 The study considered three scenarios for energy system optimization: a Baseline, a Green scenario, and a
 Super Green scenario. The scenarios, consistent with those used in macroeconomic analysis (see Chapter
 2), were defined in the following way:

         The Baseline scenario is an extrapolation of the current state of the energy sector including
          already planned or implemented mitigation measures, in particular ongoing implementation of the
          current EU 2020 climate and energy package, which sets an EU-wide target to reduce GHG
          emissions by 21 percent in energy-intensive sectors, which participate in EU emissions trading,
          compared to 2005. However, it does not include broader reforms that the energy supply system
          needs to implement in line with the EU’s long-term plan to reduce carbon emissions.67
         The Green scenario models implementation of the proposed EU 2030 framework for climate and
          energy policies, which sets overall GHG mitigation at 40 percent compared to 1990 levels. For the
          power sector and other ETS participants, EU 2030 target corresponds to the reduction of GHG
          emissions of 43 percent for the EU as a whole compared to 2005.
         The Super Green scenario is driven by the EU’s prospective 2050 Roadmap which aims for the EU
          to reduce GHG emissions by at least 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050, to a large extent by
          almost total decarbonisation of the power sector.

 Marginal abatement cost analysis


 A marginal abatement cost curve (MACC) for electricity supply and energy efficiency is estimated in
 addition to the demand and supply modeling. The measures examined are presented according to two
 parameters of the MACC: potential mitigation impact (kilotons of CO2e68 abated) and the unit cost of
 abatement (cost per metric ton of CO2e abated). The MACC calculations for energy demand measures were
 done using the ESDA model described above and include end-use energy efficiency measures for the
 household sector, as these measures bring the most immediate and effective results. The MACC


67
   Emissions reduction in this chapter are generally cited against 2005 because that is the year EU emissions trading was
established; thus, all practical rules and targets are formulated against 2005. 1990 is cited in the original broad policy
statements because it is the EU’s base year for Kyoto and other international obligations.
68 Carbon dioxide equivalent
calculations for electricity supply were done using the TIMES/MARKAL model, also described above.
Generation options included in the Super Green scenario are used: solar photovoltaic (PV), hydro, wind,
biomass, natural gas plants with installed carbon capture and storage (gas CCS, carbon capture and
storage), and nuclear. The TIMES model constructed the best (minimum cost) mix of generation sources to
achieve a desired abatement level in eight different cases, corresponding to eight green generation
technologies. This meant six scenario runs, one for each of the green generation options. Abatement level
was set as a constraint, and each scenario maximized generation from one out of the eight generation
sources, considering many other variables/constraints in the model: production/transformation facilities;
transportation, transmission, and distribution networks; various resource, technical, socio-economic,
environmental and other constraints (including the size of the plants, their capacity factor, and the need
for back-up capacity). For example, in scenario 1, solar PV was set to be maximized in the electricity supply
system, and the rest of the generation technologies were selected by the model. The model also calculated
the cost of such a system and the cost of the baseline system. The difference between these two costs
constituted the marginal cost, which was then converted into net present value.

        Findings

This section presents the main finding of modeling. It aims at demonstrating the impact of green measures
on the sector outcomes by comparing the trends in the sector development under the three scenarios:
Baseline, Green and Super Green. The sector outcomes include projections of primary energy supply,
structure of electricity generation capacity and electricity generation mixes, required investment and total
(investment and O&M, operations and maintenance) costs, and the level of emissions.

Primary energy supply


Under the Baseline scenario, Romania's total primary energy supply in 2050 is projected to increase by
approximately 49 percent from the 2015 levels, from about 38,184 ktoe to about 56,779 ktoe. The
structure of primary energy supply reflects only a moderate increase in the share of cleaner energy sources.
The share of renewable energy (hydro, wind and solar) increases from 17 percent in 2015 to 22 percent in
2050. While oil and natural gas continue to be the most important sources of primary energy, the
contribution of gas to the mix increases and the share of oil decreases over time: oil’s share in the Baseline
scenario drops slightly from 29 percent in 2015 to 26 percent in 2050, while the share of gas increases by
eight percentage point, from 22 percent in 2015 to 30 percent in 2050. The share of coal drops from 16
percent in 2015 to eight percent in 2050 in the Baseline. The share of biomass stays at nine percent.

To move further in the direction of a greener energy system, the Green scenario exhibits further
expansion of renewable/non-fossil energy supply and contraction of fossil energy supply. In the Green
scenario, the share of renewables (hydro, wind and solar) in 2050 is higher than in the Baseline: in 2050, it
equals 24 percent or two percentage points higher than in the Baseline. The share of biomass is three
percentage points higher in the Green scenario than in the Baseline in 2050. The reverse happens with
natural gas: its share in 2050 in the Green scenario is 19 percent or five percentage point lower than in the
Baseline.
The Super Green scenario assumes no GHG emissions from power generation and a significant reduction of
non-power sector energy emissions; therefore, the measures in this scenario are much more aggressive
than in the Green scenario. While the RE share stays at the same level as in the Green scenario, the share of
biomass is higher (22 percent) and the share of gas is lower (15 percent). Coal almost disappears from the
mix, falling to two percent. Also, nuclear energy increases to nine percent of the total (from six percent in
the Green and five percent in the Baseline scenarios). (Figure 3.6)

      Figure 3. 6. Low carbon sources replace fossil fuels in energy supply in all scenarios

           Primary energy supply by source: 2020 and 2050

                         a. 2020                                                        b. 2050




 Source: Energy Supply Technical Paper. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015


     Generation capacity


To meet increasing demand in the face of rising prices for emissions allowances under the ETS in the
Baseline scenario, total installed capacity for power generation increases from 23 GW in 2015 to 30 GW
by 2050 or 29 percent growth. This increase will be largely covered by new wind, hydro, solar, and also gas
capacities, which replace coal and oil sources in the mix. From 2015 to 2050, oil declines from two GW to 0.2
GW (from seven percent to one percent of total capacity), and coal from seven GW to one GW (from 30
percent to four percent of total capacity). The share of wind and solar PV will increase tremendously:
together they constitute four GW in 2015 and 12 GW in 2050. Nuclear capacity is unchanged: Romania's
two nuclear power plants, Cernavado Plant 1 and 2, currently account for about six percent of the country's
total installed capacity, and there will be no installation of new nuclear capacity under the Baseline through
2050.
The higher share of intermittent or variable generation resources (wind and solar) creates a challenge
for load balancing. The Baseline scenario would have ten GW of new wind and solar capacities over the
next 35 years. This high penetration of variable generating sources creates a challenge in balancing
generation and load. To meet peak load, installed capacity should also have sources that provide constant,
non-variable, generation (e.g. coal, gas, and nuclear). At present, Romania has a ratio of 20 GW of installed
capacity versus 10 GW of peak load. Adding more variable sources would require a higher ratio of total
installed capacity to peak load, because the risk of insufficient generation for peak load increases faster
than the growth in the share of intermittent sources. However, because non-variable generation involves
economies of scale, electricity generation from all non-variable sources will not be fully utilized
domestically. Exporting the excess generation could be a solution.

The need for zero-emission sources for power generation is higher in the Green and much higher in the
Super Green scenario than in the Baseline. Fossil fuel-based generation resources (i.e., coal, gas) will
decrease in the Green scenario and be completely eliminated by 2050 under the Super Green scenario. On
the other hand, nuclear power capacity would increase by 1 GW in the Green and 3 GW in the Super Green
scenario, as compared with the Baseline, providing non-variable generation to the system dominated by
variable sources of electricity. It will raise the share of nuclear in the 2050 capacity mix from 5 percent in
Baseline to 13 percent in Green and 15 percent in the Super Green scenario. Wind, solar, and hydro have
approximately the same capacity level across scenarios in 2050. Biomass is not part of the capacity mix in
the Baseline but is present in both the Green and Super Green scenarios at a level of one GW. (Figure 3.7)


         Figure 3. 7: Generation capacity in 2050 is cleaner in the green scenarios with demand
                      contained by energy efficiency measures
                        Total Installed capacity by fuel, 2050, GW




 Source: Energy Supply Technical Paper; Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015
Energy efficiency measures on the demand side can significantly contribute to lower the capacity need
for electricity generation. Large-scale energy efficiency improvements on the demand side (in energy
end-use sectors such as the residential and commercial sectors) are considered in the Green and Super
Green scenarios. Major energy efficiency improvement measures include use of more efficient lighting and
electric appliances, retrofitting buildings with wall, window and roof insulation, heating system
improvement in the residential, commercial and public buildings, and use of efficient electric motor and
thermal energy equipment in the industry sector. The implementation of such measures leads to a 26
percent reduction of residential sector energy consumption by 2050 from that in the absence of these
measures. The energy efficiency measures in the non-residential buildings sector (e.g., more energy
efficient space heating and space cooling) results in a 30 percent reduction in services sector energy
demand. In the case of the industrial sector, the introduction of more energy-efficient technologies,
especially electric motors and boilers, leads to a 16 percent reduction in industrial sector energy
consumption. If the energy efficiency measures considered in the analysis are implemented successfully, it
would save three GW and four GW of installed capacity under the Green and Super Green scenarios
respectively (see Figure 3.7). The impact of the energy efficiency measures is also clearly visible in the
demand for new generation capacity; addition of new capacities under the Green and Super Green
scenarios would be two and one GW lower as compared to that under the Baseline scenario (see Figure
3.8).


The new installed capacity (constructed during 2015-2050) is constituted by wind, solar PV, hydro, natural
gas, biomass, and nuclear. The structure of new capacity differs by scenario. Only wind and hydro play the
same role (in terms of the capacity level) in all three scenarios: wind capacity exceeds 6 GW (note that
Romania has 12-14 GW of economically exploitable wind potential and the current capacity is 3 GW), and
hydro capacity amounts to 3 GW. The new hydro capacity is assumed to operate at a very low capacity factor
of 34 percent thereby incorporating any adverse potential climate change impacts on catchment areas and
run-off. Solar PV has importance in all scenarios, but to a different extent: the capacity is higher in Green
and Super Green (3 GW in each), while amounting to 2 GW in Baseline. Nuclear capacity of 3 GW would be
added in Super Green scenario while natural gas capacity is built under Baseline (4 GW) and Green (2 GW).
Under the Super Green, no fossil fuel plants, old or new, will exist by 2040; and in this scenario power
sector in Romania would be emission free by 2050. (Figure 3.8)
            Figure 3.8. New capacity is dominated by RE and nuclear in green scenarios, with demand
                        contained by energy efficiency
                        New installed capacity, 2015 -2050, GW




Source: Energy Supply Technical Paper. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015



 Generation


 The electricity generation mix changes significantly across scenarios (Figure 3.9 and Figure 3.10). While
 the share of non-fossil fuel based electricity generation equals near 60 percent under the Baseline in 2050, it
 exceeds 85 percent under the Green scenario and 100 percent under the Super Green scenario. Under the
 Green and Super Green scenarios, electricity generation from fossil fuel-based sources decreases rapidly.
 For example, there would be no electricity generation from coal, gas, or oil by 2040 under the Super Green
 scenario. Electricity generation from nuclear power generation facilities under the Green and Super Green
 scenarios would be almost three times as high as that of the Baseline scenario. The impact of demand side
 energy efficiency measures on saving electricity generation is significant. If the demand side energy
 efficiency measures are implemented successfully, it would reduce the need for electricity generation by
 20 and 11 percent in the Green and Super Green scenarios respectively. The lower reduction in generation
 under the Super Green scenario as compared to the Green scenario is explained by base load conditions of
 nuclear capacity, which has a much bigger presence in Super Green.
    Figure 3. 9: Generation is increasingly dominated by renewables with demand contained by
                   energy efficiency
                  Total generation by fuel, 2050, TWh




 Source: Energy Supply Technical Paper. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, 2015


Despite the focus on the electricity portion of the energy sector, because of its critical role in energy
sector mitigation, other parts of the energy sector were also considered. Heating, oil refineries, and
households as providers of energy services for own use were reviewed. This analysis found that demand
for space heating is likely to grow in the future despite energy efficiency improvements due to increasing
residential and office space. Currently, heat is produced mainly by combined heat and power (CHP) plants
that use natural gas or biomass. Modelling demonstrated that final demand for heat increases by 20-23
percent in 2050 compared to 2015 if energy efficiency measures are not implemented. However, with the
implementation of energy efficiency measures, the situation reverses: heat demand decreases by 10-14
percent in 2050 from the 2015 level. While natural gas remains the main fuel source in heat production
during 2015-50 in all scenarios (because there is no obvious alternative source), mitigation is achieved by
improved (cleaner) technologies used for heat production and the decentralization of the heating sector.
      Figure 3.10: The share of renewables grows, mostly at the expense of lignite and coal,
      especially in
                Super Green scenario

                           a. Renewable energy                                                 b. Lignite and coal




      Source: TIMES/MARKAL modeling outcomes. Report developed through the “Romania: Climate Change and Low
      Carrbon Green Growth Program”, 2015, World Bank



Total Supply Costs: energy sector and electricity sector69


Total energy supply costs decrease from Baseline to Green scenario but rebound in the Super Green
scenario, as investment costs are offset by the savings to operational costs induced by energy efficiency
measures. In the Baseline scenario, energy supply costs (including capital, fuel and operational costs) over
2015-2050 total €336 billion (present value),70 but would decrease to €326 billion in the Green scenario
due the implementation of energy efficiency measures on the demand side. Total energy supply costs under
the Super Green scenario would increase to €356 billion, as the reduced operational costs from energy
efficiency implementation is offset by expensive new nuclear power and CCS-equipped gas plants for power
generation. Energy efficiency measures that reduce energy demand and thereby lower required energy
supply require additional investment of €19 billion over the 2015-2050 period (or about 0.6 average annual
percent of GDP) but save €29 billion in fuel and operational costs on the supply side.

Energy sector investment costs are the biggest contributor to total costs, and the Super Green scenario has
especially heavy additional investment needs. Romania is facing a substantial replacement of existing coal-
based power plants by gas and renewable energy-based power generation: existing fossil-based plants are
quickly becoming obsolete, and the switch to lower emissions supply is present even in the Baseline. In
the Baseline, the retirement of coal and lignite plants happens mostly early on: 1.5 GW of coal capacity retires
by 2025, an additional 3.7 GW by 2035, and another 0.3 GW by 2040. Since the costs of replacing these

69
   As noted above, the energy sector model applied to Romania includes both energy supply and energy demand (or
end-users).
70
   At a five percent discount rate. The discount rate was selected as a mid-range social discount rate (the typically used
social discount rates range from 4 to 6 percent).
plants come relatively soon, their discounted value is higher. In addition, other plants retire over the
years: overall, the Baseline involves a newly built capacity of 17 GW, while Green includes 15 GW of new
plant capacity (with demand contained by energy efficiency measures). Therefore, the incremental (to
Baseline) cost under the Green scenario is not significant, because the heaviest financial burden is already
imposed in the Baseline. The incremental cost of Super Green as compared to Green is high because less
expensive generation sources are replaced by more expensive ones (in particular, three GW of nuclear are
built in the Super Green while only one GW is built in the Green scenario), and this happens earlier, increasing
the discounted costs. Also, Super Green requires more generation than Green, pushing up both capital as well
as fuel and operations and maintenance costs.

The electricity system will require €28 billion in investment costs in the Baseline during 2015-2050 to meet
demand or about average annual 0.8 percent of GDP. Required investment increases to €37 billion (present
value) in the Green and to €54 billion in the Super Green scenario, or average annual 1.1 and 1.7 percent of
GDP respectively. The additional costs of the green scenarios above baseline costs come partly from
investment in those energy efficiency measures that contain the growth of demand for electricity (€8 billion).
In addition, the Super Green scenario almost eliminates power sector emissions by 2050, and this is costly:
almost all fossil plants are replaced by 2050 by more capital-intensive renewable energy- based generation.
As a result, investment needs in the power sector double from the level needed in the Baseline.

Investment needs for the electricity sector are substantial in all cases but rise significantly as requirements
for emissions reduction tighten. Until 2020, investment needs in electricity supply and demand total about
€7 billion (discounted) in the baseline to over €10 billion in the green scenarios. In all three scenarios, the
burden of investment rises over time, with 40-45 percent of the total in the last decade 2040-2050, partly
because most of the fossil-based plants retire at that time. In the Green scenario, new wind, solar, nuclear,
hydro, and gas is added, and coal and oil-based generation almost disappears by 2050. In the Super Green
scenario, new electricity generation from renewable sources and nuclear sufficient to eliminate electricity
generation from coal-based sources by 2030 is constructed. Nuclear plant investment after 2030 further
contributes to high investment costs in the Green and Super Green scenarios. Energy efficiency measures
require rising and significant investments of their own. For both these categories, financing will come from
the private sector, although the public sector may need to establish programs of support for energy
efficiency, with some financing available from the European Union (See Table 3.1).
 Table 3.1: Electricity investment requirements jump after 2030
            Schedule of electricity investments and energy efficiency by scenario, billions of 2010 Euros


                                                                                                           2010-2050
                                    2015-2020 2020-2030 2030-2040                      2040-2050
                                                                                                         (discounted)*


         Scenario                                         Electricity supply:
              Baseline                      7.4             14.2             17.5          27.6                     27.6
                     Green                  7.4             12.5             19.5          31.6                     28.2
           Super Green                      7.3             22.5             38.3          51.9                     45.3
       Energy efficiency:                   3.1             11.1             15.2          19.0                     19.1
            Electricity**                   1.6              5.3              5.9               6.8                  8.3
             Other***                       1.4              5.8              9.3          12.2                     10.8
     Total electricity investment:***
              Baseline                      7.4             14.2             17.5          27.6                     27.6
                     Green                  9.0             17.8             25.5          38.4                     36.5
           Super Green                      9.0             27.8             44.2          58.7                     53.6
     Total energy investment:****
              Baseline                     7.4              14.2             17.5          27.6                     27.6
                     Green              10.4                23.6             34.8          50.6                     47.3
           Super Green                  10.4                33.6             53.6          70.9                     64.5

      Notes: * using a five percent discount rate. All other columns are in constant prices but not discounted.
             **electricity energy efficiency is more efficient electrical appliances in residential and nonresidential buildings.
             **other energy efficiency is residential and nonresidential space heating and cooking measures.
             ***electricity supply investment and investments in electricity-saving efficiency measures.
             ***electricity supply investment and investments in all energy efficiency measures.
      Source: Energy Supply Technical Report and Energy Demand Technical Report.


Emissions: energy sector and electricity sector71

Romania’s energy sector GHG emission return to near the 2005 level by 2050 under the Baseline scenario,
but the green scenarios secure dramatically lower levels (Figure 3.10). In the Baseline scenario, 2030
emissions stand at nine percent lower than 2005 emissions while 2050 emissions are just two percent
below 2005. Emissions in the Green scenario are about 25 percent below 2005 by 2030 and hold steady
through 2050, while the Super Green scenario pushes energy sector emissions to almost half of 2005 by
2030, and they rise only slightly by 2050. While the absolute level of emissions in all three scenarios
decreases throughout 2015-2050, the pace of emission reduction exhibits different trends across scenarios.
It decreases steadily in the Baseline scenario because growing demand is not restrained in the Baseline and

71
  As noted above, the energy sector model applied to Romania includes both energy supply and energy demand
(or end-users).
because of only moderate action toward the replacement of fossil fuels with renewable energy. When
more aggressive actions on energy efficiency and lowering carbon are taken in the Green scenario and
when more aggressive replacement of fossil fuels is implemented in the Super

Green scenario, the pattern of emission reduction changes. In these two scenarios, during 2015 to
2020/2025, the pace of emission reduction slows because many of the measures that have been taken
require time for implementation (e.g., electricity plant construction). After this phase, the pace of emission
reduction increases through 2030 or so and then holds steady.

 Figure 3.11. Energy sector emissions drop in all scenarios, but at different paces
              GHG emissions reduction in energy sector, compared to 2005, in %




 Source: Energy Supply Technical Paper. Report developed through the “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth
 Program”, 2015, World Bank


The electricity sector experiences a large reduction of CO2 in all scenarios over time, and the pace of
reduction increases in all three scenarios in later years. This pattern emerges in the green scenarios due
to a combination of aggressively implemented energy efficiency measures that significantly constrain
demand growth and as a result of aggressive actions on the supply side–an increase in the share of non-
fossil sources of electricity. In the Baseline scenario, emissions in 2030 are 20 percent below 2005 and 36
percent below 2005 in 2050, while the respective outcomes in the Green scenario are 45 percent in 2030
and 72 percent in 2050. The biggest reduction is in the Super Green scenario: 92 percent emission reduction
in 2030 and 97 percent in 2050. In this scenario, the electricity sector almost completely eliminates
emissions. Both the absolute level of emissions and the pace of its drop increase in all three scenarios
throughout 2015-2050, although the pace of emission reduction initially slows while the measures are in
the process of implementation during 2015-2020/2025, a typical delay in outcomes when measures require
time for implementation. (Figure 3.11)
 Figure 3.12. Electricity sector demonstrates a significant and increasing emissions reduction
                           GHG emissions reduction in electricity sector, compared to 2005, in %




 Source: Energy supply technical paper. Report developed through the “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green
 Growth Program”, 2015, World Bank


Marginal Abatement Cost Curve

The Marginal Abatement Cost Curve shows that the proposed measures provide a significant potential
abatement level totaling 30 Mt CO2 per year in 2050. (See Figure 3.13). The demand side measures mostly
have negative net costs or positive benefits. Also, when applied on a large scale, they will deliver a
significant level of mitigation. Therefore, they are the first candidates for implementation. The most cost-
efficient electricity supply options are solar PV and wind, followed by hydro generation, S C P , biomass
and nuclear. Gas CCS would require higher expenses reaching €20 per tCO2e abated, the highest estimated
unit cost in the energy sector. The measure delivering the highest abatement potential in energy demand is
building insulation, followed by the usage of efficient lighting. In electricity supply, the highest abatement
can be achieved from the development of electricity generation using natural gas plants with installed
carbon capture and storage (gas CCS). Among renewable energy options, the highest abatement potential
is in wind, followed by biomass, then solar photovoltaic (solar PV), then hydro generation.
 Figure 3.13. Marginal Abatement Cost Curve for the energy sector, Super Green scenario




Source of data: MACC Technical Report.



Conclusions and Recommendations

Romania can meet the mitigation obligations likely under the EU 2030 framework in energy and
electricity at moderate costs. With an energy sector responsible for almost 60 percent of total GHG
emissions, Romania clearly cannot achieve climate change mitigation targets beyond those of the current
EU 2020 policy without significant action in the energy sector. The Green scenario compels substantial
 emissions reduction in the power sector which requires moderate incremental investment as compared
 with the Baseline. The Green scenario will achieve 45 percent emission reduction by 2030 (and 72 percent
 reduction by 2050) as compared with 2005. The investment cost of the Green power sector scenario
 through 2050 is €37 billion (present value),72 equal to an annual average 1.1 percent of GDP through 2050.

 The prospective requirements of the EU 2050 Roadmap, which requires at least 80 percent reduction in
 emissions and the virtual elimination of emissions from the power sector, are both expensive and
 challenging to implement. The Super Green power sector scenario will provide 92 percent emissions
 reduction between 2005 and 2030 and 97 percent reduction by 2050, achieving an almost complete
 elimination of emissions from power. This scenario also delivers abatement on a faster schedule than the
 Green scenario. The investment cost of the Super Green scenario to 2050 is €54 billion (present value) or
 an average annual of 1.7 percent of GDP.

 Implementation of the same set of aggressive energy efficiency measures is a key part of the Green and
 the Super Green scenarios, as these measures deliver low cost abatement in the short term, require
 moderate upfront investment, and have modest implementation barriers. Improving energy efficiency
 across the board in all economic sectors, but especially in residential and nonresidential sectors, offers the
 most effective and also viable means for containing the growth of energy demand, limiting investment
 requirements to meet the growing demand, and reducing GHG emissions. Beyond the climate agenda,
 improving energy efficiency is also critical for Romania’s competitiveness in the European Union. While
 the energy intensity of Romania’s economy has been decreasing for the past two decades, it is still one of
 the highest in the EU, and greater efficiency will go hand in hand with modernized and more competitive
 companies and sectors.

 A lower carbon path for Romania’s energy sector imposes significant costs and complex planning
 challenges on the sector, in particular on power generation. Achieving emission reduction targets beyond
 the EU 2020 targets--the Green (likely EU 2030 targets) and the Super Green (possible EU 2050 targets)–
 will require Romania to abandon plans for new coal-based power generation capacity and life- extension
 of existing plants. It will also require significant additional renewable generation capacity and, therefore, a
 regulatory environment that would promote it.

 While this assessment included a set of generally-agreed technologies at costs based on today’s best
 analysis, both technologies and costs will surely evolve, and updated analysis will be needed. The TIMES
 MARKAL supply model and the Energy Service Demand Analysis tool constructed for this analysis remain
 available for further development and application by the government for current and future policy
 questions related to the energy sector, in particular questions related to low carbon. The Ministry of
 Energy, Small and Medium Enterprises and Business has already taken on these models to apply to critical
 questions in support of the country’s new energy strategy. The usefulness of such tools and models will
 only increase into the future as Romania begins to take a more active role in contributing to EU climate and
 energy policy, as well as implementing it.


72
  At a five percent discount rate. The discount rate was selected as a mid-range social discount rate (the typically used
social discount rates range from 4 to 6 percent)
 At the same time, it should be noted that the energy sector in Romania has the potential to become an
 engine of economic growth. Romania’s endowment of energy resources is significant and diversified well
 beyond coal, including hydro and other renewable resources, natural gas, and even uranium to fuel its
 nuclear power industry. Romania has the potential to satisfy its own needs and export electricity and gas
 into the regional and European energy markets (even without the use of coal), to energize the economy
 and create jobs and prosperity.

 While long-term sector development to 2030 and 2050--the subject of this assessment—is important, the
 government cannot be distracted from critical near-term sector reforms. Implementation of the energy
 reform program jointly supported by the European Commission, the IMF and the Bank should continue.
 The measures recommended here under the Green and the Super Green scenarios to allow Romania to
 meet various GHG mitigation obligations require long-term implementation. In the short- term, it is
 critical that the sector continues with current reform efforts, many of which lay essential conditions for the
 success of the long-term green transition. These reforms includes completion of the ongoing liberalization
 of residential electricity and gas prices; adoption and implementation of the Minimum Social Insertion
 Program (social safety net which inter alia will help secure access of low income households to basic energy
 services); restructuring of the Hunedoara and Oltenia energy complexes; and adoption and implementation
 of the Law on Corporate Governance for further improvements in the corporate governance of state-
 owned energy enterprises. Along with energy security, competitiveness and fiscal benefits, these measures
 are key for Romania achieving emission reduction targets.

 Greening of the energy sector implies substantial costs, which rise significantly over time and as
 requirements for emissions reduction tighten, but a lower carbon energy sector needs to be part of
 Romania’s long-term planning. Careful modeling of the power sector provides a detailed assessment of
 low carbon possibilities. A need for 30 percent more installed power capacity between now and 2050,
 along with existing mitigation obligations, push even baseline investment costs to a very high level of €28
 billion through 205073 or an average annual 0.8 percent of GDP. Lower carbon scenarios economize on
 supply costs by pushing energy efficiency to contain demand, such that power emissions can be 31
 percentage points below baseline in 2030 with about €9 billion of additional investment and 56 percentage
 points lower in 2050 for €26 billion over baseline investment costs. Until 2020, investment needs in
 electricity supply and demand total about €7 billion in the baseline to just over €10 billion in the green
 scenarios. These costs jump after 2030, as remaining fossil-based plants are replaced with renewable and
 nuclear capacity and aggressive energy efficiency actions continue. Financing for these investments,
 whether power generation or energy efficiency, will be the responsibility of the private sector, although
 the public sector may need to establish programs of support for energy efficiency, with some financing
 available from the European Union.




73
     In present value terms using a 5 percent discount rate
CHAPTER 4. HOW CAN TRANSPORT BE LOW CARBON?

CHAPTER SUMMARY

The challenges for mitigation in the transport sector are significant, especially as Romania’s motorization
rate converges with the EU average, and both passenger and freight activities are on an upward
trajectory. As a result, the energy demand for transport is projected to grow, and GHG emissions
are estimated to increase. The Romanian transport sector is emissions-intensive and, considering
continuing growth in vehicle ownership and road travel, is expected to be increasingly polluting, unless
transport policies change. In both passenger and freight segments, Romania experienced a marked
increase in the share of road transport and a significant decrease in the share of rail. High and growing road
transport share is a major source of total transport emissions. The emissions from air transport make up a
small proportion of overall emissions in the transport sector, but are projected to increase in absolute
terms over time at a slightly faster rate than overall travel activity. Other drivers of sectoral emissions
include traffic congestion, poor parking management, declining public transport patronage, increasing
private vehicle usage, and old taxi fleet, pedestrian and cycling infrastructure in urban areas in Romania.

The strategic mitigation model that has been developed is the Transport Strategic Emission Prediction
Tool (TRANSEPT). The Romanian General Transport Master Plan (GTMP) is included in Business as Usual
(BAU) scenario, so are certain existing pricing instruments and regulations. In terms of pricing instruments,
Romania’s fuel duty rate and parking fees are low compared to the rest of Europe. To change the age and
characteristics of the vehicle fleet, Romania introduced an “Environment Stamp” tax on new vehicle
registrations in 2003. Moreover, the uptake of the scrappage scheme peaked in 2010, and has since
fallen to much lower levels. Romania has also put in place some intelligent traffic management measures,
access restrictions and speed restrictions.

Given the growth in vehicle ownership and road transport, decoupling GHG emissions from the transport
sector and economic growth, or at least lowering the GHG intensity of future transport growth,
represents the key challenge. Inefficiencies of the road transport sector can be grouped into the
following three types: pricing inefficiencies, fuel inefficient technology, and those that come with
spontaneous transition of the urban form. At present pricing does not reflect the full costs of transport.
Relaxation of land development controls in transition countries has led to inefficiencies associated with
low-density development. Transport service provision needs to be addressed holistically to ensure that
public transport is able to attract new users and realize the full climate and economic benefits.

Reducing GHG emissions—as opposed to reducing GHG emission growth rate—is difficult in the transport
sector. Based on the multi-criteria analysis, the following measures are selected for inclusion in the Green
Scenario: (a) fuel price taxation increase; (b) new vehicle registration tax; (c) eco-driving program; (d)
smarter choices/personal travel planning programs; (e) investment in walking and cycling infrastructure; (f)
parking pricing; (g) air travel taxation. Best practice examples typically combine the disincentive of high
parking charges with an effective and efficient public transport system, and good walking and cycling
facilities. Lastly, it is important to address needs for transport services holistically to ensure that public
transport is able to attract new users and realize the full climate and economic benefits.
 CHALLENGES FOR GREEN GROWTH
 Overview

 With continuing growth in vehicle ownership and road travel, emissions from the transport sector are
 expected to increase, unless transport policies change. Annual GHG emissions from the domestic transport
 sector has increased since 1990,74 and has grown faster than the EU average. (Figure 4.1) In 2002, the
 transport sector accounts for 12.7 percent of Romania’s total GHG emissions. While it is lower than the EU
 average of 19.7 percent (Figure 4.2), it is rising more quickly, driven in part by the declining modal share
 of rail and increased motorization. Road transport accounts for 93 percent of domestic transport
 emissions, similar to the EU average.75


Source: EEA.                                                        Source: EEA
 Figure 4.1. Trends in Romania’s Transport                           Figure 4.2. Transport GHG Emissions
             Emissions Compared to the EU                                        (% of total GHG emissions)
             (1990=100)

                  130                                                              25
                  120
                  110                                                              20
     percentage




                                                                      percentage




                  100
                   90                                                              15
                   80
                   70                                                              10
                   60
                                                                                   5
                                                                                        2000   2003     2006    2009      2012
                        1990   1994     1998   2002   2006   2010                                     Romania     EU 28

                                      EU 28     Romania




74
   This includes emissions from transport (road, rail, inland navigation and domestic aviation) of the GHG regulated by
the Kyoto Protocol. Only three gases are relevant in the context of transport (carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous
oxide) and these have been aggregated according to their relative global warming potentials.
75 European Environment Agency data, as of June 2013
 Romania experienced a significant decrease in the share of rail and a marked increase in the share of
 road transport. High and growing road transport share is a major source of total transport emissions.
 Figure 4.3 shows the modal split for passenger between the three main land-based modes of domestic
 travel – private car, rail and bus/coach since 2000. While the mode share of private cars in Romania has
 been increasing and approaching the EU average, the mode share of passenger rail dropped from being
 higher than to lower than the EU average. On the other hand, the modal split for freight movements, in
 terms of percentage of ton-km travelled, has experienced similar trends, but to a less extent. 76 (Figure
 4)The mode share of rail freight has declined, although it is still higher than the EU average. Road freight
 has increased in mode share, despite being below the EU average. The decline in rail and transfer to
 road in passenger and freight segments can be attributed to underinvestment and poor maintenance of
 the Romanian railway system, resulting in slow and unreliable train services.77




76
  Eurostat data at http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu. The amount of freight moved by air (which is excluded from the
modal split figures shown above) is very small - 28,523 tons in 2011, up from 19,229 tons in Romania’s first year of EU
membership in 2007. For comparison, some 65 million tons of freight were transported on Romania’s railways in 2007.
 77
    European Commission (EC). 2012. Position of the Commission Services on the Development of Partnership
 Agreement and Programs in Romania for the Period 2014-2020. Ref. Ares (2012)1240252 - 19/10/2012.
 The emissions from air transport make up a small proportion of overall emissions in the transport sector,
 but are projected to increase in absolute terms over time at a slightly faster rate than overall travel
 activity. Domestic air passenger transport activity (internal within Romania) forms a small part (7 percent)
 of total passenger movements through Romanian airports, which is a relatively low level compared to other
 EU countries (the EU-27 average is 18 percent). It has slightly increased in recent years (Figure 5),
 despite the international economic downturn in 2007. Passengers flying to and from other EU countries
 form the great majority of passengers using Romanian airports (81 percent), with the remainder (12
 percent) flying to and from destinations outside the EU. There are a number of industry initiatives to reduce
 emissions.




Other drivers of sectoral emissions include traffic congestion, poor parking management, declining public
transport patronage, increasing private vehicle usage, and old taxi fleet, pedestrian and cycling
infrastructure in urban areas in Romania. With 54 percent of the country’s population living in towns and
cities, urban transport forms a major part of the overall sector activities in Romania.78 The carbon dioxide
emissions intensity from road transport in Bucharest (833 kt/year) is higher than that of the 19 next largest
cities combined (596 kt/year),79 reflective of the high levels of traffic concentration and congestion pressure.
The start-stop driving cycle in congested traffic increases greenhouse and other gaseous emissions. The
problem of traffic congestion is likely to worsen with increased private vehicle ownership, which also puts
pressure on the supply of designated parking spaces in Romanian cities, leading to “informal” parking
arrangements, with vehicles parking on footways, cycle tracks and public spaces. Urban public transport,
which includes a combination of metro systems, tram networks, trolley buses, and bus networks, requires
modernization and maintenance that are often cost-prohibitive for cities, resulting in the decline of public
transport patronage. For example, ridership in Ploiesti fell from 7 million trips per month in 2011 to 6.7


 78
      Institutul National de Statistica (INS). 2011. Census. Available at: http://www.recensamantromania.ro/rezultate-
 2/
 79
   To date, there are only four countries in the EU that have spatially disaggregated emissions inventories at a
 national level, namely, the UK, the Netherlands, Denmark and Sweden. This data has been analyzed to better
 understand the distribution of emissions between urban and non-urban areas. The largest 20 cities (with populations
 over 100,000) were identified and their respective emissions levels analyzed. E-PRTR: The European Pollutant Release
 and Transfer Register: Welcome to E-PRTR. EEA; Copenhagen. Available at: http://prtr.ec.europa.eu
million in 2012. 80 Many of the taxi vehicles in Romania are old and fuel-inefficient. The age limit for taxi
vehicles varies greatly across cities (five years in Brasov and twelve years in Cluj-Napoca), as do the quantity
and quality of pedestrian and cycling infrastructure.81 Local co-benefits of a more efficient transport sector
—such as reduced traffic congestion and noise, improved air quality and road safety, or enhanced
energy security—are likely to drive the development of transport policies.82

The challenges for mitigation in the transport sector are significant, especially as Romania’s motorization
rate converges with the EU average. The General Transport Master Plan projects rapid growth in car
ownership, with the motorization rate exceeding 350 cars per 1,000 inhabitants by 2030, which would
represent an increase in excess of 50 percent increase over the 2012-2030 period.83

Although mode share of car in Romania is at a similar level to the EU average, the car ownership rate in
Romania is the lowest in the EU at 224 cars per 1000 inhabitants in 2012 (Figure 6)), but has grown
significantly in recent years, up from 152 cars per 1000 inhabitants in 2006. Figure 7). Without intervention
to provide better transport alternatives, as car ownership grows, car use is also likely to grow.




 Transport activities, related energy demand, and resulting emissions are all expected to grow in a
 baseline scenario (with continuation of current polices but no new policies on climate). According to
 the European Commission’s Trends to 2050 Model and the emissions model developed under this study,
 both passenger and freight activities are on an upward trajectory, the energy demand for transport is


 80
    Improving energy efficiency in Ploiesti, Romania: TRACE city energy efficiency diagnostic study. World Bank (under
 the Romania Regional Development Program), undated.
 81
    There are examples of improvement of pedestrian areas. In Brasov in 2008, the Municipality developed a pedestrian
 area in the historical center with 10 streets closed to car traffic and streets repaved with cobblestones, using funding
 from the 2007-2013 Regional Operational Program. In Ploiesti, an EU-supported CIVITAS project promoted walking
 and a pedestrian zone was created in the city center, backed by a campaign to encourage behavioral change. As a
 consequence, there has reportedly been a 20 percent improvement in public transport speed, in addition to a 15
 percent reduction in pollution in the central zone of the city
82
   James Leather and the Clean Air Initiative for Asian Cities Center Team (2009), Rethinking Transport and Climate
Change, Asian Development Bank Development Working Paper Series No.10, December 2009
83
  The draft version of the GTMP of October 2014 was used for the purposes of the modelling. The GTMP is in process
of approval by the European Commission and the major infrastructure projects could be revised accordingly. The
TRANSEPT model can be used to modify the underlying assumptions once the GTMP is finalized and approved
 projected to grow (Table 4.1), and GHG emissions are estimated to increase (Figure 4.8).84 The
 differences in projections between the two models result from the differences in the assumptions of
 trends for different modes, with the emissions model forecasting a greater growth in vehicle activities,
 energy demand and growth in GHG emissions.




 The Romanian General Transport Master Plan (GTMP) is included in Business as Usual (BAU) scenario, so
 are certain investments in urban planning, operational efficiency measures, pricing instruments and
 regulations. In order to ensure complementarity, the country-specific strategy should be coherent with the
 EU-level transport strategy, which focuses on assuring sustainable mobility for people and goods and
 contributing to ambitious GHG emissions reduction targets. The Romanian GTMP was developed under the
 guidance of the European Commission as a condition for its approval of the Strategic Operational
 Program for Transport (SOPT). The GTMP includes very significant investment in public transport
 infrastructure (including the national rail system. Also, the Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans are under
 development for a number of cities, involving integrated land use and transport planning in the
 capital city (Bucharest and Ilfov County) and seven larger cities that are designated as growth poles. In terms
 of measures to improve operational efficiency, there are well established eco- driving programs in the
 freight sector to reduce fuel consumption and emissions, and freight and logistics hubs (as part of the
 GTMP).

 Pricing instruments that are in use in Romania include fuel taxation, vehicle scrappage scheme, parking
 pricing and new vehicle registration tax. Until 2014, Romania’s fuel duty rate was one of the lowest in EU
 at 32 euro cents/liter for diesel and 35 euro cents/liter for gasoline, but a 7 euro cents/liter was applied in
 April 2014. Nevertheless, gasoline and diesel prices remain significantly below the EU average in April

84
  For more details about the models and comparison of the projections, please refer to the Appendix of the Transport
Technical Paper
2015 (Figure 9).


Similarly, parking fees in Bucharest are low compared to other EU-12 cities. (Figure 10) A policy of high
parking pricing, particularly in relation to mass transit public transport, can be an effective mechanism to
discourage the use of private vehicles. A vehicle scrappage scheme has been in place in Romania since
2005, known as the ‘Rabla’ (clunkers). Approximately 500,000 ageing and high-polluting vehicles have been
scrapped, and the purchase of around 250,000 more efficient vehicles has been subsidized. Uptake of the
scrappage scheme peaked in 2010, with almost 190,000 cars scrapped, and has since fallen to much lower
levels. Whilst the impact of the scrappage scheme to date are reflected in the baseline emissions forecasts,
the BAU does not project a return to the high levels of new vehicle purchase achieved by the scrappage
scheme in its top performing years. Romania introduced another pricing mechanism to change the
age and characteristics of the vehicle fleet - an “Environment Stamp” tax on new vehicle registrations.
The broad regulatory framework has been in place since 2013, with flexibility to adjust rates to encourage
greener vehicle technology uptake. Currently Romania has no aviation travel tax.

Figure 4.9. Gasoline and Oil Prices as of April 13, 2015




Source: European Commission (EC). 2015. Consumer Prices of Petroleum Products Including Duties and Taxies.
Available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/2015_04_13_with_taxes_1747.pdf.
 Figure 4.10. Daily Parking Rate

             35
             30
             25
             20
       US$




             15
             10
             5
             0




                                                                                                                                            Tallinn
                                                                                                                         Sofia
                              Tirana




                                                            Riga




                                                                                                             Podgorica




                                                                                                                                                               Kyiv
                                                                   Bratislava




                                                                                                    Warsaw
                                       Istanbul


                                                  Vilnius




                                                                                           Zagreb




                                                                                                                                                      Prague
                  Bucharest




                                                                                                                                 Budapest
                                                                                Belgrade
     Source: Colliers International. 2011. Global Central Business District Parking Rate Survey. Available at:
            http://downtownhouston.org/site_media/uploads/attachments/2011-07-
            19/Colliers_International_Global_Parking_Rate_Survey_2011.pdf


 Regulatory interventions include traffic management measures, access restrictions and speed
 restrictions. The Bucharest Urban Traffic Control Center delivered introduced an adaptive urban traffic
 control and public transport management system, which is estimated to have reduced travel times by
 about 20 percent and achieved a 10 percent reduction in CO2 within the area.85 Bucharest does not have
 Low Emission Zones, but it already has access restrictions that apply to vehicles over 5 tons. They are
 banned from the central area of Bucharest at certain times, and only allowed to circulate outside of
 these times with a permit. Vehicle fuel consumption increases rapidly when speed progresses beyond
 the optimally efficient speed of around 90 km/hour. Romania’s speed limits are currently set at 130
 km/hour on motorways, 110 km/hour on expressways, 90 km/hour on other non-urban roads for cars and
 motorcycles; trucks and buses are limited to 110 km/hour, 90 km/hour and 80 km/hour
 respectively. A lowering of the speed limit for all vehicle types to a speed of 100kph on all road types could
 be implemented to increase fuel efficiency levels and reduce emissions.


 Challenges

 Given the growth in vehicle ownership and road transport, decoupling GHG emissions from the transport
 sector and economic growth, or at least lowering the GHG intensity of future transport growth,
 represents the key challenge and will require departure from the business-as-usual policies in the
 transport sector.86 The main challenge the transport sector faces is how to reduce the system’s

85
     SWARCO MIZAR. Urban Traffic Management, Romania, Bucharest 2007-2014. Available at:
http://www.swarco.com/mizar-en/Projects/ITS-References/URBAN-TRAFFIC-MANAGEMENT,-Romania,-Bucharest-
City-of-Bucharest
86
  International Transport Forum (ITF) and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
2008. Greenhouse Gas Reduction Strategies in the Transport Sector: Preliminary Report. Available at:
http://www.internationaltransportforum.org/pub/pdf/08ghg.pdf/
 dependence on oil, limit GHG emissions and minimize externalities, without compromising efficiency,
 mobility and economic growth. 87 Figure 11 presents real GDP growth and GHG emissions from the
 transport sector in Romania over the 2000-2012 period, suggesting that they move in tandem, with an
 inflexion in 2009 when real GDP started growing more rapidly than transported related GHG emissions.
 The close interdependence between transport and economic development is evident over the 2000-
 2012 period - GHG emissions rose by 54 percent while real GDP rose by 55 percent. To mitigate GHG
 emissions, growth in demand needs to be either limited, managed or targeted on low emission travel
 modes, coupled with reducing GHG rates (g/km emitted) from vehicles.

 Figure 4.11. Real GDP Growth and GHG Emissions from Transport Sector (2000=100)




 Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 2015; EEA.


 Inefficiencies of the road transport sector can be grouped into the following three types: pricing
 inefficiencies, fuel inefficient technology, and those that come with spontaneous transition of the urban
 form. At present pricing does not reflect the full costs of transport, failing to include costs of negative
 externalities and to invest beyond roads. Adequate pricing policies are critical to support transport
 investments, change demand and existing behaviors, allocate resources more efficiently, and raise funds
 to invest in more sustainable forms of transport. Both fuel tax and parking fees in Romania are low
 compared with other EU countries. There is room to adjust these pricing mechanisms, and other
 instruments, including the new vehicle registration fees, urban congestion fees and others. Increasing
 the use of renewable energy and the uptake of low carbon vehicle technology can reduce energy intensity
 of the transport sector, but the lack of infrastructure for alternative fuels is an issue that needs to
 be addressed. At present, there are only 20 electric vehicle charging stations,88 constraining the use of
 alternative fuel vehicles. In 2014, only 7 electric or hybrid electric vehicles were registered in Romania. By
 comparison, a total of over 75,000 were registered across the EU. Moreover, relaxation of land
 development controls in transition countries has led to inefficiencies associated with low-density
 development. In Romania, there has been a decrease of residential use in the urban core, an increased
 rate of residential suburbanization, and subsequently increased personal vehicle ownership, travel time
 and congestion. Integrating land use and transport planning in urban areas is key to minimizing GHG

87
   Andreas Kopp, Rachel I. Block, and Atsushi Iimi. 2011. Turning the Right Corner: Ensuring Development through a
Low-Carbon       Transport    Sector.     World      Bank:   Washington        D.C.  Available   at:  http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2013/05/31/000445729_20130531125005/Re
ndered/PDF/780860PUB0EPI0050240130right0corner.pdf
88 Association for Promoting Electric Vehicles in Romania (AVER). Available at: www.aver.ro.
emissions in the future. Failure to consider land use and transport in an integrated manner in Romania’s
towns and cities will inevitably lead to unnecessary motorized travel and higher GHG emissions in the
future.

Transport service provision needs to be addressed holistically to ensure that public transport is able to
attract new users and realize the full climate and economic benefits. A modal shift from road to much
less emission intensive rail transportation could help contain road transportation demand and
emissions, while also resulting in a co-benefit of reduced road congestion. But the impact of investments
should be monitored through changes in occupancy rates. Low emission rail transport or public transport
can be more emission intensive per passenger-km or ton-km than use of private cars and trucks, if ridership
remains low or declines further. The GTMP report argues that Romanian railways “are in a crisis situation.”
For all public transport service, maintenance, vehicles or rolling stock, customer service, operational
efficiency and service prices need to be considered as part of an attractive package offer to customers.

METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS

The objective of the analysis was to assess the impact of green policies and investments on transport
emissions. The strategic mitigation model that has been developed for Romania is the Transport Strategic
Emission Prediction Tool (TRANSEPT). It includes four modules which produce the input matrices for
calculation of the GHG emissions: (a) transport demand; (b) vehicle stock; (c) vehicle and driving efficiency;
and (d) fuel consumption. Each module takes a number of baseline datasets as input and applies the effect
of the policy interventions under three scenarios – Business as Usual (BAU), Green and Super Green - to
them. The adjusted datasets are then used as input matrices to the final module of TRANSEPT, which
calculates the resulting GHG emissions for all three scenarios. The process is outlined in Figure 12. The
impact of the green policies is assessed by comparing the outcomes of Green and Super Green scenarios
against the BAU scenario. The outcome of the analysis is a range of potential interventions, their cost
(investment and operational), and their abatement potential. TRANSEPT is a bottom-up engineering model
and models the measures individually (as opposed to using a system approach).
Figure 4.12. Overview of TRANSEPT Model Process




Source: World Bank.

The measures which have the potential to deliver the greatest absolute carbon savings over the
course of the modelled period are as follows: (a) the lowering of speed limits (speed restrictions); (b)
increasing the fuel tax (as a substitute to more sophisticated road user charging); (c) the implementation
of a more progressive first registration tax (Environmental Stamp) promoting the adoption of low emission
vehicles; and (d) eco-driving programs which encourage more efficient driving patterns, with advertising
campaigns targeted at private car users and training programs focused on the freight and public
transport sector. Figure 13 provides a summary of the cumulative abatement results for each intervention
over 2015-2050, while the table below provides a comparison of the abatement potential of the proposed
intervention in three different time periods: the period 2015-2022 corresponds to the timeframe of the
Government Action Plan, the period 2015-2030 parallels the time horizon of the Government Transport
Strategy, and the period 2015-2050 is the timeframe of the analysis presented in this report.
Table 4.2. Carbon Abatement from Interventions (MtCO2e)


            Intervention                     2015-2022        2015-2030        2015-2050   % of Total Emissions

  Fuel Price                                        1.03                4.14     14.37                   2.08

  Scrappage Scheme                                  0.24                0.33        0.35                 0.05

  Vehicle Registration Tax                          0.07                0.57        6.79                 0.98

  Parking Pricing                                   0.19                0.64        1.85                 0.27

  Urban Cong Pricing                                0.05                0.60        2.73                 0.39

  Air Travel Taxation                               0.27                0.76        2.44                 0.35

  Ultra-low Emission Vehicles                       0.02                0.12        1.08                 0.16

  Public Sector Electric Vehicles                   0.02                0.13        1.15                 0.17

  Bus Electric Vehicles                             0.04                0.23        1.68                 0.24

  Speed Restrictions                                2.17                6.29     21.36                   3.09
  Eco Driving                                       1.06                2.69        7.14                 1.03

  Low Emissions Zones                               0.23                0.72        2.92                 0.42

  Investment in Walking Cycling                     0.46                1.20        2.77                 0.40

  Smarter Choices/Soft Measures                     0.22                0.58        1.37                 0.20
  Source: TRANSEPT.
 Note: The periods in this table are selected to represent three timeframes: of the Government’s Action Plan, of the
 Government’s Strategy, and of the analysis presented in this report.


 Having identified the abatement potential for each of the modelled interventions, consideration needs
 to be given to the most effective areas of investment to achieve emission reduction. The implementation
 and ongoing costs of delivering the identified schemes have been estimated using case study evidence, and
 a variety of sources of estimated costs applied to the Romanian context. The scope of the estimated costs
 are limited to those borne directly by the Government of Romania, including both investment costs and
 operational and maintenance costs.89

 The decision on which interventions to include in the Green Scenario were derived from a multi- criteria
 analysis that took into account the following: (a) scheme investment cost to the government; (b) cumulative
 emission savings; (c) carbon reduction cost effectiveness; (d) deliverability and economic importance; and
 (e) wider benefits. The wider benefits considered included local air quality, decongestion, noise, safety,
 equity and health benefits.90 Table 3 summarizes the performance of each abatement intervention in
 terms of investment value, required investment cost and potential implementation barriers. As an example,
 the measure “speed restrictions” was not included in Green scenario while it has a significant impact on emissions.
 The reason is challenging implementation of this measure, which require a high level of coverage and enforcement.
 Another measure not included in Green scenario is the new vehicle registration tax – it was identified as
 a tool which can bring significant carbon savings, but is politically difficult to implement. Some other
 measures did not make the Green scenario list because of their high cost (e.g., urban congestion pricing) or
 low abatement potential (e.g., parking pricing).

 Table 4.3. Abatement Intervention Performance

     Intervention               Discounted    Absolute      Carbon reduction Deliverability/   Wider Benefits
                                Investment    Emissions     cost-effectiveness economic impact
                                Cost, Euro    Savings,      Euro/ton
                                million       MtCO2e

     Fuel Price Taxation               0.9          14.37              0.06     Challenging        Very high
     Vehicle Registration Tax          0.9           6.79              €0.13     Moderate          Moderate
     Speed Restrictions               22.6          21.36              €1.1     Challenging        Very high
     Air Travel Taxation               3.5           2.44              €1.4      Moderate          Moderate
     Eco-Driving                      34.4           7.14              €4.8           Good         Very High
     Parking Pricing                  10.7           1.85              €5.8      Moderate          Moderate
     Smarter Choices/ Soft            18.8           1.37              €13.7          Good         Very High
     Measures
     Investment in Walking            56.3           2.77              €20.3          Good         Very High
     Cycling
     Low Emissions Zones              60.4           2.92              €20.7     Moderate          Moderate
     Public Sector EV                 28.2           1.15              €24.6          Good         Moderate
     Bus EV                           222.2          1.68              €133      Moderate          Moderate
     Ultra-low Emission               163.2          1.07              €152      Moderate          Moderate
     Vehicles
     Urban Congestion                 792.8          2.73              €291      Politically       Moderate
     Pricing                                                                    Challenging
     Scrappage Scheme                 146.3          0.35              €413            Good        Very High
 Note: Costs are discounted, using a 4 percent discount rate, while emissions are undiscounted.
 Sources: World Bank, TRANSEPT.


89
   Costs—capital and operational and maintenance costs —are discounted at a rate of 4 percent to provide the net
present value (NPV). The abatement cost is cost (NPV) divided by total undiscounted cumulative carbon reduction over
2015-2050.
90 These were considered at a qualitative level, but not included in costs
Key transport measures were selected, with a modest investment cost for the green package but
significant financing needs for the super green package. Based on the multi-criteria analysis, the following
measures are selected for inclusion in the Green Scenario: (a) fuel price taxation increase; (b) new vehicle
registration tax; (c) eco-driving program; (d) smarter choices/personal travel planning programs; (e)
investment in walking and cycling infrastructure; (f) parking pricing; (g) air travel taxation. As for the Super
Green Scenario, all interventions have been included in order to assess an upper bound for slow GHG
emission growth from the transport sector. No specific pre-defined GHG saving targets were used to
constrain the choice of interventions, as a bottom-up approach was adopted. It is important to note
that non-inclusion within the Green Scenario does not mean that the schemes have no value or that
these should not be considered for implementation in Romania, based on wider appraisal criteria such
as economic impact or local air quality. For example, with high implementation and operating costs,
technological and enforcement barriers and potential political resistance, the promotion and acquisition of
Ultra Low Emission Vehicles (ULEVs) in the short/medium term is not considered cost effective as a means
of carbon emissions saving. However, considering its very poor air quality standards, Bucharest would
potentially benefit most significantly from the promotion and acquisition of ULEVs, and the intervention
should be considered within this context. The combined discounted capital investment totals €135 million
over the period 2015-2050 under the Green Scenario, but rises sharply to €1687 million for the Super Green
Scenario (Table 4).


Table 4.4: Investment Costs of Green and Super Green Scenarios
            (Euro millions)
                            Undiscounted Investment Cost                     Discounted Investment Cost
                                                                                                      Model
   Scenario         Action Plan             Strategy    Model Period   Action Plan    Strategy
                                                                                                      Period
                    (2015-2022)       (2015-2030)       (2015-2020)    (2015-2022)   (2015-2030)   (2015-2050)
    Green
                            93                   136           194            79           108            135
   Scenario
  Super Green
                           885                  1,477      2,811             748       1,136          1,687
    Scenario
Note: A 4 percent discount rate was used.
Source: TRANSEPT.

The scale of abatement potential achievable in the Super Green Scenario, in comparison with the
Green Scenario and the BAU scenario, is presented in Figure 14. Under the BAU scenario, emissions
grow by 34 percent over period 2015-2050, while under the Green Scenario, emissions growth slows to
24 percent. Emissions growth slows further to 17 percent under the Super Green scenario. Note that the
impact of the bundle of measures is not identical to the sum of the individual measures due to the inter-
relationship between certain policies. In all cases, GHG emissions from the transport sector will rise,
with different rates of growth. These results are in line with many studies which suggest that reducing GHG
emissions—as opposed to reducing GHG emission growth rate—is difficult in the transport sector.
However, as shown in Figure 15, GHG emissions from transport are projected to grow more slowly
than the real economy under a Green Scenario.
 At the last step of the analysis, a marginal abatement cost curve (MACC) provides a framework to present
 the outcomes of the transport sector analysis in a form useful for policy discussions. Cost and abatement
 potential of the proposed interventions, calculated in TRANSEPT, are used as input into a tool developed
 at the World Bank to calculate MACC parameters.91 The outcomes are presented in Figure 16. The
 most cost efficient measures are fuel price tax, scrappage scheme, vehicle registration tax, parking
 pricing, and urban congestion pricing; the measures delivering maximum abatement are
 speed restrictions, vehicle registration, and fuel price taxation.


 Figure 4.16. Transport measures vary in their abatement potential and their unit cost
             Marginal Abatement Cost Curve, 2015-2050




 Source: calculations using the World Bank MACC methodology.




91
     See Chapter 9 in this report, which describes the MACC approach used in this study across sectors in detail
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

As Romania’s motorization rate converges with that of the EU, transport emissions are expected to
grow even if green measures in the sector are implemented. Unlike in other sectors, where the
objective is to reduce emissions, the goal of green growth development in transport is to decouple growth
of emissions from the sector growth or, in other words, to lower GHG intensity of the transport sector going
forward.

The proposed mitigation action plan recommends a set of actions on the basis of estimated benefits. The
main areas of concern coincide with the top drivers of emissions, and many of them – such as the old
vehicle fleet and increasing private ownership of vehicles – should be addressed using policy or behavioral
incentives such as taxes, regulations, fees and pricing aimed at encouraging replacement of old vehicles
and discouraging driving.

Fuel pricing is a particularly effective policy instrument that discourages vehicle usage and encourages the
purchase of more fuel-efficient vehicles, thereby reducing vehicle-fuel intensity. Fuel taxes are relatively
inexpensive to collect, easy to administer and reasonably equitable.

The New Vehicle Registration Tax (Environment Stamp) is levied according to a vehicle’s Euro standard,
CO2 emissions, engine displacement, with a discount rate applied depending on the age of vehicle. A
gradual pre-announced increase of the most polluting cars has been a means of influencing purchasing
decisions. The cost of changing the rates under the existing regulatory framework would be negligible. It is
assumed that the change in tax rates is fiscally neutral as higher taxes for high polluting vehicles are offset
by lower taxes for more efficient vehicles.

Parking pricing, in conjunction with tightened parking regulation and enforcement, may be considered
to be a more cost effective more readily implementable solution to in town congestion, instead of urban
congestion charging. Parking pricing is a market-based measure which offers the potential for emissions
savings with a high level of cost effectiveness. Indeed, the measure would be expected to offer a stream of
revenue which could facilitate some of the investment measures in the transport sector.

Air travel taxation presents a mechanism for exerting some control over the growing demand for air
travel at the margins, and also offers a revenue stream which may be put to useful purpose. The
implications for the economy need to be considered, but there is are potentially positive equity impacts in
what may be expected to be a strongly progressive form of taxation.

Best practice examples typically combine the disincentive of high parking charges with an effective
and efficient public transport system, and good walking and cycling facilities. Smarter choices
programs, combined with investment in walking and cycling infrastructure, have been demonstrated to
lead to modal shift, achieving not only a reduction in emissions levels but also significant wider benefits
including health and wellbeing, and decongestion. Smart choices programs are “soft” behavioral change
programs that provide better information to travelers on available choices and highlight the potential
benefits of sustainable transport modes. Smart choices schemes and policies include workplace and school
travel plans, personalized travel planning, awareness campaigns, public transport information and
 marketing, car sharing schemes, teleworking and teleconferencing. In cost-benefit analysis, these
 schemes typically perform strongly, with cost-benefit ratios in excess of 20 by comparison with highway
 and public transport schemes in the low single figures. Concerted and sustained investment can realize
 emissions savings at a reasonable level of cost effectiveness.

 The investment in infrastructure required to achieve modal shift from private cars towards public
 transport depends on local circumstances and the extent of the targeted shift. It is important to
 address needs for transport services holistically to ensure that public transport is able to attract new
 users and realize the full climate and economic benefits. Low-emission rail transport or public transport can
 be more emissions-intensive per passenger-km or ton-km than use of private cars and trucks, if ridership
 remains low or declines further. A modal shift from road to much less emission-intensive rail transportation,
 or to public transport (national rail system, local bus, tram, or trolleybus systems) could help contain road
 transportation demand and emissions, while also resulting in a co-benefit of reduced road congestion.

 Institutional arrangement and coordination are also critical. Actions should start with collaborations
 between transport stakeholders, such as Government ministries, the rail sector the City of Bucharest,
 municipalities, bus operators, and parking management organizations. More complicated but also
 necessary actions in this area should aim at creating clear governance structures and contractual
 arrangements, as well as increasing administrative and technical capacity to support strategy development
 and project implementation.

 Financing needs for the recommended measures in transport rise sharply between the Green and
 Super Green scenarios but still remain modest, as incremental investments within a large sector.
 Under the Green scenario, additional investments total about €135 million over 2015-5092 but over €1.7
 billion in the more ambitious Super Green scenario. Most of the costs are incurred in the first fifteen
 years, during 2015-2030. In the first five years, 2015-2020, the implementation of the recommended
 transport measures will require just above €60 million in the Green scenario but about €608 under the
 Super Green scenario.




92
     Discounted at five percent rate
CHAPTER 5. CAN URBAN AREAS LEAD ON GREENING?
 CHAPTER SUMMARY

This chapter sets out a development scenario analysis for the Bucharest-Ilfov Metropolitan Region (BIMR),
to provide insights on opportunities to change the greenhouse gas emission trajectory of Romanian cities,
using BIMR as an example. The BIMR dominates Romania’s population, economic landscape and land use
development patterns. The motorization rate has been rising due to suburbanization. Traffic congestion
is increasingly part of daily life, despite the fact that the City of Bucharest is served by one of the most
comprehensive public transport networks in Europe. Romania has the lowest per-capita energy
consumption in the EU but significant growth in electricity demand is already occurring, driven mainly by
residential and commercial sectors. In addition to being among the most polluting service suppliers in the
EU, district heating has become a serious drain on public finances in many cities, because tariffs for
residential consumers are highly subsidized. As for waste management, Romania overwhelmingly relies
on landfilling. Buildings account for the largest share of energy consumption (44 percent of total demand),
followed by industry (30 percent) and transport (23 percent). Approximately 80 percent of buildings-
related energy demand occurs in residential buildings. Heating constitutes 57 percent of all energy use
in buildings, though the ratio is even higher in residential buildings.

The financial resources available to upgrade major infrastructure systems have been limited by the
regional economic slowdown and Romania’s difficulty in absorbing EU funds. Low carbon urban actions
have been impeded by institutional challenges, including the lack of formal roles in planning and
implementing, policy-planning disconnects between different government entities, and the lack of
transparency. Also, subsidized energy prices for households and selected energy- intensive state-owned
enterprises have led to low energy prices and an immature market for energy efficiency-focused firms.

The Rapid Assessment of City Emissions (RACE) model is a geospatial model that compares population
and development patterns under different scenarios. In contrast to the Business as Usual scenario, spatial
development in BIMR under the Low Carbon Development scenario exhibits less sprawl, higher densities,
mixed-use, and a coordination of transit and spatial planning. Unsurprisingly, proactive spatial planning
leads to significant improvement in energy use, energy spending and emissions, even though the gross
building area remains relative to BAU. In addition to congestion pricing and district heating upgrades,
several cross-sectoral measures are recommended, including data collection training, dissemination and
use; guidance; improve metropolitan governance and management; and improving management of urban
growth. Recommended land use policies include promotion of mixed land use, up-zoning and transit-
oriented development. When considered together with transportation, preferential land space for public
transport, creation of pedestrian-only zones, parking policies and completion of ring roads are
recommended. Building efficiency-related recommendations include the Property Assessed Clean Energy
(PACE) finance; green mortgages; point of sale efficiency upgrades/audits; energy efficiency capacity-
building programs.
 OVERVIEW93

 Rising suburbanization is not captured in Romanian urban statistics. The official urbanization rate in
 Romania is roughly 55 percent, which is low compared to other parts of Europe and has been fairly
 constant for the past two decades. Migration out of rural areas has been to the outskirts of major cities,
 which are still categorized as rural. For example, population levels in Ilfov County (on the periphery of
 Bucharest) has increased 69 percent between 1977 and 2011, jumping from 230,000 to 389,000 people.
 (See Figure 10.1 on the expansion of built up areas). Other Romanian cities are experiencing a similar
 phenomenon. (See Table 10.1).


     Figure 10.1: Expansion in Built Up Areas around Bucharest 1984 to 2010




     Source: B Mihai, C Nistor, & G Simion, “Post-socialist urban growth of Bucharest, Romania – a change
     detection analysis on Landsat imagery (1984–2010),” Acta Geographica Slovenica, (forthcoming).




93
 For more details on the analysis and discussion, please see the full technical report of the urban sector, Please
add: Report developed through the “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program”, 2015,
World Bank
Table 10.1: Changes in Built Up Area of Romanian Growth Pole Cities 1992-2012




Source: World Bank, Enhanced Spatial Planning as a Precondition for Sustainable Urban Development.
2013. p 18

Romanian cities have shown some interest in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and some have
undertaken assessments to identify low carbon options. Sixty communities, together representing 25
percent of Romania’s population, have signed on to the European Commission’s Covenant of Mayors
program, which requires development and implementation of an energy action plan. The World Bank’s
Tool for the Rapid Assessment of City Energy (TRACE) has been deployed in seven Romanian cities
(Brasov, Cluj-Napoca, Constanta, Craiova, Iasi, Ploiesti, Timisoara) to support local energy efficiency
planning efforts, by assessing energy use in six key sectors, benchmarking against peer cities, and
evaluating which interventions might be most appropriate. TRACE is most useful in addressing sectors
over which a local authority has the greatest control – the public bus system, for example, rather than
private automobiles – but it does not address other options important to lower carbon emissions, such
as renewable energy or other fuel switching.

Urban Transport:94 The motorization (car ownership) rate in Romania is low compared to the rest of the
EU, but it has been rising, exacerbating existing traffic congestion problems in most cities. Many cities
have public transport systems (including buses, trams and trolleys), but declining ridership has made it
difficult for system operators to finance those upgrades which might bring riders back to the system.
Taxis are plentiful in most cities, but many of the vehicles are old and fuel-inefficient, mirroring the make-
up of the nation’s vehicle fleet. Some cities have an age limit for taxi vehicles, but this varies significantly
from city to city. Finally, the pedestrian and cycling infrastructure varies greatly in quality and quantity
between different towns and cities, and within different city areas. Responsibility for urban transport
investment generally sits with the municipalities in Romania. Sustainable urban mobility plans are
currently under development in Romania’s seven growth pole cities and Bucharest/Ilfov.




94
     A detailed discussion of the transport sector can be found in chapter 4 of this report
 Urban Energy Systems:95 Romania has the lowest per-capita energy consumption in the EU. Per capita
 consumption of electricity is particularly low, but significant growth in electricity demand is already
 occurring, driven mainly by residential and commercial sectors. Some of this growth is occurring as
 households move away from their reliance on district heating. District heating systems were once a
 prominent feature of many Romanian cities, but the 300 systems operating in 1995/96 had declined to
 83 by 2011. In 16 of the 31 district heating systems with more than 10,000 customers, the number of
 customers has dropped by more than 50 percent. In many cities, district heating has become a serious
 drain on public finances because tariffs for residential consumers are highly subsidized, on average by 50
 percent.

 Service quality, cost, and concern over high pollution levels are among the primary reasons for
 declining demand. Most of the old inefficient cogeneration units and heat-only boilers have not been
 upgraded or replaced with modern generation equipment, nor are they equipped with adequate burning
 equipment, resulting in SO2 and NOX emissions that exceed EU norms. With an average of 275 tons of
 CO2 per Gcal, Romania’s district heating producers rank among the most polluting service suppliers in
 the EU. Heat distribution networks suffer an average of 30 percent heat and water losses, compared to
 5-10 percent for newer networks. As a result of those inefficiencies, the cost of district heating is about
 18-20 percent higher than some other EU countries.

 Urban Waste Systems: The GHG emissions associated with municipal solid waste disposal in Romania
 total approximately 2 percent of the country’s overall emissions. The majority result from the country’s
 overwhelming reliance on landfilling as its primary waste management strategy. Organic waste
 entombed in a landfill decays anaerobically, produces methane, a GHG with 25 times the heat trapping
 potential of carbon dioxide.

 BASELINE DEVELOPMENT CONDITIONS IN THE BUCHAREST-ILFOV REGION

 With a population of 2.3 million, the Bucharest-Ilfov Metropolitan Region ranks 37th in size among
 all of the metropolitan regions in wider Europe. Bucharest is the capital of Romania, its financial center,
 the leading industrial and cultural hub, and home to many of Romania’s top universities. Located in the
 south-eastern part of Romania, Bucharest is approximately 100 km south of the Carpathian Mountains,
 200 km to the west of the Black Sea, and 60 km north of the Danube River. The region’s climate is
 temperate, with hot summers and cold winters. Although formerly known as the Municipality of
 Bucharest, administrative and political powers are shared between the Municipality and local sector
 councils in Bucharest, with little overlap in authority. The city government is headed by a mayor (Primar
 General) and city council (Consiliu General). The city is further subdivided into six administrative sectors
 (Sectoare), each with their own mayor and city council. In general, the Municipality is responsible for
 major city infrastructure systems such as the public transport network, major roadways, and the water
 and sewage system. Sector town halls manage secondary roads, parks, schools, and street cleaning.


95
     A detailed discussion of the energy sector can be found in chapter 3 of this report
Ilfov County is managed by a County Council that is responsible for basic public services and the road
and transport network outside of the administrative limits of each of the 32 communes located within
the County. As is the case with District government above, Communes are responsible for local
infrastructure and other government service issues within their boundaries. While Bucharest’s
population has declined over the past two decades, Ilfov County – the nearly 1600km2 administrative
district that completely envelops Bucharest – grew by 35 percent from 1992 to 2011. Ilfov County now
accounts for more than 17 percent of the metropolitan area’s population, up from 12 percent in 1992
(Table 10.1). This population shift has largely resulted from Bucharest residents moving from urban areas
into new, single-family residences in suburban areas in Ilfov.

The Bucharest-Ilfov Metropolitan Region (BIMR) dominates Romania’s population, economic
landscape and land use development patterns. BIMR accounted for over 27 percent of the country’s
GDP in 2011, up from 11 percent in 2000 (See Figure 10.2). The region’s share of Romania’s population
increased by 10.2 percent in 2000 to nearly 11.4 percent in 2011, a pattern that will likely continue over
the next few decades. This increase is in stark contrast to other cities around the country, where the
population has declined significantly. (See Figure 10.3).

 Figure 10.2: Population Distribution in Romania, 2011




 Source: World Bank team calculation based on 2011 Population and Housing Census
 Suburban development pressures are strong. Population distribution within the study area reflects
 three historical conditions typical of many eastern European cities: (i) lower population densities in the
 historical core area; (ii) high densities in outer clusters of high-rise apartment complexes adjacent to
 industries, built during the Communist era following the Soviet model; and (iii) scattered, low-density
 suburban sprawl that has evolved since Romania’s Revolution in 1989 and the subsequent privatization
 of land. Many of the high-rise, prefabricated panel apartment blocks in Bucharest have small units. Public
 spaces have deteriorated over the years due to poor maintenance. With the privatization of land,
 suburban farmers are now able to sell individual plots for the development of single family homes.
 Growing incomes enable many Bucharest residents to move to the suburbs, even though they continue
 to have weak public services in terms of schools and commercial facilities.


         Figure 10.3: Bucharest-Ilfov Region’s Change in Share (%) of Romania’s GDP and
                     Population




     Source: World Bank team calculation


 Overall, the distribution of total building stock shows a radial pattern driven by proximity to major
 roads. The distribution of residential building stock clearly shows these spatial patterns:96 Suburban
 low-rise development is occurring at very low densities, generally at 6 dwellings/hectare. Medium-rise
 residential is largely comprised of 3-5 story walkup apartments in central areas. High-rise residential
 stock is principally panel blocks built during the Communist era. Other salient characteristics of
 Bucharest’s building stock are the low quantity of commercial offices and their central location, the

96
     Using the RACE model, building areas have been calculated in all 500 m cells within the study area
large quantity of large-scale retail (big-box) in suburban areas, and the distribution of industrial
buildings, clustered around older industries in the inner urban area and more recently scattered in the
suburbs.

The Bucharest-Ilfov region’s economy is still in transition, with an ongoing dramatic shift in
ownership. Only 8 percent of employees worked for the state-owned enterprises in 2012, in contrast to
25 percent in 2000. Approximately 13 percent worked for foreign-owned firms in 2011, in contrast to
only 5 percent in 2005. Services currently account for more than 76 percent of employment, with higher
value-added producer services accounting for 31 percent of total employment. Manufacturing is still
the largest employer (159,800 employees in 2011), but numbers have decreased by almost 23,000 from
2008 to 2011. BIMR’s manufacturing sector is gradually innovating, but traditional industries (food,
apparel, metal fabrication, printing machinery, furniture, tanning/dyeing) still provide the largest share
of employment. Exports grew by 69 percent from 2005 to 2011.

Per capita GDP in BIMR is 2.5 times the national average. The region has several major comparative
advantages that will continue to drive its economic growth over the coming decades. The GDP of BIMR
grew by 12.3 percent between 2010 and 20116, and has been high for most of the past 15 years. Its
economic hinterland is large: within a one-day drive by truck from the center of Bucharest is a population
of 11 million; within a two-day drive, the hinterland reaches Budapest, Vienna, Athens, Istanbul and Kiev,
a market of 83 million. BIMR has the most educated human capital in Romania: 33 percent of its working
age population has vocational and tertiary education attainment, compared to less than 15 percent in
other regions. Supplementing these advantages are labor costs, which are the third lowest in wider
Europe.

Traffic congestion is increasingly a part of daily life in the Bucharest-Ilfov region, despite the fact that
the City of Bucharest is well-served by one of the most comprehensive public transport networks in all
of Europe. Approximately 38 percent of trips in the region are made via automobile. Traffic congestion
is becoming a serious problem, particularly in the urban core, at intersections along the main ring roads,
and on the main thoroughfares traveling through the city along a north-south axis. A primary contributor
to the congestion problem is rapid growth in vehicle ownership rates, which have risen from 152
vehicles per 1000 inhabitants (2006) to 224 vehicles per 1000 inhabitants (2012). Also, insufficient off-
street parking facilities in the central area led many drivers to use illegal “parasite” spaces on the
roadway, narrowing lane space and further inhibiting the flow of vehicles.

Bucharest is served by a dense transport network, consisting of the 51-station metro system, and the
RATB’s (Regia Autonoma de Transport Bucuresti) network of 120 bus lines, 24 tram and light rail lines,
and 15 trolleybus lines. Non-motorized transport (NMT) is the second most utilized means of transport for
daily trips: 31 percent of trips are made by walking, while 2 percent of trips are made on a bicycle. The bus
is the most-utilized form of public transport, followed closely by the metro. Metro stations are located
approximately every 1.4km. A 5th metro line is expected to open in 2017. The majority of the bus and
tram fleet has been overhauled in recent years to improve passenger comfort and vehicle efficiency.
Circumstances in Ilfov County are quite different. Nearly one quarter of roadways in Ilfov County consist
of high speed motorways. Access to Bus system is virtually non-existent, as there are just a few lines
serving Ilfov County residents commuting into Bucharest. There are 2.6 trips per capita per day in the
BIMR, with Bucharest residents travelling approximately 6.3 km on average and Ilfov residents travelling
longer distances. (Figure 10.4) The average trip distance for the entire Bucharest-Ilfov region is
approximately 6.8km.

 Figure 10.4: Travel Distance for Trips over 1km for Bucharest and Ilfov




Buildings account for the largest share of energy consumption in Romania, at 44 percent of total
demand, followed by industry (30 percent) and transport (23 percent). Energy use in buildings is
influenced primarily by the thermal efficiency of the building, its size, its age, and its level of use.
Approximately 80 percent of buildings-related energy demand occurs in residential buildings.
Romania’s building stock is fairly old, with nearly 90 percent of the residential buildings built before the
1989 Revolution. In other words, there were constructed at a time when there were no specific thermal
performance standards. Such buildings are unlikely to have much insulation, and have mechanical
systems that would be considered unacceptable under today’s modern energy or building codes. The
level of compliance with EU’s Building Performance Directive in Bucharest is unclear.

Heating constitutes 57 percent of all energy use in buildings, though the ratio is even higher in
residential buildings. Building heating systems around Bucharest typically involve freestanding boiler
units inside the building, or in larger buildings, a connection to a large district heating system.
Bucharest’s district heating system is vast – the second largest urban system in the world – involving more
than 4,000 km of distribution pipes and satisfying 72 percent of the city’s thermal energy needs. The
number of customers linked to the system has declined over the years, as has often been the case
elsewhere in Romania. Service quality, cost, and concern over high pollution levels have been the primary
reasons for declining demand. The RADET district heating system is fired by natural gas (54 percent), fuel
oil (26 percent), and coal (20 percent). The electricity consumed in buildings in Bucharest and Ilfov is
assumed to have the same characteristics of the national grid picture, meaning it is heavily dominated
by coal and hydropower. Coal use in Romania is considerably higher than in many other European
countries. Energy prices for selected industrial customers and all residential customers are subsidized.
Nationally, Romania is reported to recycle only 5 percent of its total waste stream, with virtually all of
the remaining material ending up in landfills. Data from the National Institute of Statistics in 2011
disclosed that Bucharest-Ilfov generated a total of 881,000 tons of municipal solid waste, with Bucharest
responsible for approximately 86 percent of that total. Approximately 45 percent of the region’s waste is
considered biodegradable (meaning it could be composted and converted into a useful soil amendment),
while another 30 percent of the waste stream is made up of commonly recycled materials. None of
these landfill facilities currently have any methane gas recovery system in place, which is problematic
because organic waste entombed in a landfill decays anaerobically and produces methane gas. Unless
the landfill is properly designed, capturing or flaring the methane via a series of pipes embedded in the
landfill, the gas will slowly leak out of the landfill for many years, including long after it is formally closed.
Proposals have been floated to develop a large waste-to-energy facility that would convert the waste
heat into electricity. The status of this project is unknown.

THE CHALLENGES OF LOW CARBON GROWTH IN THE BUCHAREST-ILFOV REGION

The financial resources available to upgrade major infrastructure systems have been limited by the
regional economic slowdown and Romania’s difficulty in absorbing the EU funds. Foreign direct
investment (FDI) has generally been good for the BIMR: 60 percent of the country’s total FDI went to
the region 10 years ago. However, by 2010, FDI levels had dropped by nearly 80 percent, a situation
from which Bucharest is still recovering.97 The slowdown in the real estate market also has obvious
implications in terms of the tax resources available to the Municipality for major infrastructure projects.
Another critical factor has been Romania’s difficulty in absorbing European Union Regional Operating
Program Fund. As of the end of March 2015, the absorption rate for the period 2007-2013 was 49
percent. Between 2007 and 2009, however, the absorption rate was 0 percent, as there was considerable
ramp-up time to train staff, prepare portfolios of projects, develop the necessary legal framework and
regulations, focus on strategies and the analytic foundation.

Low carbon urban actions have been impeded by institutional challenges, including the lack of formal
roles in planning and implementing, policy-planning disconnects between different government
entities, and the lack of transparency. Compelled by the problems of traffic congestion, diminished air
quality, and excessive energy spending, 60 Romanian communities have voluntarily opted to create
Sustainable Energy Action Plans under the auspices of the city- focused Covenant of Mayors program.
However, Romania lacks a formal urban climate strategy and action plan, and clarity regarding the
formal role of local authorities in crafting and implementing changes that are necessary to reduce urban
GHG emissions. High-level climate policy statements typically speak only in terms of sectoral or
infrastructure changes, but do not specify who is responsible for planning or implementing these changes.
The ambiguity around the role of local authorities is an obstacle to their engagement in ways that are
more reflective of local considerations rather than national or global imperatives. Moreover, policy and


97
  CJ Pen and M Hoogerbrugge, Economic Vitality of Bucharest. European Metropolitan Network Institute
(EMI). 2012.
 planning disconnects between different tiers of government or Ministries with overlapping functions
 have proven to be a major impediment to the resolution of several major infrastructure challenges.
 Examples can be found in all sectors: Two different regulatory agencies are responsible for policies relevant
 to district heating systems. The metro system in Bucharest is operated by METROREX under Ministry of
 Transport control, while the surface transport system (trams, bus and trolley) is managed by RATB (Regia
 Autonoma de Transport Bucuresti), which is under city control.

 Lack of transparency by different government agencies has made it hard to plan and set priorities. For
 example, public access to information about the building stock in Romanian cities is limited, and there
 are no reports published to date comparing the Energy Performance Certificate scores across cities,
 despite the fact that the law has been fully implemented as of 2011. 98 Were such information
 available, local authorities could more easily compare building upgrade strategies or set priorities
 among different types of buildings.

 Subsidized energy prices for households and selected energy-intensive state-owned enterprises lead to
 low energy prices and in turn an immature market for energy efficiency-focused firms. As part of its
 accession into the European Union, Romania agreed to move away from tightly regulated and heavily
 subsidized energy prices to a market-based system. As of early 2015, businesses must now pay market
 rates for electricity and gas, but energy prices for selected industrial customers and all residential
 customers remain subsidized. Energy-intensive state- owned enterprises (SOEs) continue to receive
 preferential electricity and gas prices. State and local subsidies for residential district heating cover
 roughly 50 percent of residential customer costs. Household energy prices will not be fully liberalized
 until January 2018 (electricity) and January 2019 (gas) respectively, reducing the incentive to adopt
 energy saving measures. No timeline has been given for removing district subsidies. In addition to
 influencing energy demand, low prices have meant the market for energy efficiency-focused firms and
 expertise has been slow to develop. That should change in the coming years, either through firms in other
 European countries targeting the Romanian market, or through more home-grown endeavors. Trade
 groups such as the Romania Green Building Council are becoming more active, although membership
 rates remain quite low.99


 METHODOLOGY: RAPID ASSESSMENT OF CITY EMISSION (RACE) MODEL

 Rapid Assessment of City Emissions (RACE) model is a geospatial model that compares population and
 development patterns for a region under different scenarios, in order to develop technical estimates
 of how they differ in terms of energy use, energy spending levels, air quality emissions, and GHG
 emissions. By changing assumptions about current and future land use patterns, the design and location
 of different public transport system options, the energy and emission factors assigned to different land
 use patterns in a city, and the solid waste management system design, it is possible to compare a


 98
     Required by the EU Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 2002 2002 (2002/91/EC) and its Recast
(2010/31/EU
99
   Interview with Steven Borncamp, Romania Green Building Council. July 2014.
“baseline” scenario with one or more alternative scenarios in terms of:

    a) Total energy demand
    b) Total energy spending (in real terms)
    c) Total energy-related air quality emissions (PM10 and NOx)
    d) Total energy-related CO2 emissions


                              Figure 10.5: Overview of the RACE model




 Source: Chreod Ltd.
Step 1: Compile Baseline Inventory of Metropolitan Elements. Without the legacy of GIS- analytics or
data tracking in the Bucharest-Ilfov region, digitized information on local land use patterns, the location
of roads or highways, population data, and building stock data was obtained from a variety of sources, and
in many cases, manually generated based on high resolution satellite imagery. A comprehensive land use
map with information on shape, dimensions and uses of individual buildings was developed by leveraging
data through OpenStreetMap, satellite imagery, field studies and geo-referenced photographs.
Population data was obtained from census data of 2011. The digital representation of road networks,
local rail network and the public transport network was obtained from the work on the Bucharest
Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan (SUMP) and OpenStreetMap, and manually created using GIS and digital
images. The 2012 Bucharest Statistical Yearbook provided the enterprise address and employment data,
which was used to develop maps of different types and locations of business activity around the
Bucharest-Ilfov region.

Once the spatial model was fully developed, population, land use, and business activity information was
then reallocated by superimposing a 500m x 500m grid scale over the entire Bucharest-Ilfov region.100
Data attached to an individual cell or to an aggregation of cells is more easily extractable for analysis in
a relational database or a spreadsheet, as is the case with the RACE model. Step 1 is completed once the
data is transferred into the RACE spreadsheet model, and energy and emission factors are applied to
develop Baseline estimates of current energy demand, energy spending, and GHG and air quality
emission levels for BIMR. Solid waste management system parameters are also entered into the analysis
at this point, as the various disposal options are not necessarily spatially linked. This information serves
as the starting point for the scenario analysis.

Step 2: Prepare 2050 Development Scenario. The future development scenarios modelled in RACE posit
assumptions about future demographic and economic conditions likely to exist in the city/region. In
making these calculations, the scenario must explicitly address the pace of expected growth and shifts
in the city’s reliance on manufacturing value chains (i.e. from low to high value-added manufacturing)
and in consumer and product services. Collectively, these assumptions drive estimates of future demand
for industrial, commercial, and residential building stock, which RACE then uses to calculate emissions.
Moreover, transport infrastructure assumptions are necessary to construct “accessibility indices” for
each 500m grid cell, which measure the relative accessibility of each cell to the city center or other areas
of anticipated economic growth, thereby defining areas most likely to attract development activity. At
least two different spatial growth options can be constructed to accommodate the projected population
and building stock requirements: a Business-as-Usual option and a Low Carbon option. These options
articulate different visions for the location of growth, the density of growth, the land use mix of growth,
and the extent to which these land uses are integrated with the city’s transport infrastructure.

Step 3: Model Business-as-Usual (BAU) Option. The BAU Option reflects recent spatial patterns of
development: the land use mix is assumed to remain relatively segregated. In other words, large
residential areas with little or no formal employment spaces; growth driven by changes in population
levels and/or economic expansion continues to focus on suburban and peri‐urban areas (with little, if
any growth distributed to the core and inner city areas), based on the assumption that land values and
resettlement costs are lower in the suburbs. Grid cells with building densities higher than the city average
are also excluded as growth areas. Finally, the BAU option assumes little attempt is made to link
development growth to public transport systems in the region. With these assumptions in mind, growth
is then distributed around the city using GIS, factoring in accessibility indices that prioritize available
marketable land and recent growth trends. Once this is done, it is possible to recalculate energy demand,
energy spending, and emissions for the region. Any changes in the solid waste management system
structure (compared to the baseline period) are also accounted for at this time.

Step 4: Model Low Carbon (LC) Option. The Low Carbon option presumes very different growth
parameters than the BAU Option. High-density clusters of mixed use development are proposed,
minimizing the need for travel to places of work, education, commerce, and recreation. Because growth
is concentrated in areas with the best accessibility, there is tight integration of land uses with transport

100
   This technique is commonly employed in GIS analyses to help remedy the fact that data is often available at
wildly disparate scales (e.g. building scale vs. census tract vs. specific addresses, etc.)
infrastructure. The LC option can propose changes to transport routes or the creation of new transit
nodes to improve land use-transport integration and facilitate even higher density development. Solid
waste management system options known to increase a city’s carbon performance are also changed in
the model. Energy demand, energy spending (in real terms), and emission levels are then calculated for
the new configuration.

Step 5: Compare Development Options. The models employed in this analysis have been used to
estimate the technical potential for change in energy demand, emissions, and other variables, but not the
cost-effectiveness of different interventions. It highlights indicative changes that can be attributed to
different policy decisions or estimates of how and where growth will manifest itself around a city. By
comparing the energy and emission impacts of different development options, local and regional
authorities can identify the types of policies that affect the long term economic and environmental
sustainability of their city. Action plans can then be prepared to comprehensively review and where
appropriate, adjust these policies to minimize emissions.


KEY FINDINGS
Option 1: Business-as-Usual (BAU)
The BAU option assumes the continuation of low-density growth of residential, office and industrial
development. For residential development, which accounts for the majority of both floor space and
energy use, residents in high-rise Communist-era apartment blocks are assumed to continue the recent
market trend of moving to single-family homes in the suburbs around Bucharest. Consequently, low-
rise’s share of total residential building stock grows from 42 percent in 2014 to 60 percent in 2050. The
BAU scenario involves extensive suburbanization in the ring 10-15 kms from the center of the city,
since there is insufficient land to accommodate low density residential growth within Bucharest (Figure
6.1). Given the absence of public transport in this outer ring, residents would need to rely on private
vehicles for journeys to work, education, shopping, and recreation. Indeed, the BAU scenario is notable
for its lack of integration between new development and public transit (trams, buses and metro).
      Figure 10.6: Distribution of New Building Stock under BAU Option




      Source: Scheme developed within “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program”, 2015,
      World Bank.

 In the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario, overall energy use and associated emissions continue to
 increase out to 2050. While this is to be expected given the low density development and lack of
 coordination with transport planning, what is most surprising is the slow rate of growth in GHG
 emissions. Even as demand for energy continues to increase between 2014 and 2050 as a result of the
 demographic and spatial trends—including an 30 percent increase in population and building area—
 carbon emissions grow much less rapidly (9 percent) over the same period. This is explained by a number
 of positive trends in building (anticipated improvements in building efficiency; changes in carbon intensity
 of electricity grid; and reduction in technical loses in the district heating system), transport (fuel
 efficiency gains and cleaner fuel mix), and solid waste management (rates of recycling and
 biodegradable waste diversion).

 Under the BAU scenarios, efficiency gains in buildings can be attributed to several current trends:
 renovation of the existing building stock at current pace of 1 percent per year, energy savings from
 retrofits at a conservative 15 percent, new buildings with moderate energy savings of 45 percent under
 EU policies, compared with existing building stock.101 Total GHG emissions from buildings are also
 affected by changes in the carbon intensity of the electricity grid, as coal-fired plants are largely


101
   These assumptions on the rate and depth of change are informed by Building Performance Institute Europe (BPIE).
2014. Renovating Romania: A Strategy for the Energy Renovation of Romania’s Building Stock. Available at:
http://bpie.eu/renovating_romania.html#.VWxEQzLGVyU.
replaced by natural gas facilities. The thermal efficiency of buildings in the Bucharest-Ilfov region is
also expected to increase thanks to anticipated reductions in technical losses from the district heating
system (from 15 percent to 13 percent).

Increasing vehicle kilometers travelled are somewhat offset by efficiency gains and cleaner fuel mix. As
people move to the suburbs, the number and average length of trips, and speeds decrease as a result of
increased congestion (speed is an important determinant of emissions). Under the BAU, the number of
trips is projected to increase by 30 percent and average trip length by 8 percent from 2014 to 2050.
However, all vehicle classes will also experience efficiency gains (40 percent in private vehicles and
almost 20 percent in buses) as a result of current EU directives on fuel efficiency, and natural replacement
of vehicles (an increase in Euro III/3 and up vehicles and a decrease in less-efficient older models). In the
absence of coordinated land-use and transit policy, it is assumed in the BAU scenario that modal split
will stay the same, but there is a trend towards a cleaner fuel mix, with particularly notable growth in
LPG consumption in private cars.

It is anticipated that rates of recycling and biodegradable waste diversion in Bucharest would reach
half the levels mandated by EU targets. In the solid waste sector, emissions increase along with
population and income growth. While waste composition is assumed to remain constant over the time
period, management of waste is expected to change in line with current trend of improvement.

Option 2: Low Carbon Development
Compared to the BAU option, spatial development in BIMR under the Low Carbon Development
scenario option exhibits less sprawl, higher densities, mixed-use, and a coordination of transit and
spatial planning. It assumes proactive local action to reduce energy consumption in buildings and
transport, and to change local solid waste practices, and ambitious national initiatives to promote
clean power and cleaner vehicles. Spatially, growth is concentrated in a number of strategic areas (Figure
6.3). The LC Option creates two major new sub-centers with high densities and a mix of residential, office,
and retail uses. Very high density residential is distributed in the immediate vicinity of metro stations,
reflecting a strong coordination of transport and land use planning.
 Figure 10.7: Distribution of New Building Stock under Low Carbon Option, 2050




 Source: World Bank

The efficiency gain of urban land use and reduction in travel distances can be achieved by the following
developments in the LC scenario. In terms of residential development, the LC option halves the share of
low rise development, doubles the share of high rise development, and more than doubles the share of
very high density development in 2050, compared to BAU. Retail becomes more dispersed in high
density communities, reducing the need to travel to shops. Similar to BAU, the Low Carbon Option
assumes that 100 percent of industrial development is in industrial estates; spatially, these are
concentrated in 2 large industrial parks strategically located close to rail and expressways. For space of
institutional buildings, the LC scenario assumes a drop in government buildings’ share, accounting for e-
government reforms that reduce the need for building space. Education’s share increases, reflecting a
qualitative improvement in space per student. The amount of land allocated to healthcare facilities
increases, reflecting a growing demand from an aging population. Transportation’s share grows only
slightly, reflecting an increase in the number of metro stations and hubs by 2050.

Unsurprisingly, proactive spatial planning leads to significant improvement in energy use, energy
spending and emissions, even though the gross building area remains the same as the BAU option. The
scenario leads to carbon emissions reductions of 37 percent relative to a BAU pathway, with buildings-
related energy use delivering three-quarters of savings. (Figure 10.8) The biggest difference between the
LC and BAU scenarios is the attention to land use planning. In particular, development of high density
buildings and mixed uses around transit nodes is reflected in a changed modal split, with a 9 percent
increase in public transportation and 3 percent increase in non-motorized transit.
 Figure 10.8: Carbon Emissions Reductions under Low Carbon Scenario Relative to
                BAU, 2050 (metric tons of CO2e)




 Source: World Bank


Reduced energy use cuts total energy spending by $1.4 billion USD per year in real terms. In the buildings
sector alone, energy savings amount to $956 million USD per year by 2050. Thermal energy savings,
relative to the BAU scenario, amount to as much as $632 million USD. Given that retail prices for heating
are set by the government, it is likely that most of these savings will accrue to the municipal budget—an
important saving given the large burden of subsidizing thermal energy use in Bucharest.
 Figure 10.9: Comparison of Buildings, Transport and Solid Waste Emissions in BAU
               and Low Carbon Scenarios (metric tons of CO2e)




                                                                       Percentages refer to reduction from
                                                                                   2050 BAU

                                  -38%




                                                                            -23%


                                                                                                   -80%
 Source: World Bank
Under the Low Carbon scenario, reductions in building-related emissions will come from reductions
in fossil fuels for electricity generation and improvement in transmission and distribution efficiency,
in addition to increase in the proportion of higher density buildings, and actions by both local and
national governments to increase the rate and depth of building energy efficiency above and beyond
the BAU path. Building-related emissions are 38 percent lower relative to the BAU scenario. As for
transport, new spatial patterns will lead to reductions in the number and length of trips, and traffic
congestion. Combined with measures to improve vehicle stock and efficiency, transport emissions are
23 percent lower than the BAU scenario, with a total (real) saving in energy spending amounting to
$440 million USD per year by 2050. Moreover, particulate matter (PM10) emissions will decline by
39 percent and nitrous oxide (NOx) emissions by 16 percent, relative to the BAU scenario. These
improvements in local air quality, along with improvements in urban mobility, can make Bucharest a
much more attractive and healthier place for people to live and work. While its relative contribution
to region-wide emissions is low, the solid waste sector under the LC option shows a greater reduction
proportionate to its BAU development trajectory than any other sector. An 80 percent reduction in
emissions relative to BAU is achieved if Bucharest-Ilfov meets all EU targets with regards to recycling
and biodegradable waste diversion. Emission reductions are driven primarily by a reduction in
methane, via a combination of composting and the capture of 100 percent of the methane emissions
from local landfills.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This study provides local authorities with insights into how policies affect the speed and location of
growth, the density of urban growth, the type, mix and location of transport infrastructure, the local
waste infrastructure, and the degree of integration between different land uses and transport services
can have on the long-term economic and environmental sustainability of a city. Delivering changes
that lead Romania to a low-carbon future will take considerable financial resources and strong political
leadership on the part of a range of stakeholders. The following table presents different categories of
recommendations that focus more directly on initiatives Bucharest Municipal Government, District
governments in Bucharest, and Ilfov County and Commune officials should consider.

Other Romanian cities interested in this type of assessment are encouraged to evaluate the quality of
data, go through modelling training, and consider the fundamental limitations of the model. RACE should
be used to obtain knowledge into indicative changes in energy demand, energy spending, and emission
levels that can be attributed to different policy decisions or strategic changes in how and where growth
should be directed around a city. The RACE highlights the value of strategic planning in promoting more
compact city design, transport-oriented development (and other policies resulting in changes in modal-
split), upgrades to more efficient vehicle stock, and policies promoting building efficiency upgrades can
deliver sizable reductions in annual energy spending and emission levels.

Table 10.2. Policy Recommendations
Sector                                                                                                 Type of Policy
                     Policy Recommendations
Focus                                                                                                  Initiative

                     Data collection training, dissemination, and use : Expand the amount of land      Administrative
                     use, building stock, and building and transport-related energy use data and                policy
                     systematically collected and made available for public use. Local authority staff reform
                     should be trained on data collection strategies and methods of analysis (including
                     GIS).
                     Guidance: Convene multi-stakeholder coordinating group to ensure policy            Administrative
                     coordination on land use and transport policies and investments                   and    policy
                                                                                                       reform
                     Improve metropolitan governance and management : Evaluate, with all               Administrative
                     affected stakeholders, mechanisms to improve coordinated and integrated strategic and    policy
    Cross-sectoral




                     planning, development monitoring and control, and delivery of metropolitan public reform
                     services at the scale of the metropolitan region (including land use planning, public
                     transport, and environmental management.)
                              Improve management of suburban growth : Design, enact as a statutory              Administrative
                              instrument, and enforce a growth management strategy for the metropolitan and   policy
                              region that limits uncontrolled suburban sprawl, and subsequent reform
                              consumption of agricultural land and forests.
                              Promote mixed land use: Adopt mixed land use policies, where different Land use policy
                              types of land use (housing, shops, offices, other urban amenities) are reform
                              interspersed rather than segregated, thus providing more convenient access to
                              goods/services and employment opportunities. Mixed land use policies are
                              recognized for their ability to reduce the use of motorized transport.
                              Up-zoning: Change the floor-to-area (FAR) ratio allowed on certain land Land use policy
                              parcels or in certain neighborhoods, thus increasing the level of population or reform
                              economic activity that can be accommodated. Note: these changes must be
                              made to take into account the carrying capacity of local streets, sidewalks, and
                              parking areas to ensure they do not become overloaded.
                              Transit-oriented development: A variation on upzoning by specifically Land use policy
                              targeting these changes in the vicinity of high-capacity transit nodes, thereby   reform
                              increasing the size of the population likely to make use of the mass transport
                Land use




                              system. Note: these changes must be made in close coordination with
                              relevant transport agencies to ensure that transit system capacity (overall, or
                              at specific nodes) does not become overwhelmed by higher rates of usage.
                              Preferential lane space for public transport/high occupancy vehicles :            Roads policy
                              Dedicated lane can ensure that high occupancy vehicles are not adversely          reform
                              affected by slow moving vehicles. Interest in public transport use typically
                              increases if it is seen as a time-saving option compared to private vehicles.
                              Creation of Pedestrian-only zones: Designating core city areas as pedestrian-     Land use and
                              only zones can reduce demand for motorized vehicles.                              roads   policy
                                                                                                                reform

                              Parking policies: On-street parking takes up scarce lane space that could be      Roads policy
                              used to facilitate vehicle movement around the city. Different parking policies
                              (e.g., variable rate pricing with higher rates during peak travel period, on-
                              street parking bans or time-based restrictions) should be considered for
Land use and Transportation




                              important thoroughfares. Land use policies can also be amended to promote
                              the creation of more off-street parking. On the periphery of the city, Park and
                              Ride facilities should be established at the end of high capacity transit lines to
                              encourage the use of public transportation when entering Bucharest. (Such
                              systems are critically needed if congestion pricing programs are established in
                              the urban core. See below.)
                              Completion of Ring road(s): The incomplete nature of the ring roads around Roads policy
                              Bucharest leads through traffic to drive through the city center, competing
                              with local traffic and increasing congestion levels.
                                 Congestion pricing: Congestion pricing is a mechanism whereby users of
                                                                                                                 Roads policy
Traffic management               scarce public goods, such as road space in the center of a large city, are
                                 charged for their use of that good. The pricing strategy seeks to influence
                                 demand by dissuading individuals unwilling to bear this cost burden.
                                 Typically, congestion pricing in cities is limited to heavily trafficked areas;
                                 drivers entering must pay a toll to enter that area. Congestion pricing
                                 programs presume that effective alternatives (such as public transit) exist to
                                 allow individuals to enter that area at no or low charge.
                                 District heating system upgrades: Conduct or require strategic reviews of Engineering
                                 local district heating systems to identify cos- effective efficiency upgrade    analysis
heating
District




                                 opportunities. Systems can also be analysed for the possible use or
                                 integration of low(er) carbon energy sources.
                                 Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) finance: PACE systems create a            Public finance
                                 revolving loan fund that can be tapped to support energy efficiency upgrades.
                                 Property owners can apply for these funds, which are then paid off via a
                                 surcharge on their energy bill (typically at a rate equivalent to the energy
                                 savings the upgrades deliver to the building.) Because the loan is attached
                                 to an individual property rather than the owner of the property, when the
                                 property is sold/transferred the loan obligation is immediately transferred
                                 as well. PACE programs can be capitalized by private investors or other
                                 municipal finance strategies.
                                 Green Mortgages: Green mortgages typically enable borrowers to obtain           Public finance
                                 larger mortgages (or preferred rates) because their properties have been
                                 certified as meeting minimum efficiency standards. The monthly savings on
                                 energy spending can thus be transferred to allow the borrower to afford
                                 higher monthly mortgage payments. Local authorities can partner with and
                                 promote the Romania Green Building Association’s new green mortgage
                                 program that provides preferential rates to property owners buying or
                                 investing in more efficient buildings.
                                 Point of Sale Efficiency Upgrades/Audits: These requirements seek to bring      Energy policy
                                 older buildings closer to the energy performance of new buildings. These
                                 requirements must be satisfied before a property can be sold, transferred
                                 from one occupant to another, or renovated beyond a certain limit. To ensure
                                 that the retrofit burden does not become excessive, such policies typically
                                 cap the total cost of required improvements at some fraction of the sale or
                                 rental price. These requirements mesh well with EU-imposed building
                                 performance disclosure requirements, because underperforming properties
                                 can easily be identified.
           Building efficiency




                                 Energy Efficiency capacity-building programs: Local authorities can create      Energy policy/
                                 programs to improve local knowledge of building efficiency upgrade education
                                 opportunities. These programs can be run centrally out of City Hall, or
                                 support can be given to relevant community-based organizations in a strong
                                 position to influence/inform the public.
C H A P T E R 6 . H O W W I L L WAT E R AVA I L A B I L I T Y A F F EC T G R O W T H?
C H A P T E R S U M M A RY
Romania’s water sector is vulnerable to climate change, and adaptation efforts are essential for its
continued ability to meet demand for water from the end-use sectors – households, industry,
agriculture, and hydropower. The water sector in Romania is facing a dual challenge: water availability is
dropping and demand for water increasing, both due to climate change. Irrigation supply is constrained
by the inadequate irrigation infrastructure, while irrigation availability is becoming critical for agriculture
due to climate change. Similarly, supply reliability for industrial and domestic use is most challenged for
basins with lower water endowment during summer months. Hydropower generation will both constrain
and be constrained by water demand in other sectors in Romania. It is also sensitive to water scarcity in
basins during the dry seasons. Adaptation efforts are therefore important.

Two sets of models were used to analyze the impact of climate change on water availability and demand
and the offsetting impact of adaptation measures: climate change models and adaptation scenario
models. The latte compared two green (adaptation) scenarios – Green and Super Green - to the
outcomes in the Baseline scenario. Climate change will lead to a decreased river runoff, which in turn will
negatively affect water demand-supply balance. In agriculture, water availability will be threatened during
the primary growing months, while demand for irrigation will increase due to rising temperature and
decreasing and more variable precipitation. Unmet municipal demands will be modest but industrial
activities may be more seriously affected if no adaptation efforts are undertaken.

Climate change is projected to have a negative impact on meeting water demand, and demand
management (including investing in improved efficiency of irrigation and municipal and industrial
delivery and use efficiency) provides only a limited solution; increase in basin storage is needed. The
greatest green growth investment potential exists for optimizing agronomic inputs, including fertilizer
inputs, and rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure to restore irrigation production to currently rainfed
areas. The highest investment payoffs for these measures are in the South-Muntenia, Northeast, and
Northwest Development Regions. A targeted approach to new varieties – focused on the South Muntenia
region, but also on maize production in selected southern regions – is likely to be most successful. It is
also clear that expanded irrigation has a very high potential for a positive investment payoff, provided
water is available for the irrigation sector.

The highest NPV results for irrigation investments are indicated in the Southeast and South-Muntenia
regions; high NPVs were also found for the Northeast and West regions. The required investment in Green
(which includes modest adaptation actions) amounts to €1.8 billion (discounted value102) or 0.05 percent
of GDP, while a Super Green scenario (with very ambitious and more expensive adaptation actions)
requires €11.0 billion in investment costs (discounted value) or 0.32 percent of GDP. The schedule of
investments generates a higher burden for 2015-2030 when approximately 65 percent of the total


102
      At five percent discount rate
required investment is made.

CHALLENGES FOR GREENER GROWTH
Overview
Romania’s water resources are moderate, but sufficient with prudent resource management that would
ensure conservation and sustainability; regional and inter-annual variation is, however, significant. The
utilizable level of water resources (surface and ground) in Romania, as defined by the existing capacity to
extract and use water, is 40 billion cubic meters (BCM) per year, while the total water demand stands at
8 BCM per year. With a current population of 20.2 million, per capita water availability in Romania
amounts to approximately 2000 cubic meters per capita per year. This value is lower than the Europe’s
average of 4,500 cubic meters per capita per year and only slightly above the international threshold for
water stress, 1,700 cubic meters per capita per year. Water withdrawals, however, stay at a very
reasonable level, substantially below the international benchmark for pressure on available water
resources - water stress is defined at 10 percent of water withdrawal as share of water resources and
Romania’s level is 3.2 percent. At the same time, the challenge is a significant inter-basin and inter-annual
variation in water resources availability. In the driest years, water availability has fallen to 20 BCM. Water
availability is also varied across the basins, and the basins of Jiu, Arges-Vedea, Buzua-Ialomita, Siret, Prut-
Barlad, and Dobrogea-Littoral are facing water scarcity.

There is a degree of overcapacity in the water supply system, due to the steady decrease in water
demand caused by structural changes in the economy in the 1990s. The current water demand comprises
of industry (67 percent), agriculture (18 percent), and municipal (15 percent). The water demand has
steadily decreased since the 1990s, because of reduction in industrial activity and shut-down of
economically unviable irrigation schemes, as well as due to the introduction of water metering and tariffs
and reduction of system losses in domestic water supply. The total demand, in terms of volume of water
made available to users, decreased from approximately 20 BCM per year in the early 1990s to 8 BCM in
2012, while water consumption in the same year equaled 6.5 BCM.


Challenges

Romania water sector is vulnerable to climate change and adaptation efforts are essential for its
continued ability to satisfy demand for water from the end-use sectors – households, industry,
agriculture, and hydropower. The water sector in Romania is facing a dual challenge: water availability is
dropping and demand for water increasing, both due to climate change. Water availability is decreasing
due to the warmer and shorter winters, lessened snow volume and early and fast snow melting, lowering
of the groundwater table in summer months and lower precipitation. Water demand is increasing due to
higher summer temperatures and higher evapotranspiration, pushing up demand for water not only from
agriculture, but also from the industry and municipalities. Water quality will degrade due to higher
summer temperatures, through decreases in dissolved oxygen, eutrophication and algae growth.
Wastewater sector will suffer from more frequent floods, storm-water infiltration in sewer systems, and
direct inundation of treatment facilities. The hydropower capacity factor, and therefore hydro generation
output, will be adversely affected by decreased water availability. The hydropower facilities and the
storage reservoirs will be also affected by the increased flooding.

Irrigation supply is constrained by the inadequate irrigation infrastructure, while irrigation availability
is becoming critical for agriculture due to climate change. Irrigated area in Romania has decreased from
2 million ha in the early 1990s to approximately 0.8 million ha that is currently considered irrigable with
functional infrastructure, as economically unviable schemes were closed down. Moreover, the actual land
under irrigation has remained below 300,000 ha for the past five years. The irrigation volume reduced
from 8 BCM per year in the early 1990s to 1 BCM per year in 2012 according to MARD. There are areas
of water scarcity in many basins, where summer droughts are a significant concern. This situation is
becoming more serious with the increasing impacts of climate change including rising temperatures and
reduced rainfall across Romania. Addressing this challenge will require adopting climate-resilient
agriculture and updating the river basin management plans - while taking climate change impacts into
account - to re-assess the sustainable levels and modes of irrigation in the water-scarce basins.

Similarly, supply reliability for industrial and domestic use is most challenged for basins with lower
water endowment during summer months. The majority of the basins in Romania have no serious
problems in ensuring sufficient volume of water to meet the municipal and industrial demands. However,
the basins with lower endowment of water (Jiu, Arges-Vedea, Buzau-Ialomita, Siret, Prut-Barlad, and
Dobrogea-Litoral) face supply reliability challenges during the summer months, especially in dry years.
The Dobrogea-Litoral basin is the most severely affected in this regard: as a result, almost 95 percent of
the supply for the city of Constanta is being sourced from groundwater, which is being pumped from
significant depths of 300-700 meters. A number of cities in Banat and Moldova regions also face water
scarcity in summer months. These cases, however, stand apart from the situation in most of the urban
areas in Romania, especially Bucharest, which have multiple sources of water and offer significant buffer
supplies and a high degree of reliability.

Hydropower generation will both constrain and be constrained by water demand in other sectors in
Romania. It is also sensitive to water scarcity in basins during the dry seasons. Romania’s hydropower
potential is estimated at 36 TWh per year, and the generation in 2012 was 19 TWh (using 6 GW of
generation capacity). Hydropower generation accounts for 33 percent of Romania’s total electricity
generation. While coal and other fossil fuels remain the primary source of energy and electricity
generation for Romania, the share of renewable sources of energy is large and increasing. The
Government intends to decommission and modernize some of the high-emission and obsolete thermal
power plants and is considering options for promoting growth of renewable capacity, including support
of small- and micro-scale hydropower generation.103
While hydropower is not a consumptive user of water, operations rules for hydropower facilities
constrain and are constrained by water uses in other sectors. Therefore the proposed new hydropower


 103
       Energy sector modeling in this assessment projects adding 3 GW of new hydropower capacity by 2050 (see
 Energy chapter).
facilities would need to be planned taking into account the existing and anticipated future water uses in
all sectors. In the basins where scarcity already arises in summers of dry years, hydropower production
will be adversely affected for a short duration. These constraints can be alleviated to a large extent by
careful systems planning and operations optimization accounting for climate change impacts.
Furthermore, the development of new hydro infrastructure will need to ensure that the environmental
and hydro-morphological impacts are managed in compliance with the requirements of the EU Water
Framework Directive.


METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS

Methodology

The objective of the analysis was to assess how climate change affects water availability and how green
(climate change adaptation) policies and investments can offset the impact of the changing water
availability on sectoral outcomes in the water consuming sectors, with the emphasis on agriculture. The
analysis also provided financial evaluation of the proposed green measures. The analysis was based on
scenario modelling involving two kinds of scenarios. First, climate scenarios were used for water
availability projections and crop yields and hydropower impact estimates. Second, three scenarios were
used to assess the impact of green policies and investments: the Baseline scenario and two adaptation
scenarios, Green and Super Green. The Green scenario required a moderate adaptation effort, while the
Super Green involved an ambitious intervention necessitating significant investment. All three scenarios
account for the impact of climate change on water availability and irrigation water demand. Table 6.1
provides details of the green measures - policies and investments included in each scenario – that are
being evaluated. The emphasis is on the measures in agriculture, making the modeling findings important
for both water and agriculture sectors.104 Water sector outcomes were measured using indicators of
annual water availability and the water demand-supply gap in agriculture (irrigation), in the combined
demand from municipalities and the industrial sector, and in the energy sector (hydropower demand).
Agriculture sector outcomes were measured by crop yields in irrigated and rain-fed areas, before and
after the implementation of green measures, and related revenues. Hydropower production outcomes
were estimated by the indicators of annual generation of hydropower and related revenues.




 104
       Relevant findings are discussed in the Agriculture chapter.
Table 6.1. Summary of water and agriculture sector green growth policy scenarios


 Scenarios                     Scenario characteristics including policies and investments
                All current and planned thermal and nuclear plant deployment or retirement;
Baseline (no    All current and funded or in construction future hydropower plants and associated storage;
CC              Current but no additional reservoir construction;
adaptation)     Irrigation capacity, use, and efficiency at current levels.
                Improved fertilizer application in the agriculture sector.
Green
                Improved varieties of crops in agriculture and extension to support farmer training in their
Scenario
                 use.
(modest CC
                Measures are applied over approximately 530,000 ha, a portion of the land area identified as
adaptation
                 areas of current medium agricultural production with potential for high production.
effort)
Super Green     Application of fertilizer and improved varieties measures designed as in the Green scenario,
Scenario         but applied over approximately a larger area of 2.1 million ha identified as areas of current
(ambitious       medium agricultural production with potential for high production.
CC              Expand the currently irrigated area by approximately 430,000 ha, a 5 times increase, in areas
adaptation       identified as viable for irrigation expansion.
effort)
The following models were used for the analysis: General Circulation Models (GCMs), the Water
Evaluation And Planning (WEAP) model, a water run-off model (CLIRUN) and an agricultural yield model
(AquaCrop). The models were implemented in the following sequence (Figure 6.1):

       Step 1. The General Circulation Models of future climate produced climate projections as
        a function of initial conditions and projected quantities of greenhouse gases emitted.

       Step 2. Climate projections from GCMs were used as inputs in the CLIRUN model to estimate
        streamflow runoff and also in the AquaCrop model to estimate crop yield and irrigation demand.

       Step 3. The runoff and irrigation water demand estimates from CLIRUN and AquaCrop, along with
        other hydrologic system inputs and non-irrigation water demand estimates, were incorporated
        into the WEAP tool, where water storage, hydropower potential, and water availability were
        modelled.

       Step 4. To refine the AquaCrop estimates of crop yield in irrigated areas (see (2) above) by
        adjusting it to water availability modeled in WEAP (see (3) above), the unmet demand for
        irrigation water from WEAP, together with statistical data on irrigated crop sensitivity to water
        availability, was fed back into Aquacrop.

       Step 5. Finally, the WEAP hydropower generation and AquaCrop crop yield results were analyzed
        to produce estimates of their economic implications. The main outcomes at this step were
        projected revenue from crop production and hydropower and net present value (NPV) of
        investment in these sectors.
 In addition to modelling, analysis involved evaluation of infrastructure investment options for water and
 agriculture. It was designed to provide ranking, based on financial assessment, of several water and
 agriculture sector investments used in modeling. The financial assessment calculated the benefit-cost
 ratio and the net present value of the cash flow of benefits and costs. Costs included both capital and
 annual operating and maintenance costs. Benefits were calculated as direct financial flows that result
 from the investment. Evaluated investment options were related to water-use efficiency in irrigation;
 construction and rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and optimization of its usage; fertilizer
 enhancement; and improvement of crop varieties.

 The water and agriculture sector analyses address four policy-relevant issues: (1) the possible adaptive
 responses by farmers to climate change and the resulting marginal impact on agricultural production and
 incomes; (2) projected impacts on energy (mainly hydropower) production under the modelled
 development and climate scenarios; (3) trade-offs between alternative water uses (for irrigation,
 hydropower, and municipal and industrial use); and (4) economic implications of climate change and
 green growth investments suitable for incorporating in economy-wide modelling of Romania’s
 macroeconomic future. Figure 6.1 presents the sequencing of models and other analyses employed to
 achieve this goal.

                         Figure 6.1. Overall analytical framework for the water study




Source: Water technical paper. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Development Program”, 2015, World
Bank.
 Findings
 Unmet water demand

 Climate change will have a negative impact on water availability 105 in all climate scenarios. Falling
 runoff during the growing season suggest an increase in the unmet demand for all types of water users.
 In the 2020s, the projected changes in annual runoff, as compared with the base year 2014, range from
 a decrease of 7 percent to an increase of 20 percent. By the 2040s, the changes are dampened
 somewhat when summarized at the national scale, but universally negative, ranging from a reduction of
 0.7 percent to 8 percent. Figure 6.2 shows total mean monthly runoff across the 91 sub-basins under
 both the 1961-2000 baseline and under the three climate change scenarios between 2031 and 2050.
 During the primary growing season months (April to September), runoff changes range from a 30
 percent reduction to a 30 percent increase. Importantly, the majority of months under two of the
 scenarios show falling runoff throughout the growing period, suggesting threats to irrigation water
 availability.

      Figure 6.2. Various uses of water are interlinked in Romania
                 Twelve river basins and 91 subbasins, 26 hydrological stations, used and viable irrigated areas, and
                 major hydropower facilities in Romania




Source: Water technical paper. Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Development Program”,
2015, World Bank.




105
      Measured as mean annual runoff
Climate change will threaten water availability during the primary growing months, while raising
irrigation water demand, and as a result unmet irrigation needs will increase for a majority of months
for all climate scenarios. Water availability is measured as mean annual runoff. Climate change will have
a mostly positive effect on runoff under the low-impact climate scenario, but a generally negative effect
under medium- and high-impact climate scenarios, particularly in the 2040s. During the primary growing
months (April to September), runoff changes within a range from a 30 percent reduction to a 30 percent
increase. Also, the majority of months under 2 of the 3 climate scenarios show falling runoff throughout
the growing period, suggesting threats to irrigation water availability. On the other hand, all climate
change scenarios show a rising irrigation water demand due to the uniformly increasing temperature
effect. Under the high-impact scenario, there is more than a doubling of demand of irrigation water in the
more arid months between the baseline and the 2021-2050 period. Although demands fall in the Eastern
part of Romania under the low-impact scenario, all sub-basins show increasing irrigation water demand
of between 10 and 100 percent under the medium- and high-impact scenario. As a result, unmet irrigation
increases in the majority of months for all scenarios, starting at between 5 and 14 percent under the
baseline between April and September, and rising to between 9 and 17 percent under the climate change
scenarios. The majority of unmet irrigation water demands occur in the Western part of Romania, and
severe unmet water demands are confined to only a few sub-basins. (Figure 6.3)

  Figure 6.3. Climate change will threaten water availability during the primary growing months Sum
              of mean monthly runoff across the 91 sub-basins, baseline (1961-2000) versus the three climate
              projections (2031-2050)




Source: Water technical paper. “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Development Program”,
2015, World Bank.
 Unmet municipal demands are modest but irrigation and industrial activities may be adversely affected
 by climate change without adaptive efforts. Figure 6.4 presents the percentage of mean monthly
 irrigation, municipal and industrial demand that is unmet, under the baseline and each of the climate
 change scenarios. Unmet municipal demands are fairly modest, ranging from zero to approximately
 1 percent under the medium-impact scenario. On the other hand, unmet industrial demands are more
 significant, particularly considering that they constitute approximately 75 percent of the total water
 withdrawals of Romania. Under baseline conditions and unmet industrial demands are fairly constant over
 the year, and remain under 5 percent. Under the low-impact scenario, unmet demand reaches nearly 15
 percent in September, suggesting that many industrial activities may be adversely affected by climate
 change without adaptive efforts. Unmet demands are as high as 25 percent in some sub-basins, and
 increase significantly between the baseline and three climate scenarios.


  Figure 6.4. Unmet municipal demands are modest but irrigation and industrial activities may be
              adversely affected by climate change without adaptive efforts
              Percentage of irrigation (top), municipal (middle) and industrial (bottom) demand that is
              unmet under the baseline (1961-2000) and three climate scenarios (2021-2050)




Source: Water technical paper. “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Development Program”,
2015, World Bank.
 Hydropower will also be affected by the decreased river runoff. At 19 TWh in 2012, hydropower
 generation accounts for approximately one third of total electricity generation in Romania, and is
 therefore an essential component of energy security. Mean annual hydropower generation is projected
 to increase in the 2020s and 2030s under the low-impact scenario, due to the projected increases in river
 runoff. 106 However, hydropower generation declines under the other seven scenario-decade
 combinations, most significantly in the 2030s and 2040s under medium-impact scenario where
 hydropower production falls by nearly 10 percent. Also of significance is that hydropower generation
 decreases in the 2040s under all three climate scenarios. Within individual river sub-basins, decadal
 average hydropower generation is projected to fall by a maximum of 50 percent, and increase by a
 maximum of 30 percent.

 While water sector modeling shows decrease in water availability for all types of use including hydro
 generation, it did not aim at evaluating whether expansion of hydropower in the future would be
 beneficial. Such analysis requires considering all sources of power generation as a system, taking into
 account available energy resources. The energy supply analysis (see Energy chapter) aimed to find the
 least cost solutions for the future structure of power supply taking into account multiple constraints,
 including resource limitations. This analysis was done using an optimization system model,
 TIMES/MARKAL. The findings showed that hydro plants will still be producing power to satisfy
 approximately one-third of the total power demand in Romania in 2050 under all three scenarios –
 Baseline, Green, and Super Green. In each of the three scenarios, nine MW of new hydro capacity would
 be constructed by 2050. This analysis took into account Romania’s current hydro potential and applied a
 low capacity factor of 35 percent, which accommodates the water sector modeling projections of
 decreased river runoff.

 The focus of the water sector investments was primarily on water demand management, rather than
 on available augmentation alternatives. The investment options include improved irrigation efficiency,
 municipal and industrial delivery efficiency, and municipal water use efficiency. Irrigation efficiency
 options included both conveyance improvements (e.g., lining irrigation canals), and field level
 improvements, such as converting from flood to sprinkler irrigation. Municipal and industrial efficiency
 improvements would focus on repairing leaking delivery systems and potentially installing leak prevention
 systems. However, the reductions in unmet demands resulting from these investments were minimal
 because the existing unmet demands in the system occur during years when extremely low flows occur
 and are dedicated wholly to meet minimum environmental flow requirements. If little or no water is


106
   Note that hydropower results are only presented under the “no investment” policy scenario, as differences in
generation under the ‘no investment’ and under the Super Green policy scenario were minimal. The effect of the
Super Green irrigation expansion is minor because (a) most of the expansions are anticipated to occur in basins with
lower levels of existing hydropower capacity and (b) the consumptive use of projected irrigation represents a s mall
portion of the overall water budget of Romania. The future development of hydro generation capacity was modeled
using an energy system model, TIMES / MARKAL (see Chapter 3 on energy). The outcomes show that hydro
generation will constitute approximately 30 percent of total generation capacity in Romania by 2050 in both the
Green and Super Green Scenarios. There are no investments envisaged under either Scenario
 available to be used consumptively, then decreasing withdrawal requirements through efficiency
 improvements will have limited effect. More effective alternatives may include increased basin storage,
 inter-basin transfers, conjunctive use between surface water and groundwater, improved reservoir
 management practices, or potentially allowing periodic relaxation of environmental flow requirements as
 needed.

 Impact of climate change on crop yields

 In the agriculture sector, analysis considered impact of climate change on yields of irrigated and rainfed
 crops across basins and by type of crop. It is clear that rainfed crops will be negatively affected by higher
 temperatures and lower precipitation, and the analysis of green scenarios aims at evaluating how to
 target adaptation efforts geographically and by crop. Climate change affects crop yields through changes
 in soil moisture, direct temperature effects on crop growth, and changes in the evapotranspiration
 requirements of the crop, among other effects. Under the medium-impact climate scenario (which is
 considered to be the most likely one), rainfed yields will generally decline but irrigated yields will tend to
 improve with climate change and that the effect is exacerbated over time.

 The yields of rainfed crops differ significantly by crop and by basin. Certain rainfed crops such as maize,
 barley, and winter wheat tend to perform well in some regions. Some crops, such as rainfed winter wheat
 in northern and some western mountainous regions, stand to gain as much as 20 percent in yield increases
 from climate change in the 2040s owing to more mild and damp winters. The most sensitive crops to
 forecasted climate change, with forecast yield reductions of 10 percent or greater are rainfed sugar beets,
 particularly in the Southeast, South Muntenia, and Bucharest development regions (up to 35 percent yield
 reductions); rainfed potatoes and tomatoes in all regions (up to 19 percent yield reduction in southern
 regions); rainfed alfalfa (lucerne) in southern and western regions (up to 13.5 percent yield reductions);
 and rainfed maize in South Muntenia and Bucharest (about 10 percent yield reduction). In economic
 terms, the maize reductions are a great concern (the reductions occur in the southern regions).107 (Figure
 6.5)


 There are substantial crop yield benefits from expanding irrigation. Irrigated yields will tend to improve
 under climate change. This finding indicates that if water stress is removed by irrigating, then the direct
 temperature effects of climate change may have a positive effect on future crop yields. Climate change
 expands the differential between rainfed and irrigated yields for almost all regions and for almost all crops.
 The largest positive gains are in winter wheat, alfalfa, maize, and barley, while sugarbeets and tomatos are
 projected to experience the largest declines. As a result of this general finding, the primary investment
 option considered in Super Green was a signicant expansion of irrigated areas. By moving from rainfed to
 irrigated hectares, farmers become much more resilient to the effects of climate change. (Figure 6.5)



107
   These results coincide well with previous climate change analyses for the agriculture sector conducted jointly by
the National Meteorological Administration and the National Research and Development Institute for Soil Science
Agro-chemistry and Environment - ICPA Bucharest
      Figure 6.5. South is affected more by climate change and enjoys significant benefits from irrigation;
           crops differ in reaction to irrigation in the North
           Percentage increase in rainfed and irrigated crop yields in 2040-2050: North and South*

      a. North                                                   b. South




       *"North" includes the basins where yields are affected less by climate change: North-West, Center, North-East, West.
       *"South" includes the basins where yields are affected more by climate change (all located in the south of the county):
       South-East, South-Mutenia, Bucharest-Ilfov, South-West Oltenia.
       Note: results for the medium-impact climate scenario.
Source: Water technical papers “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Development Program”, 2015,
World Bank.


Off-setting climate impact on crop yields with the help of climate change adaptation measures


The most promising green growth investments for yield improvement were (1) optimizing agronomic
inputs, including fertilizer inputs, and (2) rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure to restore irrigation
production to certainly currently rainfed areas. The first two are at the center of the Green investment
policy, and all three options are the focus of the Super Green policy. Improved rainfed crop varieties
generate between 0 and 10 percent yield benefits, whereas optimizing fertilizer application can produce
anywhere from a 4 percent to a 70 percent yield improvement, depending on crop, region, and whether
the farm is rainfed or irrigated. A number of farm-level investments were evaluated for their potential
yield improvements, including adopting improved drought tolerant crop varieties, converting from
rainfed to irrigated, improving soil drainage, improving soil aeration, optimizing fertilizer application
and optimizing the timing of irrigation water application. The yield improvements generated from
improved varieties and fertilizer application for each crop and administrative region (for 2040s) are
presented in Figure 6.6. Impact of improved crop varieties are presented for rainfed crop sonly, while
optimized fertilizer application is shown for both rainfed and irrigated crops.
    Figure 6.6. Optimized agronomic inputs, including fertilizer application, is a most promising
    adaptation measure
    The range* of percentage changes in yields as a result of the adaptation measures, 2040-50

    a. North**                                                      b. South***




    *Range across crops within the North and South
    **"North" includes the basins where yields are affected less by climate change: North-West, Center, North-East, West.
    ***"South" includes the basins where yields are affected more by climate change (all located in the south of the county):
    South- East, South-Mutenia, Bucharest-Ilfov, South-West Oltenia.
    Note: results for the medium-impact climate scenario.
Source: Water technical paper. “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Development Program”, 2015, World
Bank.

Financial assessment of the proposed CC adaptation measures

Financial assessment estimated financial benefits from the implementation of the identified
adaptation measures. Benefit-cost calculations suggest that the largest gains for these investment
would be in the Southeast and South-Muntenia regions; the next tier of good investment potential is
found in the Northeast and West regions. The highest investment payoffs for optimized fertilizer
application programs are in the South-Muntenia, Northeast, and Northwest Development Regions. In
general, fertilizer programs show strong returns to investment throughout Romania, and for best results
could be targeted for those farms of medium size (roughly 10 ha), to ensure that the measures
encourage consolidation of the smallest farms while also avoiding provision of an unnecessary subsidy
to the largest farms, which are already quite productive. These investments are consistent with those
being considered as part of Romania’s National Rural Development Plan, but would likely require a larger
investment in CC adaptation measures than is currently contemplated if they are to be deployed at
sufficient scale to counter-act the negative risks of climate change.

The overall agriculture revenues see a slight downward trend over time when no additional green
growth investments are made. Green and Super Green investments will compensate for the decline and
increase the revenue under the medium-impact climate scenario during the 2020s. However, it is also
important to note that although Green and Super Green investments will produce higher yield revenue
than the baseline in 2030s and 2040s, the revenue will still be lower than the average of observed baseline
revenue. (Figure 6.7)

Figure 6.7.Baseline, Green and Super Green investment revenues




Note: results for the medium-impact climate scenario. Source: Water technical paper, Report developed through the “Romania:
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program”, 2015, World Bank



Green investments will push up revenues relative to baseline revenues, across all regions and during all
time periods. However, the costs of investing in improving crop varieties tend to outweigh the benefits
in most regions. The NPV of investments in enhanced fertilizer application and rehabilitated irrigation
investments is positive, while the NPV of improved crop varieties is negative for both Green and Super
Green Investment packages. The overall NPV values for Romania under the Green and Super Green
investment options are projected to be positive at $1.8 billion and $11.0 billion, respectively in all regions.
With Super Green investments, agricultural revenues increase more dramatically due to the broader set
of investment options that are considered. (Table 6.8) Table 6.9 presents the benefit-cost ratio of the
investments in each region. Investments to enhance fertilizer and rehabilitate irrigation in across all
regions, and investments to improve crop varieties in some regions, have benefit-cost ratios above 1
(benefits outweigh the costs). On the other hand, it is clear that investments to improve varieties have
the lowest ratios across regions.
 Table 6.8. Percent change in value of Romania’s crop production in each region under Green and
 Super
                 Green scenarios, by time periods108
          REGION                      2020S                               2030S                        2040S
                           BASE          PERCENT            BASE             PERCENT         BASE         PERCENT
                         REVENUE         CHANGE           REVENUE            CHANGE        REVENUE        CHANGE
                          ($USD        GREE SUPER          ($USD           GREE SUPER       ($USD       GREE SUPER
                           MM)          N     GREEN         MM)             N     GREEN      MM)         N     GREEN
 Nord-Vest                $1,108.5        3.44%   15.06   $1,024.7        3.03%    13.42   $1,125.2        3.11%   13.70
                                 5                    %          7                     %          5                    %




      Centru               $1,068.9       1.20%   4.74%    $946.31         1.09%   4.63%    $1,040.2       1.13%   4.64%
                                      8                                                                0
      Nord-Est             $1,607.1       2.77%   8.91%    $1,520.3        2.45%   8.35%    $1,562.8       2.54%   8.67%
                                      0                               4                                5
      Sud-Est              $1,615.0       0.32%   5.95%    $1,567.0        0.32%   7.17%    $1,523.5       0.35%   8.35%
                                      7                               0                                6
      Sud-Muntenia         $1,894.9       4.33%   16.98    $1,750.1        4.49%   18.40    $1,679.7       5.15%   21.21
                                      7               %               5                %               1                %
      Bucuresti-Iflov        $89.48       1.62%   2.12%     $81.01         1.75%   2.38%     $77.85        1.83%   2.54%
      Sud-Vest             $1,076.0       0.69%   12.17    $953.68         0.62%   12.73    $1,032.9       0.60%   11.71
      Oltenia                         5               %                                %               2                %
      Vest                 $1,088.6       4.90%   16.06    $966.71         4.22%   14.79    $1,101.1       4.48%   14.96
                                      1               %                                %               6                %
      TOTAL                $9,548.8       2.56%   11.38    $8,809.9        2.39%   11.45    $9,143.5       2.57%   12.13
                                      0               %               7                %               0                %
      Note: Value in constant 2012 $USD
Note: results for the medium-impact climate scenario. Source: Water technical paper. “Romania: Climate Change and Low
Carbon Green Growth Development Program”, 2015, World Bank.




108
   Table 4-3 reports the present value revenues and costs above baseline (at a 5 percent discount rate), and the net
present value (NPV) of the investments for each region under the Green and Super Green scenarios, by investment
option
 Table 6.9. Benefit cost ratio for agricultural investments under the green growth scenarios, 2015-
 2050

             REGION                           GREEN                                                SUPER GREEN

                              ENHANCED        IMPROVED        TOTAL         ENHANCED        IMPROVED          REHABILITATED       TOTAL
                               FERTILIZER      VARIETIES                FERTILIZERS          VARIETIES             IRRIGATION
      Nord-Vest                      2.71             0.45     2.40                 2.71            0.45                 2.57      2.41
      Centru                         2.80             0.41     2.47                 2.80            0.41                 2.55      2.49
      Nord-Est                       2.58             0.43     2.28                 2.58            0.43                 2.05      2.18
      Sud-Est                        1.92             1.10     1.80                 1.92            1.10                 2.44      2.36
      Sud-Muntenia                   2.05             1.41     1.96                 2.05            1.41                 3.15      2.25

      Bucuresti-Iflov                2.61             2.78     2.64                 2.61            2.78                 3.47      2.84
      Sud-Vest Oltenia               2.00             0.66     1.81                 2.00            0.66                 2.87      2.19
      Vest                           2.62             0.65     2.34                 2.62            0.65                 3.07      2.49
      TOTAL                          2.38             0.89     2.17                 2.33            0.86                 2.59      2.30
 Note: results for the medium-impact climate scenario.
Source: Water technical paper. “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Development Program”, 2015,
World Bank.

 The required investment in Green amounts to Euro 1.8 billion (discounted value109) or 0.05 percent of
 GDP, while a more aggressive Super Green scenario requires Euro 11.0 billion in investment costs
 (discounted value) or 0.32 percent of GDP. The schedule of investments puts a higher burden on the
 period 2015-2030 when approximately 65 percent of the total required investment is made.

                  Table 6.10. Water investment put higher burden on the first half of the modelled period
                                       Schedule of water investments by scenario, billions of 2010 Euros

                                                             2015-          2020-          2030-           2040-        Total 2010-
                                                              2020          2030           2040            2050             2050

                                                                              not discounted                            discounted

       Euro billion:
       Green                                                      541           614            377             231               1,763
       Super Green                                            2,917           4,077          2,503           1,537              11,034
       Percent of GDP:
       Green                                                         0.07      0.05           0.04            0.04                0.05
       Super Green                                                   0.45      0.36           0.29            0.24                0.32
      Source: World Bank staff calculations




109
      At five percent discount rate
Conclusions and Recommendations

Climate change can potentially present a substantial risk to agricultural production, irrigation, municipal
and industrial water uses, and hydropower generation at current facilities in Romania, but those effects
can be addressed, at least partially by following a green growth investment plan at national level.
Implementing a program for Romanian irrigation infrastructure, in particular, can counteract the effects
of climate change in most places and provide additional benefits to increase productivity beyond current
levels. These investments do not eliminate climate change risks to water-dependent sectors, but the
combined effect of multiple investments has great potential for supporting green growth in Romania.
In addition, the analysis and findings presented here demonstrate that it is critical to consider climate
change when choosing among investment options and green growth development pathways. The
following is a summary of green investment packages that provide the best return for Romania, and a
series of additional steps that should be taken by the Government of Romania water resource institutions
as follow-up to this work, in order to refine the investment plan.


Recommended Priority Green Growth Investment Packages

The greatest investment potential exists for optimizing agronomic inputs, including fertilizer inputs, and
rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure to restore irrigation production to currently rainfed areas. The
agricultural productivity measures would require a significant investment in high-quality extension
services, as well as increased and/or subsidized availability of fertilizers, with the payoff being a
significantly increased crop yield. The highest investment payoffs for these measures are in the South-
Muntenia, Northeast, and Northwest Development Regions. In general, fertilizer programs show strong
returns to investment throughout Romania, and for best results could be targeted for those farms of
medium size (roughly 10 ha), to ensure that the measures encourage consolidation of the smallest farms
while also to avoid providing an unnecessary subsidy to the largest farms, which are already quite
productive.

A targeted approach to new varieties – focused on the South Muntenia region, but also on maize
production in selected southern regions – is likely to be most successful. The results for enhanced
varieties are interesting, as in many basins the modeled response to enhanced varieties is low, yielding
negative net present values and benefit-cost ratios less than 1 for this investment. The exceptions are in
South Muntenia and Bucharest-Ilfov, where net present values for investment in varieties are positive,
and where benefit-cost ratios for this investment are between 1.4 and 2.7. The South Muntenia region
crops, which are characterized by a high concentration of maize, are most responsive to an investment in
new varieties. Wheat in these regions are also highly responsive to new varieties, increasing yields by
approximately 10 percent. Other regions’ crops (and crop mixes) are far less responsive to a change in
varieties.
It is also clear that expanded irrigation has a very high potential for a positive investment payoff,
provided water is available for the irrigation sector. The highest NPV results for irrigation investments
are indicated in the Southeast and South-Muntenia regions; high NPVs were also found for the
Northeast and West regions. The NPV results largely track with the spatial distribution of areas found to
be “economically viable” for irrigation system restoration and rehabilitation, a determination that was
made in a prior study. What this study adds, however, is an assessment of the potential revenue gains to
irrigated agriculture, relative to current rainfed yields, with full consideration of the effects of climate
change over time. The method reflects no spatial differentiation of rehabilitation costs – detailed analysis
is left to subsequent project-scale feasibility studies. Yet both the NPVs and the benefit-cost ratios do
reflect spatial variation in the returns to irrigation investment. The returns are likely to be strong in all
regions. The lowest benefit-cost ratio of 2.05 is in the Northeast region, which reflects good investment
potential, but the best returns are likely in the South Muntenia, Bucharest-Iflov, and West regions, which
all indicate benefit-cost ratios of more than 3 for irrigation investments. Further analysis can be readily
conducted to assess the robustness of this result across a range of climate scenarios (the findings in this
chapter focus on the medium-impact climate scenario), or using alternative climate input such as those
from Regional Climate Models, to which NMA has access.


Realizing the Best Green Growth Outcomes: Some Suggested Next Steps

As a result of this study, a set of transferable tools for water sector investment analyses has been
developed and will be delivered to local counterparts in the Ministry of Environment, as well as ANAR,
INHGA, and other nominated local stakeholders. This tool can be usefully applied to further assess the
irrigation and other water and agriculture investment options, both individually and in combination with
water use efficiency options. It can also be used to assess multi-sectoral strategies that may have water
use implications – for example, as described further below, a shift from fossil fuel-based thermoelectric
power generation to wind power has the likely implication of reduced water use, an implication which
could be assessed within the scope of this study, but which could be both consistent with Romania’s
energy sector planning and important to the future of Romania’s water sector.

The tools developed here are appropriate and well-suited for the types of analyses conducted and the
recommendations made, but additional work is needed if the tools are to be used for both ongoing water
resource planning and to assess more specific agriculture, irrigation, and water use efficiency investments.
Some important limitations need to be recognized in interpreting the results, especially the WEAP results,
as indicated below, and some data gaps should be addressed to support further work:

       Planning scale of the WEAP analysis: The WEAP tool is a planning tool, which means it reflects
        a spatial, temporal, and management resolution that is less granular than tools that focus on the
        operation of individual elements of water infrastructure, such as hydropower dams, irrigation
        schemes, or municipal water supply systems. The planning scale is particularly appropriate for
        identifying potential conflicts for water use, incorporating forecasts of demand and supply, and
        setting priorities among alternative investments. However, a planning scale analysis cannot
        reflect the full range of complexities in national water systems. For example, the unmet demands
          forecasted for the industrial sector are based on highly aggregated industrial sector data. A clearer
          picture of persistent unmet demands might be demonstrated with more highly resolved data
          inputs, which could be tested in the context of capacity building activities.

         Water allocation priorities: The WEAP system, as configured in this analysis, reflects relatively
          course schemes for setting priorities for water allocation among potentially competing uses. The
          priority scheme operates as a decision-rule, and does not reflect the possibility of more refined
          management approaches that have a seasonal, temporary or conditional nature, and that might
          therefore be deployed to better optimize the allocation of water in basins where supply is
          insufficient to meet the full range of competing demands. In particular, the level and seasonal
          timing of environmental flow requirements need to be carefully considered in all future work.


           Forecasting versus current situation: When interpreting the WEAP and other results in this
          paper, it is important to note that this study is focused on forecasting the future water system
          in Romania. All scenarios analyzed here – the baseline, Green, and Super Green investments
          incorporate the effects of future climate change. As a result, the findings presented here
          regarding the supply-demand water balance and allocation of water among water use sectors
          may differ from information that characterizes the current situation of water availability.

         Evaluation of model and results uncertainties. Any modeling exercise involves some degree of
          uncertainty. A forecasting exercise, in particular, can only be evaluated based on comparison or
          calibration of the models to current conditions.

 Additional thinking will be needed on several fronts to better manage water. For example, addressing
 unmet water demands in the baseline under the Super Green investment scenario will likely require
 additional water efficiency measures, if water-dependent industries are to continue to grow. Unmet
 industrial demands, in particular, are quite significant, and overall industrial demands constitute
 approximately 75 percent of the total water withdrawals of the country. Investment in reducing
 abstractions in the industrial sector is a potential option for meeting the unmet demands. These
 abstractions could potentially be reduced by shifting from using once-through systems to the closed cycle
 water cooling systems in thermal power plants, since closed cycle technology would lead to a decrease in
 water withdrawals but an increase in water consumption.110 A systems approach is needed to assess
 the tradeoff between decreased abstraction and increased consumption related to implementation of
 these types of technologies in Romania. The WEAP system, however, can also be used to assess multi-
 sector strategies. Moreover, compared to the nonrenewable fossil-based technologies (gas, coal,
 nuclear), renewable technologies (geothermal, retrofitted coal, solar, wind) are generally less water-
 intensive, leading to overall reductions in water abstraction.111 An interesting extension of the WEAP
 system used in this report would be to assess the tradeoff between water abstraction and consumption

110
    Baker, Jonathan, et al. "Quantifying the impact of renewable energy futures on cooling water use." JAWRA Journal
of the American Water Resources Association 50.5 (2014): 1289-1303
111
    Baker et al
 with increased use of renewable technologies, especially wind. A better understanding of these tradeoffs
 can move the country toward a better rationalization and allocation of water use that supports green
 growth and development for decades to come.

 The required investment in Green amounts to Euro 1.8 billion (discounted value112) or 0.05 percent of GDP,
 while a more aggressive Super Green scenario requires Euro 11.0 billion in investment costs (discounted
 value) or 0.32 percent of GDP. The schedule of investments puts a higher burden on the period 2015-2030
 when approximately 65 percent of the total required investment is made. It is also worth noting that the
 Green investments would be a manageable increase from 2013 levels of agricultural sector support of €1
 billion direct payments, and €1.3 billion of rural development expenditures. By contrast, Super Green
 investments would represent a substantial increase from current spending and would quickly exhaust the
 National Rural Development Plan (NRDP) 2014-2020 financial allocation for irrigation infrastructure,
 which is over 400 million EUR, or about €65 million annually.




112
      At five percent discount rate
CHAPTER 7. CAN AGRICULTURE FLOURISH IN A CHANGING CLIMATE?
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Romania is endowed with high quality agricultural resources and has a history of being “the bread
basket of Europe.”113 However, Romanian agriculture is characterized by low productivity, and the
county is importing food. An important factor of low productivity is a large share of subsistence agricultural
holdings. The ageing farm population and out-migration could trigger commercialization of the sector, but
effective policies will be essential to address the risk of land abandonment and the issue of land
fragmentation. Both mitigation and climate change adaptation are important. The main adaptation needs
include a reliable irrigation infrastructure, adjusted crop varieties, and improved fertilizer application.
Agriculture accounts for 17.4 percent of the total GHG emissions in the country, but is at the bottom of the
EU ranking in agriculture emission intensity, due to the low productivity of the sector; this will be reversed
once agriculture becomes more efficient, unless mitigation measures are taken.

The objective of the analysis was to assess the impact of green (adaptation) policies and investments on
sectoral outcomes through joint modeling of water and agriculture sectors and to provide financial
evaluation of the proposed infrastructure investment options. The models used are General Circulation
Models (GCMs), the Water Evaluation and Planning (WEAP) model, a climate runoff (CLIRUN) model and
an agricultural yield model (AquaCrop). The green scenarios include the following measures: rehabilitation
of irrigation infrastructure, adjustment of crop varieties, and improvement of fertilizer application. Analysis
was concluded with the Marginal Abatement Cost Curve, where two measures, currently supported by
the EU using National Rural Development Plan 2014-2020, were considered: minimum tillage and
manure management. The outcomes of modeling show the negative impact of climate change under
Baseline scenario on yields and the improvement in yields that can be achieved using green measures.
Irrigation was found to provide the largest gains in yields. Less ambitious Tier 1 scenario will require an
expenditure of US$2,003 million (present value (PV)) and will bring revenue of $US4,345 million (PV).114
In the more ambitious Tier 2, the costs are $US13.304 million (PV) and the revenues are $US30,663.9
million (PV). In both cases, benefits outweigh costs by more than twice.


The recommendations emphasize the importance of a rehabilitated and modernized irrigation,
specifically in the rainfed areas, and optimization of agronomic inputs, including fertilizer inputs.
Fertilizer programs show strong returns to investment throughout Romania, and for best results could
be targeted for those farms of medium size (roughly 10 ha), to ensure that the measures encourage
consolidation of the smallest farms while also avoiding providing an unnecessary subsidy to the largest
farms, which are already quite productive. Recommendations also include encouraging forest belts115 and
soil management to reduce soil erosion, promoting renewable energy sources, organic farming, good
farming practices, improving awareness of climate change and of the need for adaptation, and


113 1
     In particular, it was known for having very high quality wheat prior to World War II
114
    At 5 percent discount rate; costs include green investment and O&M
115See a detailed discussion of the importance of forest belts in the Forestry chapter
strengthening policy and institutional capacity. Financing needs for the two recommended measures–
no tillage agriculture and manure management - equal Euro 516 million (discounted value116) or 0.01
percent of GDP. Most of the financing will be needed in the last two decades of the modeling period, in
 2030-2050.


 CHALLENGES FOR GREENER GROWTH
 Overview
 Romania is endowed with high quality agricultural resources, has a history of being “the bread basket
 of Europe”, and tops the EU ranking by the share of the agriculture sector in the economy. Romania is
 among the best endowed European countries in terms of its agricultural land117, fertile chernozem
 soils, and water resources, and agriculture has been traditionally the backbone of the Romanian
 economy. While the share of agriculture in total gross value added (GVA) decreased over the last decade
 by more than 50 percent, to 6 percent of GVA in 2012, it is the highest in the EU, where it averages at 1.8
 percent. By total agricultural output in absolute terms, Romania ranks eighth in the European
 Union. 118 Agricultural employment constitutes 28.6 percent of Romania’s total employment (after
 dropping by 25 percent in the last decade), compared to the average of 5.3 percent in the EU. Romanian
 agriculture is crop- oriented: 73 percent of the agricultural output is derived from crop, the highest
 share in the EU, where the average is 52 percent. Agricultural land occupies almost 62 percent of
 Romania’s total land area, and nearly two-thirds of the 13.3 million hectares, which are considered
 highly-productive arable land, are mainly used to grow maize and wheat119.

 Despite the high quality land resources, Romanian agriculture is characterized by low productivity.
 The rural areas have much higher poverty incidence than the country’s average. As described above,
 Romanian agriculture constitutes 6 percent of the total GVA and 28.6 percent of the total employment,
 while the EU averages are 1.8 percent and 5.3 percent respectively (Figure 7.1). This points to a low
 productivity of the sector. In fact, average crop yields in Romania are 30-50 percent below the EU
 average and the labor productivity per full time equivalent in farming is four times lower than the EU
 average. The country, which used to be considered the bread-basket of Europe, was importing 70
 percent of its food in 2011120 and consistently had a negative agriculture trade balance (i.e., imports


116
    At four percent of GDP).
117
    Although the quality of the famous fertile chernozem soils worsened after introducing intensive agriculture
practices, which sharply decreased the soil organic matter content. After 1990, due to poor and unbalanced
fertilization, the soils have serious deficiencies in macro and microelements, mainly in the phosphorus soil content
(Source: Prof. Catalin Simota, Research Institute for Soil Sciences, Bucharest))
118
    Total agricultural output in Romania amounted to Euro 15.48 million in 2014. Eurostat. 2014. Agriculture, Forestry
and Fishery Statistics
119 Eurostat. Agricultural Census 2010

120
    World Bank. 2013. A Country Economic Memorandum. Romania: Reviving Romania’s Growth and Convergence
Challenges and Opportunities. Available at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/18028709/reviving-romanias-growth-convergence-
challenges-opportunities-country-economic-memorandum
 exceeded exports) over the period 1990-2012. While the 2013 trade balance was positive and there are
 preliminary estimates that it will stay positive in 2014, it is unclear if this represents a stable trend,
 especially considering the continued flat trend in agricultural production through 2013 (Figure 7.2). Also,
 the structure of agriculture trade shows a prevalence of commodities in export and domination of final
 products in imports.121 Agricultural incomes are low and the rural population is poor. Romania has
 the lowest agricultural income in the EU, amounting to only 22 percent of the average EU farm income
 per unit of full time employment.122 Romanian rural population is poorer than the rest of the country:
 more than 70 percent of Romania’s poor live in rural areas, while the share of rural population is 45
 percent.

 Figure 7.1. Agriculture is a significant part of the Romanian economy
               Percentage in total GVA and in total employmen1231, by sector, 2012




 Source: ARD Strategy, using data from Eurostat
 Note: Agriculture includes agriculture, forestry, and fishing.




121
   Eurostat data; Gavrilescu, Camelia. 2014. Agricultural Commodities and Processed Products Ratio in the
Romanian International Agrifood Trade. Institute of Agricultural Economics, Romanian Academy, Bucharest
122World Bank. 2013. A Country Economic Memorandum. Romania: Reviving Romania’s Growth and Convergence

Challenges                      and                      Opportunities.                    Available     at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/18028709/reviving-romanias-growth-convergence-
challenges-opportunities-country-economic-memorandum
123 NACE 2 is Eurostat's statistical classification of economic activities used since January 2008
 Figure 7.2. Agricultural trade balance is recovering, but production is flat
                 Agricultural output and trade balance




 Source: World Bank authors’ calculations based on data from Eurostat and Food and Agriculture Organization, 2015


 An important factor of low productivity is a large share of small and inefficient agricultural holdings.
 Romania has the lowest average farm size in the EU equaling to 3.4 ha, placing it only ahead of Malta
 and Cyprus according to this indicator124. It has a large number of very small agricultural holdings: its 3.7
 million farms account for a one-third of the total number of farms in the EU. Behind the averages is
 a dual farm structure: a very large number of subsistence and semi-subsistence farms and a small
 number of large commercial agricultural holdings, with the medium size farms almost non-existent. The
 dualistic farm structure is a result of the redistribution of the agricultural land after the collapse
 of the communist regime. Currently, more than 93 percent of the Romanian agricultural holdings,
 managing over 40 percent of the utilized agriculture area (UAA), are subsistence and semi-subsistence
 farms, while less than 0.4 percent of the farms, averaging over 421 ha, are large-scale commercial
 units125 (Figure 7.3a).




124
      Eurostat. Agriculture, forestry and fishery statistics. 2014 edition.
125   Eurostat. Agriculture, forestry and fishery statistics. 2014 edition
 Figure 7.3. Romanian agriculture is dominated by subsistence farms; the aging farm population can
             trigger a change in the sector structure in the next 15 years
             Farm structure in Romania, by size of land and age of holder, 2010

                           a. by size of holdings (ha)                            b. by age of holder




 Source of data: Eurostat, October 2013
The ageing farm population and out-migration of the younger generation could trigger a significant
change in the structure of the sector in the next 15 years. Today, already 40 percent of the farm
population is 65 and older and by 2030, this share will grow to 60 percent (Figure 7.3b). Rural out-
migration is also high. It is estimated that the population of rural areas in Romania is declining by an
average of 4.5 percent per year, while the range of this indicator at the county level is from 1.0 to 11.6
percent126. Within the next 15-20 years, over 2 million Romanian farms occupying 75 percent of the
utilized agricultural area will be subject to inter-generational transfer. Considering the high rate of rural
out-migration by the younger generations over the last two decades, this transfer will mean that the
land will be owed, in many cases, by non-farmers. Whether this will lead to a transformation of the
agriculture sector to a modern commercial one, requiring larger consolidated holdings, is, to a large
extent, a matter of policy: this demographic shift could trigger modernization of the Romanian
agriculture sector. Effective policies will be essential to address the risk of land abandonment and
counter further land fragmentation. The incomplete land reform is a major hindrance and transaction
costs for land registration an almost impossible hurdle to overcome. Policy-makers will be challenged to
tailor the various instruments under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), as to promote the
transformational process without negative social impacts.

Romania’s agricultural agenda is connected to the Common Agricultural Policy of the EU (CAP), which
provides a framework for mainstreaming climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. Since
the EU accession and implementation of the two pillars of the CAP (direct payments and the rural



 126
        National     Institute    of   Statistics.    Statistical  Yearbook       2011.      Available     at:
 http://www.insse.ro/cms/files/Annuar%20statistic/14/14%20Agricultura%20silvicultura_ro.pdf.
 development program), Romanian agriculture received access to the financial support from the CAP.127
 With the reform of the CAP in 2013, climate change mitigation and adaptation has become one of the
 cross-cutting objectives to be pursued by all member states through all agricultural support measures.
 The new direct payment scheme obliges member states to spend a minimum of 30 percent of their
 national envelope for “greening” activities: crop diversification, maintaining permanent grassland and
 maintaining the ecological focus areas.

 Romania’s National Rural Development Program (NRDP 2014-20) provides a strategy and measures
 for mitigation and adaptation in agriculture. The NRDP is eligible for co-financing under the European
 Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD). Within rural development measures, a minimum of 30
 percent of the total expenditure in Romania has to be earmarked for mitigation and adaptation128. Direct
 payments are available for holdings with a minimum size of the farm at 1 ha or the minimum size of the
 crop parcel at 0.3 ha, and over 70 percent of the farms in Romania do not qualify for it. Only 46 percent
 of the national envelope for direct payments has been secured by 99 percent of the qualifying farms.


 Challenges

 Climate Change Adaptation


 Climate change will be a significant factor of the future agricultural development in Romania. The
 negative impact of climate change is already a reality. The farming sector is most vulnerable to climate
 change. Romania’s agricultural production is heavily dependent on the climatic conditions during the
 vegetation period of the crops. It has been estimated that from 1980 to 2011, Romania suffered average
 annual weather related losses of $US 8,452 million, or 0.26 percent of GDP, of which 34 percent was
 linked to drought. The crops that experience the most severe impacts are typically rain-fed crops grown
 in the traditional summer season, such as maize, sunflower, sunflower, fruits and vegetables. On the
 other hand, some crops may benefit from the direct effects of climate change (as well as elevated CO2
 levels) – notably those that will benefit from a longer, warmer growing seasons such as autumn-sown
 winter wheat or pastures (see section Findings in this chapter) (Figure 7.4). The extent of vulnerability
 also depends on farm size. Large-scale crop farms commonly have very specialized production, and low
 diversification increases the risk of crop loss due to weather variability129 and extreme weather for

127
    During the first programming cycle of implementing the EU CAP, Romania was entitled to receive Euro 13.7 billion,
of which Euro 5.6 billion were primarily used to support farmers by direct payments (Pillar I of CAP) and Euro 8.1
billion - for a co-financed National Rural Development Program (NRDP 2007-13). For the current programming cycle
2014-20, the financial allocation increased to Euro 19.8 billion. European Commission (EC). Multiannual Financial
Framework 2014-20. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/budget/mff/index_en.cfm
128 European Commission (EC). Overview of CAP Reform 2014-20. December 2013. Prepared by Directorate

Generale Agriculture and Rural Development, Unit for Agricultural Policy Analysis and Perspectives. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/policy-perspectives/policy-briefs/05_en.pdf

129
      Weather variability from year to year is very high – notably in South, South-East and South-West, - making it very
 individual farms, as crops vary in climate sensitivity. At the same time, large scale farmers have better
 resources to adapt: they have access to financing, and economies of scale allow for the installation of
 the irrigation systems and climate resistant farming practices and technologies. Small-scale subsistence
 farmers are socially and economically vulnerable to climate change. However, in some cases, intrinsic
 resilience can be found within communities of small farmers due to their low inputs and recycling of
 resources, existing low carbon economies, diversity of the overall production within the community,
 strong social relations and (in some regions) alternative sources of off-farm income. The resilience and
 adaptive capacity of these more diverse communities has the potential to be further developed130.

 Figure 7.4. Yields of some crops increase with climate change
              Yields of main cereals in Romania, 2000-2012




 Source: ARD Strategy, using data from Eurostat


 The vulnerability of Romanian agriculture to climate change is strengthened by lacking agricultural
 extension and inadequate information flow from results of research. The dissolution of the National
 Agency for Agricultural Consultancy (ANCA) has disabled the effective delivery of advisory services. This
 deprived the ARD (agriculture and rural development) administration of its most important information
 dissemination instrument, while farmers lost access to knowledge and support services. Especially the
 subsistence farmers should be object of policy focus that entitles their fullest attention and continuous
 communication. In addition, farmers benefit only marginally from the results of research, due to
 deficiencies in advisory services, which increases their vulnerability. The research network needs to
 provide advice to subsistence farmers that is relevant for the specifics of small scale agriculture.

 To adapt to the changing climate, Romanian agriculture will need to have a reliable irrigation


difficult to have a farm business plan and increasing the risks, more so for small farms.
130
    Weather variability from year to year is very high – notably in South, South-East and South-West Romania series
of good years succeeded by bad years making very difficult to have a farm-business plan increasing the risks for
economic failure mainly for small farms
 infrastructure. The existing irrigation systems are old and only those owned by the water user
 organizations (WUO) were recently partially rehabilitated. The infrastructure was built in the pre-
 transition years for the non-market rural economy based on large state farms and is not fully relevant
 for today’s irrigation demand and farm structure. Also, the infrastructure was built without taking into
 account climatic characteristics of the rural areas and the cost of water and electricity (for pumping);
 much of it, for example, is in the semi-arid areas of south and south-east, where non-subsidised
 irrigation can be unaffordable for farmers. The irrigated area significantly declined in the 1990s and in
 the first decade of the 21st century and covered only 75,000 ha or 0.6 percent of the total UAA in 2010.
 A governmental emergency decree in 2013 led to an increase of the irrigated area to 180,900 ha.

 Mitigation

 Agriculture is a significant contributor to the overall GHG-emissions in Romania. Romanian agriculture
 accounts for 17.4 percent of the total GHG emissions in the country and is the third biggest emitter after
 energy and transport sectors. This level exceeds the EU average of 10 percent131. Romanian agricultural
 emissions are closely connected with the management of soils, livestock numbers, and rural biomass
 usage: the main components are nitrous oxide (N2O), which comes from soil nitrification and manure
 management, methane (CH4) from enteric fermentation by ruminants, and carbon dioxide (CO2) from
 fuel used mainly for heating and for operating machinery (the composition is 50 percent, 45 percent,
 and 5 percent respectively) (Figure 7.5).

          Figure 7.5. Agriculture contributes significantly to the overall emissions in Romania
                      Breakdown of GHG-emissions from Romanian agriculture




          Source: European Environmental Agency
 By the overall emission intensity, Romanian agriculture is at the bottom of the EU ranking, which is
 explained by the low productivity of agriculture and thus will be reversed once agriculture becomes
 more efficient, unless mitigation measures are taken. The country ranks the 5th lowest in the EU by


131
      Eurostat. Agriculture – Greenhouse Gas Emission Statistics. October 2013.
 emission intensity of its agriculture132 (Figure 7.6). It also has relatively low emission intensity by the main
 components: it ranks 6th lowest in the EU by carbon dioxide (CO2), 10th lowest by nitrous oxide (N2O),
 and 11th lowest by methane (CH4). This outcome is mainly explained by a high share of subsistence farms
 (see a discussion above), which rarely use non-organic nitrogen fertilizers and have low mechanization
 level, by a limited area of rice cultivation (a source of CH4), and by a low share of livestock production.
 Decreasing livestock numbers show a strong correlation with the reduction of agricultural GHG
 emissions (Figure 7.7), and a potential recovery of livestock farming will be accompanied by a rise in
 emissions. The livestock farming in Romania declined during transition. However, there are signs of
 recovery: while the cattle numbers are still declining (and are projected to decline for the next 10 years),
 the number of other ruminants (sheep and goats) have been increasing since 2005133. Once livestock
 economy improves, the agricultural GHG emissions will increase, unless measures are taken to control
 them: in particular, changes in feed need to be implemented to mitigate methane emissions.

 Figure 7.6. Romania ranks fifth lowest in the EU by emission intensity of agriculture
                GHG emissions from agriculture as percent of agriculture value added




 Source: World Bank staff calculations using data from European Environmental Agency and Eurostat




132   The overall GHG emissions from agriculture reduced by 53 percent in the period 1989-2011
133
      Source: The National Research and Development Institute for Soil Sciences, Dr. Catalin Simota
Figure 7.7. Decreasing livestock numbers have been correlated with emissions
             GHG emissions from agriculture and evolution of animal stock (1989-2011)




Source: ARD Strategy, using data from Eurostat



METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS134
Methodology
The objective of the analysis was to assess the impact of green (CC adaptation) policies and
investments on sectoral outcomes in agriculture through joint modeling of water and agriculture
sectors; and to provide financial evaluation of the proposed infrastructure investment options for
water and agriculture. The models used are General Circulation Models (GCMs), the Water
Evaluation And Planning (WEAP) model, a climate runoff (CLIRUN) model and an agricultural yield
model (AquaCrop). The models forecasted yields and prices of the crops that account for more
than 50 percent of Romania’s total agricultural production: maize, barley, potatoes, soybeans, sugar
beets, sunflower, wheat, tomatoes, and alfalfa. AquaCrop (Figure 7.8) was used to model crop
yields and irrigation demand. Last, the Water Evaluation and Planning System (WEAP) model was
applied, using the inputs from CLIRUN to analyze potential basin-level shortages in water available to
agriculture. Any estimated water shortage from the WEAP model was fed back to the biophysical step
to estimate the net effect of the shortage on irrigated crop yields. (See Chapter Water for more details)

The agriculture sector modelling addresses the issue of the possible adaptive responses by farmers to
climate change and the resulting marginal impact on agricultural production and incomes. Modeling
outcomes were measured by crop yields in irrigated and rain-fed areas, before and after the
implementation of green measures, and related revenues. Evaluated green investment options included


134
   Note that agriculture sector was included in the water sector modelling produced for this study and the
methodology and outcomes reflected in this section of the Agriculture chapter are mainly from Water sector
analysis (see details in the Water chapter), with the exception of the MACC curve.
the following:

       Adopting improved, drought tolerant, crop varieties;
       Converting from rainfed to irrigated crops;
       Improving soil drainage;
       Improving soil aeration;
       Optimizing fertilizer application;
       Optimizing the timing of irrigation water application.


The most promising options from a yield improvement perspective were: (1) improving crop varieties,
(2) optimizing fertilizer application, and (3) converting from rainfed to irrigated. The first two options
are included in the Green scenario and all three options are the focus of the Super Green scenario.
Importantly, investment in improved irrigation systems was included in the Super Green scenario.

Modeling started with a Baseline scenario for agriculture through 2050 . This baseline scenario assumes
that the economy of today would evolve over the next 35 years according to the pattern of West
European countries, while policies would gradually align with regional norms, no significant new
infrastructure investments would be made in agriculture beyond those already funded and/or under
construction. The Baseline scenario incorporates the expected impact of climate change on the demand
for irrigation water and the impact of climate on water supply for all demand sectors including irrigation.
The two green scenarios for agriculture – Green (modest adaptation effort) and Super Green
(ambitious adaptation effort) were formed. While the Baseline scenario involves no green
improvements, the Green and Super Green scenarios include the following adaptation measures:

   Green: the measures are applied over 530,000 ha, identified as medium productivity areas that have
    potential for high productivity, and include (i) improved fertilizer application, which results in yield
    increases in primarily rainfed crops and (ii) improved, drought tolerant, crop varieties (irrigated and
    rainfed), a measure supported by farmer training in their use.
   Super Green has the following measures: (i) extended application of improved fertilizer and varieties
    as in Tier 1, but applied over 2.1 million ha, also identified as areas of medium productivity with
    potential for high productivity, and (ii) expanded irrigation area, by 430,000 ha or 5 times above the
    existing level, in areas identified as viable for irrigation expansion.
          Figure 7.8. AQUACROP model




Source: Water sector technical chapter and Water technical paper. “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth
Development Program”, 2015, World Bank.


 In addition to modeling, analysis involved evaluation of infrastructure investment options for agriculture.
 It was designed to provide ranking, based on financial assessment, of several water and agriculture sector
 investments used in modeling. The financial assessment calculated the benefit-cost ratio and the net
 present value of the cash flow of benefits and costs. Costs included both capital and annual operating and
 maintenance costs. Benefits were calculated as direct financial flows that result from the investment.

 The analysis is concluded with the Marginal Abatement Cost Curve (MACC), which evaluates costs and
 abatement potential of two mitigation measures included in the NRDP: manure management and no-
 tillage agriculture. The analysis is done using an Excel-based simple tool.


 Findings
 Projected decrease in water availability due to climate change (temperature increase) will push up the
 demand for water for irrigation, thus increasing the already existing demand-supply gap.135 The green
 actions address this issue through several measures. The first set of measures is aimed at increased
 efficiency of irrigation: e.g., lining irrigation canals and replacing flood irrigation by sprinklers. These
 measures help reduce losses, but are insufficient when not enough water is available for supply. In this
 case, measures to improve reservoir management, increase basin storage, transfer water from basin to
 basin, use surface and ground water interchangeably are applied.
 Water sector modeling conducted by this study involved analysis of the impact of climate change on


 135
     Source of projections: Water sector modeling conducted for this study and presented in the chapter on water in
 this report.
 yields of nine crops over 12 basins in the Baseline scenario.136 The outcomes show that rainfed yields
 mostly decrease under all climate scenarios, with a varying severity of such impact among types of
 crops and an increasing impact over time. In particular, maize, barley, and winter wheat will experience
 the lowest impact and will even have higher yields with climate change in some basins, while
 sugarbeets, potatoes, and tomatoes will have the highest yield loss due to climate change. The regions that
 are projected to have the largest declines in yields are South-East, South-Mutenia, and Bucharest- lifov.
 The pattern is different for the irrigated crops: their yields increase due to climate change because the
 impact of higher temperatures is positive if not accompanied by reduced water availability (see a more
 detailed discussion of the impact of climate on crops in the Water chapter).

 What are the best green measures (investments) for increasing yields? The findings described above
 show that irrigation will be necessary for the efficiency of crop farming for most of the crops and in all
 regions of the country. Irrigation was found to be most significant adaptation measure providing the
 largest gains in yields. Also, selecting climate change resistant crops would be important for productivity
 of agriculture. In addition, optimizing fertilizer application will help achieve even higher yields. Selection of
 climate resistant crops increases yields by up to 10 percent for rainfed crops and fertilizer application
 optimization pushes the yields up by 4 to 70 percent depending on irrigation availability, region
 (climate), and type of crop.

 What are the costs and benefits of the green scenarios? Water sector modeling assessed that in the
 period from 2015 to 2040, scenario Tier 1 will require an adaptation expenditure, additional to any
 expenditures in the Baseline, of US$ 2,003.3 (present value (PV)) and will bring revenue of $US 4,345
 (PV). The resulting net income will be US$ 2,342 million (net present value(NPV)).137 Tier 2, applied over
 the same time period 2015-2040, requires a significantly higher investment, but also results in a much
 higher revenue that in Tier 1: the costs are $US 13,304 (PV), the revenues are $US 30,664 (PV) and the
 net income is $US 17,360 (NPV). In both cases, benefits outweigh costs by more than twice. The benefit-
 cost ratio is the highest for the rehabilitated irrigation and the enhanced fertilizer: the fertilizer ratio is
 2.4 in Tier 1 and 2.33 in Tier 2; while irrigation ratio is 2.59 in Tier 2 (it is not part of Tier 1).


 In the agriculture analysis for the MACC, two mitigation measures are considered: minimum tillage
 and manure management, both supported by the EU and the NRDP. The NRDP program includes
 afforestation, no tillage or low tillage crop agriculture, crop rotation, manure management (incl.
 composting and storage), organic farming, and the promotion of renewable energy sources. Based on
 the available data, four of these measures are included in the Romania Marginal Abatement Curve: no
 tillage agriculture, manure management, afforestation, and renewable energy sources. While the analysis
 of the latter two measures is presented in Forestry and the Energy chapters of this report, the former two
 measures are presented in the chart below. The No tillage measure reflects the benefits of using no
 tillage as compared with the current practice of using full tillage in the fields. In the BAU scenario,


136
      The full water sector analysis is presented in the chapter on water in this report
137   At 5 percent discount rate; costs include green investment and O&M
 the measure is applied to a limited area of 90,000 hectares. Under Green scenario, the area where no
 tillage is applied is expanded to 300,000 hectares in the first five years of project implementation and later
 to 900,000 hectares. The 300,000 ha are based on the arable land, which is susceptible to desertification.
 While desertification is the threat and motive of the minimum tillage scheme, the poor manure
 management (collecting, storage, treating, applying) of the past is the motive for the new measure
 "composting manure”. Farmers applying this measure undergo stringent practices in storage and
 treatment of manure, which impacts GHG savings per animal units (not per ha). The MACC analysis
 shows that the two evaluated measures have low cost of abatement and a reasonably high abatement
 potential amounting to 7.6 percent of the total abatement potential from the following sectors/subsectors:
 power supply, energy efficiency, transport, forestry, and agriculture (Figure 7.9).138

 Financing needs for the recommended measures that were evaluated – no tillage agriculture and manure
 management - are presented in Table 3. The measures are relatively inexpensive, deliver high level of
 abatement and are beneficial for the sector development. The total discounted net cost of both measures
 in the period 2015-2050 equals Euro 516 million or 0.01 percent of GDP. The costs increase over the
 modeling period significantly, and almost half of the total financing will be needed for the last ten years of
 the period. The benefits appear with a very slight delay, almost immediately after the
 implementation of the measures.

      Figure 7.9. Measures evaluated for agriculture have low cost and relatively high abatement potential
                  Romania Marginal Abatement Curve for agriculture




                                                                                           no tillage




      Source of data: World Bank staff calculations using data from Prof. Catalin Simota, Research Institute for Soil Sciences, Bucharest




138
      See cross-sectoral analysis in the MACC chapter and in MACC technical paper
 Table 7.1: Agriculture investments have low cost and are beneficial for the economy
          Schedule of agriculture investments by proposed measure, millions of 2010 Euros

                                                   2015-           2020          2030         2040     Total 2010-
                                                    2020           -             -            -             2050
                                                                    2030         2040         2050


                                                                      Not discounted                   Discounted*

 Euro million:
 No tillage                                                   50           171          248     359       375
 Manure management                                            19           64           94      136       141
 Total                                                        69           235          341     495       516
 Percent of GDP:
 No tillage                                           0.005          0.009        0.011        0.013     0.008
 Manure management                                    0.002          0.003        0.004        0.005     0.003
 Total                                                0.008          0.012        0.015        0.018     0.011
 *At four percent discount rate
 Source: World Bank Staff calculations and MACC chapter and technical report



 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The recommendations emphasize the importance of rehabilitated and modernized irrigation to
restore irrigated production to currently rainfed areas and optimization of agronomic inputs, including
fertilizer inputs. These measures would require a significant investment in high-quality extension services,
as well as increased and/or subsidized availability of fertilizers, with the payoff being a significantly
increased crop yield. The highest investment payoffs for these measures are in the South Muntenia,
Northeast, and Northwest Development Regions. In general, fertilizer programs show strong returns to
investment throughout Romania, and for best results could be targeted for those farms of medium size
(roughly 10 ha), to ensure that the measures encourage consolidation of the smallest farms while also
avoiding providing an unnecessary subsidy to the largest farms, which are already quite productive.
Recommendations also include encouraging windbreaks and soil management to reduce soil erosion,
promoting renewable energy sources, promoting organic farming, improving good farming practices,
improving awareness of climate change and the need for CC adaptation, and strengthening policy and
institutional capacity is vital to support the recommended interventions.
 The agricultural productivity measures would require a significant investment in high-quality
 extension services, as well as increased availability of fertilizers, with the payoff being a significantly
 increased crop yield. A targeted approach to new varieties – focused on the South Muntenia region,
 but also on maize production in selected southern regions – is likely to be most successful. It is also clear
 that expanded irrigation has a very high potential for a positive investment payoff, provided water is
 available for the irrigation sector.

 Improvements in good farming practices, like manure management and minimizing erosion through
 afforestation139 can reduce vulnerabilities. Other measures, such as promoting organic farming and
 renewable energy from biomass, helping farmers and rural communities adapt to climate change, and
 improving awareness and better management of risks in the agriculture sector, would complement the
 key investments in adaptation. All the listed measures are aimed at modernization of agricultural
 holdings and at adaptation and mitigation. Therefore, sufficient investment support should be
 earmarked for these measures within the NRDP 2014-20.

 Strengthening policy and institutional capacity is vital to support the recommended interventions. The
 capacity of the current research and development should be broadened, as to strengthen applied sciences
 on new climate-resilient crop varieties, but also to improve systematic monitoring of soil, surface,
 groundwater and overall biodiversity. The EU- and national-funded support schemes should be revisited,
 so as to improve the uptake of all farmers participating in climate change mitigation and adaptation
 measures.

 Financing needs for the two recommended measures–no tillage agriculture and manure management-
 -are low and are highly beneficial from the point of view of sector efficiency. Emission reduction is also
 relatively high. The total discounted net cost of both measures in the period 2015-2050 equals €516
 million or 0.01 percent of GDP. Most of the costs are incurred later in the modeling period, with 43
 percent falling in the last decade of the period, 2040-2050. In the first five years, 2015-2020, the
 implementation of the measures will require only €69 million or six percent of the estimated financing
 need for 2015-2050.




139
      See a detailed description and analysis of afforestation measures in the chapter on Forestry
CHAPTER 8. CAN FORESTRY                                 REALIZE ITS             MITIGATION              AND
ADAPTATION POTENTIAL?

CHAPTER SUMMARY
Romania has the largest remaining intact tract of contiguous natural and naturally regenerated forests
in Europe. Forests are important for sequestering (removing) emissions, thus mitigating climate change.
In Romania, the Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector (mostly its forestry component)
is significantly contributing to emission reduction: it was removing 27 percent of emissions produced by
other sectors every year (annual average) in the period from 2000 to 2011 and 24 percent during 1990 -
1999. Forests are also negatively affected by climate change, and adaptation efforts are needed to
preserve them and their ability to sequester carbon. In particular, changes in precipitation and
temperature can cause the drying of forests, reduction in forest growth, biological risks including pest
infestation, and forest fires. Shifts in ecozones suitable for particular tree species also require adaptation.

As Romania transitioned from centralized to market economy, the forest sector underwent significant
changes. The forest land restitution process modified the structure of forest land ownership: the holdings
are now predominantly small and the forest system is fragmented, making sustainable forest
management a challenging task. Incentives are not aligned for owners of small private holdings to comply
with the forest regulatory framework. Limited road accessibility to forests is another constraint. Lack of
adequate financial resources, especially to assist smallholders, is also a barrier to afforestation of
agricultural land and establishment of forest belts.

The analysis was based on modeling using a business as usual scenario and three green scenarios. It
concluded that for the timeframe considered (2015-2030), the quantity of CO2 removals is highest under
the most aggressive green scenario, which assumes a wide set of measures including intensive
afforestation at a rate of 10,000 ha annually, improved forest management, creation of woody biomass
at a rate of 5,000 ha per year, “no-till” practices for 40 percent of the arable land per year, among other
measures. Additional evidence from forest conditions similar to Romania indicate that sustainable forest
management enforced on both public and private lands, ensuring biomass regeneration and preventing
degradation, can optimize emission reduction. In addition to the national and international modeling
exercises, marginal abatement cost curves (MACC) were estimated for three measures: afforestation,
sustainable management of protection forests, and sustainable management of production forests. The
MACCs show that the proposed measures provide a significant potential abatement level of 1,828 kt CO 2
per year in 2050. The examined measures are evaluated as highly cost-efficient.

Recommendations stress the importance of sustainable forest management and the need to
acknowledge it within the country’s mitigation strategy. Adaptation measures in forestry, including
those that benefit other sectors, namely agriculture and energy, should be supported. Policies related to
forest fragmentation should be implemented, in particular those aimed at engaging smallholders in the
 sustainable forest management activities. Capacity for monitoring the contribution of forest management
 to mitigation should be improved. The system for forest fires detection, monitoring and management
 should be upgraded. It is critical to improve road accessibility. Investment in new technology, marketing
 and processing will support all the recommended actions. Financing needs for all three priority measures
 that were evaluated--afforestation, sustainable management of protection forests, and sustainable
 management of production forests--equal €115 million (discounted140) for the period 2015-2050 or just
 0.002 percent of GDP. When the benefits are taken into account, the total discounted net cost is a negative
 €86 million.


 SECTOR BACKGROUND

 Romania has the largest remaining intact tract of contiguous natural and naturally regenerated forests
in Europe. The forest volume is high, averaging at 218 m3/ha, above the European average of 147 m3/ha.
Forests cover 6,539 million ha, or 27.4 percent, of Romania’s total land surface,141 below the EU average of
38 percent.142 Forest removals are below the allowed annual cut (AAC) level of 22.3 million ha: in 2013, only
19.06 million ha were removed (59 percent of the growing stock volume), mainly due to limited
accessibility. Romania’s forest stock is young and therefore has a high potential to absorb CO2 (See Figure
 8.1).143

 Based on the provisions of the Forest Management Plans (FMP), 46.7 percent of the Romania forests
have a production function and the remaining 53.3 percent are protection forests used for soil
protection (43 percent), water protection (31 percent), flood protection (5 percent), recreation (11
percent), and science (10 percent).144 The Romanian Network of Protected Areas includes areas of national
importance, reserves, parks and Natura 2000145 sites, covering approximately 23 percent of the forest area.
Excluding the Danube Delta Biosphere Reserve, there are 13 national parks and 14 nature parks.146 These
27 large protected areas include 134 nature reserves and natural monuments, covering 1.17 million ha.



140
    At a three percent discount rate.
141
     National Environment Protection Agency (NEPA) of Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC). 2014.
Raport Național Privind Starea Mediului Anul 2013 (National Report Regarding the Environment Status). Romania:
Bucharest. Available at: http://www.anpm.ro/documents/12220/2209838/RSM-
2013+fata+verso+final.pdf/76379d09-39c7-4ef9-9f04-d336406eda62
142 Data Development Platform, World Bank

143
     The exception to this rule is the first two to three years of the tree life when the tree’s sequestration potential is
still low
144
    Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC). 2012. National Strategy on Climate Change 2013 – 2020.
Bucharest
145 Natura 2000 is an EU network of nature protection established under the 1992 Habitats Directive with the aim to

protect Europe's most valuable and threatened species and habitats
146
    Ioja CI, Patroescu M, Rozylowicz L, Popescu VD, Verghelet M, Zotta MI and Felciuc M. 2010. "The Efficacy of
Romania’s Protected Areas Network in Conserving Biodiversity" in Biological Conservation 143:2468–2476
More than 693 nature reserves and natural monuments are outside the large protected areas and cover
102,534 ha.147

Romania is known globally for its wood products. The forestry sector in Romania, including industry,
contributes between 1.9 percent and 4.5 percent to Romania’s GDP.148 It is also an important employer,
especially in rural areas. A third of the harvested logs is used as energy source, mostly for heating. Export
of logs is also a significant part of the forestry export, but it has been decreasing since 1990, while imports
of logs from Russia and Ukraine have been on the rise. Wood products in Romania include sawn wood,
lumber, pulp and paper, panel and veneer and furniture. The forestry sector constituted seven percent of
national exports in 2011.149 The furniture manufacturing sector represented 1.6 percent of Romania’s GDP
in 2009, and grew to 1.9 percent in 2011.150 There is a longstanding tradition of producing solid wood
furniture, some of which are specialized furniture for foreign markets

 Mitigation




147
      Borlea GF, Ignea G. 2006. Lucrările sesiuni ştiinţifice Pădurea şi dezvoltarea durabilă (The Present Forest Policy and
the Market for Forest Products). Braşov, Romania: 2005-2006. 633-638 ; Abrudan, I.V., Marinescu, V, Ignea, G. and
Codreanu, C. 2005. "Present situation and trends in Romanian forestry" in Legal Aspects of European Forest
Sustainable Development: Proceedings of the 6th IUFRO 6.13.00 Group Meeting. Editura Universitatii Transilvania
din Brasov, Romania:157–171
148
    The estimates differ depending on the approach used in calculations: FAO estimates it at 1.6 to 2.1 percent in the
period 2000-2011 (FAO. 2014. Contribution of the forestry sector to national economies, 1990-2011, by A. Lebedys
and Y. Li. 2014. Contribution of the Forestry Sector to National Economies, 1990-2011. Forest Finance Working Paper
FSFM/ACC/09. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome, while another estimate is 4.5 percent (Abrudan, Ioan
Vasile, Viorel Marinescu, Ovidiu Ionescu, Florin Ioras, Sergiu Andrei Horodnic, and Radu Sestras. 2009.
“Developments in the Romanian Forestry and its Linkages with other Sectors” in Notulae Botanicae Horti
Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca: 37 (2): 14-21
149
    FAO database
150
    FAO database; FRD Center Market Entry Services. 2011. Romanian Furniture Sector - 2011 Market Overview.
Report prepared for the Trade and Investment Promotion Section, Embassy of the Republic of Poland in Romania
 Forests are important for sequestering (removing) emissions, thus mitigating climate change 151 .

 In Romania, LULUCF sector (mostly its forestry component) is significantly contributing to emission
 reduction: it was removing 27 percent of emissions produced by other sectors every year (annual
 average) in the period from 2000 to 2011 and 24 percent during 1990 - 1999. This is shown in Figure 8.2,
 where Romania’s emissions calculated with the inclusion of LULUCF are compared with the emission level
 calculated without LULUCF contribution. Romania’s 2013 National G H G Inventory Report shows that
 in the period from 1989 to 2011, the GHG emissions calculated without taking LULUCF into account
 decreased by 54.9 percent; however, when factoring in LULUCF, they decreased by 61.1 percent. 152 A
 detailed analysis of both emissions and removals from the LULUCF sector reveals that emissions are largely
 a result of land conversion to settlements, industrial uses, and similar uses, while forest land is the largest
 contributor of emission removals. Converting land to forest (afforestation) also contributes significantly to
 sequestration (Table 8.1). In particular, afforestation of degraded lands with limited agricultural
 potential153 offers the opportunity to reduce GHG emissions while generating adaptation co-benefits and
 strengthening climate resilience. Every year, such tracts of agricultural land become classified as “lowest
 suitability” in spite of measures taken to ameliorate the agricultural potential of the area (e.g., irrigation,
 land reclamation and use of fertilizers). There is an estimated 2 million ha of such agricultural land every
 year. 154




151
    On average, temperate forests, such as those found in Romania, store approximately 168 tC/ha (Gorte, 2009),
both in the vegetative matter above and below ground, and in the forest soils
152
    Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC). 2013. Romania’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory 1989-2011.
Bucharest. Estimated using methodology presented in Good Practice Guidance for LULUCF, IPCC, 2003
153 Agricultural land subject to adverse meteorological and climatic factors such as drought, flooding, landslides, low

humus reserves or low supplies of key soil nutrients
154
    Agricultural land scoring below 25 points in soil quality is not of economic interest for agriculture,b ecause
production costs far exceed benefit from potential agricultural yields. (Bohateret VM. 2012. "Readjusting Romania’s
Forestry Policy with a View to the Year 2050" in Journal of Settlements and Spatial Planning. mr. 1/2012
Figure 8.2. LULUCF sector (mostly its forestry component) is significantly contributing to emission
            reduction
            Emissions removals by LULUCF




Source: Chandrasekharan Behr and Popa, 2014




Table 8.1: Converting land to forest contributes significantly to sequestration
                    Net GHGs emissions for the LULUCF Sector in 1989, 2010 and 2011

                                                               Emissions (+) / Removals (-), Gt CO2e
              IPCC subcategories                                                                    2012
                                                            1989       2010       2011
              5A1. Forestland remaining Forestland         -18,863    -22,263    -20,384       -19,672
              5A2. Land converted to Forestland              -122      -2,498    -3,061         -3,048
              5B1. Cropland remaining Cropland              -5,784     -2,336    -3,223         -1,661
              5B2. Land converted to Cropland                -17         18         20                31
              5C1. Grassland remaining Grassland             NA         NA         NA                NA
              5C2. Land converted to Grassland               -654       130        118               138
              5D1. Wetlands remaining Wetlands               NO         NO         NO                NO
              5D2. Land converted to Wetlands                -215       -126      -130               -53
              5E1. Settlements remaining Settlements          NA         NA        NA                NA
              5E2. Land converted to Settlements            4,125       419        410               411
              5F1. Other land remaining Other Land           NA         NA         NA                NA
              5F2. Land converted to Other Land              -30        789        835               767
       Source: MECC (2013) and MEWF (2015): Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests. 2015. Information on
       LULUCF Actions in Romania. Report under art. 10 of Decision 529/2013 of European Parliament and the Council,
       Bucharest, http://mmediu.ro/new/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/Report-LULUCFart.10Decision-529.pdf
 Climate Change Adaptation
 Climate change can cause the drying of plants and species and decrease the growth of forests. Projected
 changes in precipitation and temperature in Romania are anticipated to weaken forest systems and
 decrease forest growth. Already, approximately 1 million m3 of timber in Romania is lost annually to wind
 and snow, and approximately 130,000 ha of the designated forest areas in the lowland are affected by
 drying due to soil water deficit. Tree volume growth is already dropping due to climate related damage.
 For example, average defoliation of beech increased from 29 percent to 42 percent, since the damaging
 effect of the drying phenomena occurred between 2001 and 2004.155 Up to 30 percent reduction in tree
 population and a decrease in growth, especially for forests in the plain areas, has been projected.156

 Climate change causes shifts in ecozones, and the new ecozones can be unsuitable for the existing trees.
 Climate change also causes and compounds biological risks to forests including pest infestation. With
 climate change, ecozones shift, and previously planted trees might now be in an ecozone not suitable for
 them. Tree species outside of their natural areas are more susceptible to negative biotic factors – pests,
 water stress, and so on. Also, regeneration patterns change. In the mountains, forests are invading
 pastures. In some places, the naturally regenerated areas at the border of forests and alpine pastures are
 afforested with resinous species (Juniperus sp. Pinus mugo, etc.) that now require special management.
 In the plains and southern Romania, non-native species are invading natural forests. Projected changes in
 temperature and precipitation will cause species such as beech to lose their competitive vigor in the Outer
 Eastern Carpathians.157 An example of climate change-related pest infestation is an increase in outbreaks
 of the bark beetle at higher altitudes and latitudes.158

 Forest fires are intricately linked with forest pests and diseases –infested forest, with dying trees more
 susceptible to forest fire, and fire damaged stands more prone to pest infestation. Forest fires incidence
 in Romania under current climatic conditions is rather low. In the future, however, the occurrence of
 forest fire in the south and south west of the country is highly likely.159This area is similar to the area with
 the biggest incidence of forest fires in Europe (the Mediterranean region), where 85 percent of the forest
 fires are presently recorded, in its exposure to drought and level of management.160 Currently, Romania
 has a monitoring and intervention forest fires system that involves mainly the National Forest
 Administration (NFA) Romsilva and local authorities in charge of emergency events (County Inspectorates
 for Emergency Situations). This system is capable of coping with the present level of fire incidence, but its


155
    Chira D., Danescu F., Geambasu N, Rosu C., Chira F., Mihalciuc V., and Surdu A. 2005. "Particularitati Ale Uscarii
Fagului in Perioada 2001-2004" in Annals of Forest Research 48:3-20
156
    ICAS, 2005 (not in rapid assessment either. There’s only ICAS, 2013. Unless the Chira et al in the Anal ICAS reference
is 2005
157
    Trombik J., Hlasny T., Dobor L. and Barcza Z., 2013. "Climatic Exposure of Forests in the Carpathians: Exposure
Maps and Anticipated Development" in International Scientific Conference for PhD students
158
    Hlásny T and Turčáni M. 2009. "Insect Pest as Climate Change Driven Disturbances in Forest Ecosystems" in
Strelcová et al. (eds) Bioclimatology and Natural Hazards, Springer Nederlands pp. 165-178.
159
    Adam, 2010
160 Barbosa et al., 2008
 effectiveness is negatively affected by many issues including forest accessibility.

 Forests are important in ecosystem-based adaptation strategies for other sectors, such as agriculture
 (see Figure 8.3). Studies by The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB) illustrate the economic
 benefits from ecosystem based adaptation including using forests for adaptation to CC. Operationalization
 of this concept is increasing, although additional research is needed to better understand adaptation
 benefits. Examples from countries such as Germany, UK, and Belgium point to clear ecosystem benefits
 but offer less discussion on adaptation.
      Figure 8.3. Forests for Adaptation, Adaptation for Forests
                Diagram of forests’ role in ecosystems and adaptation




      Source: Locatelli, 2011.



 CHALLENGES OF GREENING AND LOW CARBON FOR THE SECTOR
 As Romania transitioned from centralized to market economy, the forest sector underwent significant
 changes. The restitution completely modified the structure of forest land ownership: the holdings are
 now predominantly small and the forest system is fragmented, making sustainable forest management
 a challenging task.161 By 2013, 36 percent of the forest land was privately owned, while only 64 percent
 remained in the public domain, including state and municipal ownership (Figure 8.4). There are an
 estimated 830,200 forest owners, and most of them (99.8 percent) own small forest parcels under 10 ha
 (Table 8.2). Private forest ownership spans both small and large, and individuals, indivisible communes,
 and churches. This is reflected in the structure of land ownership under the Natura 2000 protection
 network (Figure 8.5).




161
      World Bank. 2011. Romania Functional Review: Environment, Water and Forestry. Vol 2: Forestry
 Table 8.2: The forest system is fragmented
             Distribution of forest land by size among private owners (without forests owned by local
             authorities)


             Size of forest land parcel    Number of owners      Total Area (million ha)

             Forest < 10 ha                828,000               0.85
             Forest > 10 ha                2,200                 1.35

             Total                         830,200               2.20

 Source: Chandrasekharan Behr and Popa, 2014


      Figure 8.4. Forests are mostly privately owned
                     Forest ownership by land area, 2013




      Source: MECC, 2014


The restitution process has fragmented the forest system and raised challenges for ensuring sustainable
forest management. Currently, there is no national cadaster of forest lands. Providing incentives for
sustainable forest management or enabling consolidation initiatives requires knowing where the forest
parcels’ boundaries are and who owns each parcel. Currently this information is not available as there is
no cadaster of forest lands. Approximately 1 million ha of forests, or 15 percent of the total forest area, are
being administered with no management plans. Many of the smallholder lots fall in this category because
of the high expense of complying with policy requirements for forest management planning. The parcels
without management plans are scattered throughout the forest ecosystem, creating fragmentation and
augmenting the challenge of implementing sustainable management of forests.

Incentives are not aligned for owners of small private holdings to comply with the forest regulatory
framework. A barrier to the creation of forest belts and afforestation of agricultural land is the lack of
financial resources to support such activities, especially for smallholders. The main reason for poor
 performance of the afforestation programs was that the owners were not properly compensated. The
 forest regulatory framework, including technical norms that regulate compositions, schemes and forest
 regeneration technologies, are a challenge to implement under the new reality of diverse forest
 ownership types and a dynamic economy.162. The Romanian national forestry management norms and
 practices are in essence legacies of the past. The costs associated with complying with the technical norms
 and forest management planning requirements are unaffordable for small forest owners. As a result,
 logging activities often violate the law – some of them are sustainable, and some are not.

      Figure 8.5: Private forest ownership is diverse
                   Forest ownership under the Natura 2000 protection network, 2012




      Source: MECC, 2013; data from the national research agency for the forest sector (ICAS)


 Coupled with fragmented ownership, the lack of resources to approve and subsequently implement
 available management plans, is a serious challenge for sustainable forest management. There are 272
 management plans covering the protected areas, of which only twelve have been approved. This also has
 consequences for flood management as investments in flood management in upper forested watersheds
 were traditionally done by the forest administrators within forested areas. Without approval and budget
 these areas cannot have flood management. Investments in implementing the management plans are
 important for decreasing the incidence of the flooding, water turbidity and regulation of debris. However,
 due to the changes in ownership and the lack of budgetary allocation to NFA Romsilva to continue those
 investments, the incidence of flooding and fast moving water is increasing.163

 Limited road accessibility to forests is a significant constraint to sustainable forest management in
 Romania. As a result, harvesting levels are below the recommendations of forest management plans in
 inaccessible areas, while accessible forest stands are over harvested. Fire and pest control are inefficient
 due to lack of access. The average road density for Romania is 6.4 m/ha, which is significantly below other

162
    Stancioiu, P.T. , Abrudan, I.V., Dutcha, I. Marinescu, V., Ionescu O., Ioras, F., Horodnic, S.A. and Sestras, R. 2010.
"The Natura 2000 Ecological Network and Forests in Romania - Some Implications on Management and
Administration" in International Forestry Review Vol.12(1).
163
   Giurgiu, 2010
 European countries with broadly similar topography.164 A low density of forest roads implies the lack of
 access to timber resources in inaccessible sites, and/or the need to skid logs for longer distances from the
 point where they are felled to roads where they can be loaded onto trucks. Exploitation costs are higher
 since they increase with the length of skidding. Longer skidding distance also results in erosion and soil
 compaction on arterial skidding trails.

 Forest belts should be used more to provide climate resilience and benefit agricultural systems . Forest
 belts can help improve microclimatic conditions of growth for protection of agricultural crops, up to a
 distance 25 times the height of belt in the sheltered areas and 5 times in the exposed areas, due to the
 reduction of wind speed by 31 to 55 percent in the sheltered area and by 10 to 15 percent in the exposed
 one. Belts are estimated to sequester 40 tCO2e/ha/year. Other benefits include increased humidity and
 level of ionization of air at soil level, which enhances soil fertility, reduces depth and duration of freezing,
 and decreases evapotranspiration. However, in Romania, forest belts are not used enough and are even
 being eliminated. In the lowland regions, frequent and lengthy dry periods have been associated with
 climate change, the systematic destruction of irrigation systems, and the cutting of trees and forests that
 were used as wind breaks. This is having a negative impact on crop production, the environment, and
 living conditions.165

 In the face of climate change, Romanian forest managers need to improve and choose the appropriate
 management approaches for maintaining and increasing ecosystem services from forests. Romania has
 a national strategy for combating drought, land degradation and desertification. Activities included
 planting of trees to reduce soil erosion and restore degraded lands. The draft of the New Forest
 Development Strategy (2013) envisages a role for forests in climate change mitigation and highlights
 necessary measures for adapting forests. A new Forest Code was adopted by the Romanian Parliament in
 March 2015. The key changes include: (1) judicious administration of national forest on the principle of
 territoriality, with solutions for managing small forest properties which are currently not covered by forest
 management and services; (2) establishment of national targets for afforestation; (3) differentiation in
 the requirements for management planning based on the size of the property; (4) restrictions on the total
 quantity of wood (per species and varieties) that can be processed by companies to avoid monopolistic
 situations. Also, a new Government Decision seeks to improve the due diligence process and institutional
 capacity to prevent the introduction of illegally harvested wood on the market, by establishing a system
 for control and supervision of wood material traceability.

 Forestry measures in Romania are estimated to provide significant mitigation and adaptation benefits
 in meeting its 2030 and 2050 GHG emission reduction targets. The frameworks for achieving the EU wide
 mitigation target do not include forestry; therefore, implementation of these measures would be
 voluntary actions. Romania's other EU obligations, however, justify making the necessary investments in
 the measures - e.g., the EU obligations for Natura 2000, which occupies 32 percent of forests under

164
    World Bank. 2011. Romania Functional Review: Environment, Water and Forestry. Vol 2: Forestry. Austria 36
m/ha,Switzerland 40 m/ha and France 26m/ha
165
    Popovici et al., 2013
 protection status (considering that 900kt CO2 can be abated from better management of Protected Areas).
 The necessary investments are also warranted based on the co-benefits they generate - e.g., co- benefits
 of afforestation to adaptation of agriculture and restoration of degraded and abandoned agricultural land.
 The EU funding available through the NRDP would not be adequate to cover the costs associated with
 these measures. However, necessary financing could be more closely met by mainstreaming some of the
 necessary forestry actions into other EU funded programs - those supporting ecological reconstruction,
 SMEs, education and extension, and other aspects of NRDP, -prioritizing interventions and making
 sustainable management of forests profitable by reforming the policy and regulatory requirements
 (the latter would also help bring in private funds).

 METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS

 The analysis was based on modeling using the business-as-usual scenario and three green scenarios.
 Under the business-as-usual scenario and the assumptions used in the Joint Research Center of the
 European Commission and the Institute of Science and Atmospheric Sciences (ICAS) modeling exercise of
 2012, a shift of trees to older age classes is expected under the current forest management norms and
 accessibility conditions. Therefore, there will be a decrease in the carbon sink for the period 2013-2020.
 The study states that an abrupt decrease in carbon sink (during the period 2013-2020) could happen if the
 technical norms and regulations that dictate forest management planning and harvesting wood are
 revised, if there is large-scale investment in forest infrastructure, or if there are large scale natural
 disturbances, which may imply larger concentrated cuttings in some years.166

 The second study, led by ICAS, examines GHG projections for 2015-2030 under three scenarios (Figure
 8.7):

         Scenario 1 (S1) assumes the current practices of resource management for all types of lands. This
          scenario also includes afforestation of 2,000 ha annually.
         Scenario 2 (S2) includes measures to improve land use by increasing annual harvest of wood to
          the pre-1989 levels, when there was excessive logging and allowable annual extraction levels
          were constantly exceeded by 15-30 percent.167 The other measures included in the scenario are
          afforesting degraded lands at the rate of 5,000 ha per year, including re-vegetation and forest
          belts, from 2012 to 2030; and implementing ‘no-till’ practices for 30 percent of the arable land
          per year, in rotation.
         Scenario 3 (S3) includes measures to improve land use and additional financial incentives for


166
    It should be noted that a recent submission on LULUCF actions to the European Commission (dated January 2015),
it was noted that what has to be avoided is the lack of enforcement of laws that facilitate sustainable forest
management across both private and public forest lands. The main concern is related to practices that delay biomass
regeneration and larger emissions from bare forest soils, stand degradation by selective cuts and regeneration with
native forest growing low wood density tree species
  167
      Bohateret VM. 2012. "Readjusting Romania’s Forestry Policy with a View to the Year 2050" in Journal of
Settlements and Spatial Planning. mr. 1/2012
              specific public good services. This will include measures to increase annual harvest of wood to
              pre-1989 levels through intensification of forest management; afforestation of degraded lands at
              a rate of 10,000 ha annually, including re-vegetation and forest belts; creation of woody biomass
              from fast growing crops at a rate of 5,000ha/year; implementation of “no-till” practices for 40
              percent of the area of arable land per year from 2015 to 2030, in rotation; and increasing the
              protected area of nature conservation and biodiversity protection.

      This study concludes that for the timeframe considered (2015-2030), the highest benefit (most CO2
      removal) is under S3. In contrast, the benefits under S2 and S1 are lower, i.e. less CO2 is removed each
      year (Figure 8.6).

       Figure 8.6. Green scenario S3 has highest sequestration potential
                       Graphical representation of the removals of CO2 by lands converted to forestland in the
                       three scenarios (y-Axis is in Gg Co2e)
             Gg CO2e




      Source: Forestry technical paper, developed through the “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program”,
      2015, World Bank.


 The rate at which the forest is growing and hence absorbing CO2 should be highest when the stand is
 young, with the exception of perhaps the first two or three years. Therefore, intensive management of
 forests and increasing sustainable harvesting of timber can increase the level of CO2 sequestered
 compared to maintaining forest stands168 (see Figure 8.7). The general evidence is that if forests remain
 unmanaged, there will be more mature trees. As the tree growth slows with maturity, they over-shade
 and suppress the growth of younger and more vigorous stems. The young stock provides a lower CO2
 removal per ha at an early stage, but their sequestration potential is higher than in the mature stock.
 Increased management intensity would result in a greater proportion of older trees being removed,
 leading to a better growth of the younger trees and therefore CO2 removal ability of the remaining trees.

168
  Analysis in Nabuurs, G.J., O. Masera, K. Andrasko, P. Benitez-Ponce, R. Boer, M. Dutschke, E. Elsiddig, J. Ford
Robertson, P. Frumhoff, T. Karjalainen, O. Krankina, W.A. Kurz, M. Matsumoto, W. Oyhantcabal, N.H. Ravindranath,
M.J. Sanz Sanchez, and X. Zhang. 2007. "Forestry" in Climate Change: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.; and growth curves in Kinderman et al. (2013)
 Also, trees removed can be used in such carbon beneficial processes169 as construction using lumber,
 manufacturing of various wooden products, e.g., chipboard or paper, or replacing fossil fuels with
 fuelwood.

 To implement any of the scenarios described above and ensure the long-term maintenance of forest
 health, sustainable management has to occur on both state and private forest lands. The private
 landholders will need to be provided with the necessary support to comply with the requirements
 including technical services, markets, and infrastructure. Many of these will require public investments or
 financial support to buffer the upfront cost. In Romania, climate-sensitive sustainable management of
 production and protection will require reversing existing constraints in terms of technology,
 infrastructure, knowledge, research, and other enabling conditions. Additional investments in
 afforestation would enable the Romanian Government to increase harvesting in production forest to the
 annual allowable cut while minimizing any associated reduction in CO2 sequestration.

      Figure 8.7: Forest grows faster when the stand is young
                   Growth curves for central region of Europe with Picus model




      Source: Kinderman et al.


 A simplified regulatory regime for small privately owned forest areas that still requires sustainable
 forest management is required. Modifying the technical norms will allow owners to seize long-term
 opportunities in increased CO2 removal. The simpler regulation should enable owners of forests under
 10 ha to adhere to good forest practice and sustainable forest management guidance with simplified
 requirements for planning, marking, harvesting and sale of timber and non-timber forest products. The

169   The benefit is carbon storage in the wooden products
 technical norms need to be revised and the revised norms should better reflect advances in forest
 management, forest operations and associated technologies (for example, nursery technology, seed
 quality, plant handling and site cultivation), and knowledge of climate change and its impacts on forests.170
 Incentives will be important for successful afforestation initiatives. Of the 115,129 hectares of degraded
 area found suitable for restoration through afforestation in 16 counties (roughly 14 percent of the land
 area), more than 80 percent is under private ownership or community management of public lands.
 Afforestation is a cost-effective option for abatement of GHG emissions in Romania. The National Program
 for Afforestation projects a 422,000 ha increase in area under forest cover by 2035.171

      Figure 8.8. Romania can improve forestry role in mitigation via various actions
                 Projections of sequestration, forest emissions, forest conversions, and forest related
                 activities




          Note: Projections of CO2 removals and GHG emissions for forest (5A1), forest conversions (5A2) and forest related
          activities (FM, AR, D) until 2020.

          Source: Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests. 2015. Information on LULUCF Actions in Romania. Report under
          art. 10 of Decision 529/2013 of European Parliament and the Council, Bucharest, http://mmediu.ro/new/wp-
          content/uploads/2014/12/Report-LULUCFart.10Decision-529.pdf


 Romania has a high biomass potential and a tradition of using wood-based products, yet there is a
 decline in the wood industry and the country is importing wood. The biomass potential or Romania is
 estimated at 88,000 GWh per year. However, there has been a decline in the wood processing industry.
 The reasons include poor road accessibility, outdated technology and inefficient production processes,
 weak forest associations, and limited training and research in climate change. Also, an increasing part of


170
      World Bank. 2011. Romania Functional Review: Environment, Water and Forestry. Vol 2: Forestry
171
   Bohateret VM. 2012. "Readjusting Romania’s Forestry Policy with a View to the Year 2050" in Journal of
Settlements and Spatial Planning. mr. 1/2012
 the valuable wood resources has been used for heating. This problem could be reduced if wood waste
 from wood plantation and wood industry is utilized.172 Romania has long tradition in using wood based
 products for a range of purposes, including building constructions. Recently, the use of steel, concrete and
 bricks has increased replacing the use of wood. There is potential to reengage traditional knowledge and
 promote the use of wood in construction and other long lasting products. When considering a life cycle
 analysis, using wood products in place of steel, concrete and bricks (the production of which emit
 considerable amounts of CO2 and consume vast amounts of fossil fuels) can be an important opportunity
 for both climate change mitigation and sustainable growth by encouraging local traditions and economy.173

 Afforestation of agricultural lands helps with both mitigation and adaptation to climate change: planted
 trees contribute to CO2 sequestration and, if established as forest belts, also support adaptation.
 Afforestation of degraded or abandoned lands is still the main option of mitigation in the forestry sector
 in Romania due to the large area where such measures are applicable. Afforestation represents over 26
 percent of the total changed area in the period 1990-2006. In the mountainous and Subcarpathian
 regions, the expansion of the forest area is largely due to natural regeneration. Regeneration occurred on
 deforested areas and abandoned farm land and pastures, especially with the decline of livestock. In order
 to estimate the total cost of afforestation per hectare and the expected sequestration, four afforestation
 projects have been analyzed. The resulting growth of the carbon stock, assuming average site conditions,
 is reflected in Figure 8.9. The average cost, without transaction expenses, is €6,000 per hectare, which
 corresponds to the unit abatement cost of €120/tC/ha.

  Figure 8.9. Sequestration benefits of afforestation substantially increase with time
                Carbon stock trend for a native hardwood plantation (60% Oaks, 40% various other species)




 Source: Dr. Marian Dragoi, associate professor, University of Suceava, Romania
 Marginal abatement cost curves (MACC)174 for measures in the forest sector are estimated in addition
 to the national and international modeling exercises. The three main measures examined for the forest
 sector include afforestation, sustainable management of protection forests, and sustainable
 management of production forests. The measures examined are presented according to two parameters

 172
    BERD. 2011. Assessment of the Biomass Chains Including Technologies and Cost Structure. Bucharest. Recent
 studies show that the wood waste is an economically viable resource.
 173
     Börjesson, Pål and Leif Gustavsson. 2000. "Greenhouse Gas Balances in Building Construction: Wood versus
  Concrete from Lifecycle and Forest Land-Use Perspectives" in Energy Policy 28 (9), pp. 575-588
174
    See chapter 9 for details and for a cross-sectoral MACC analysis
 of the MACC: potential mitigation impact (kt of emissions abated) and the unit cost of abatement (cost
 per ton of CO2e abated)175. The estimates were made on the basis of most recent local data, collected and
 validated by Romanian experts. 176 The outcomes are presented in Figure 8.10, which shows that the
 proposed measures provide a significant potential abatement level of 1,828 kt CO2 per year in 2050. The
 examined measures are evaluated as highly cost efficient: two of them – protection forest management
 and production forest management – have positive net benefits (negative net costs) and the third
 measure – afforestation – has negligible positive net costs.

 Afforestation measure addresses the problem of the lowering share of forest land and the on-going
 land degradation, therefore focusing on degraded lands. This focus means higher costs, but higher long-
 term benefits. An average annual growth of 10 m3 per ha is assumed and an average of 1,000 ha per year
 is afforested (a conservative assumption), resulting in the abatement (sequestration) of 10,000 tCO2 per
 year. The initial cost is €6,000 per hectare, in line with the actual current costs in Romania; it is assumed
 to decrease during the projected period 2015-2050 to €3,500 per hectare due to increased
 implementation efficiency and learning curves in technology. Revenues are also assumed, from fuelwood
 produced by clearings and non-commercial thinnings. The calculations were made using composition of
 species and soil conditions typical for degraded lands.

 For sustainable management of production forests, constraints and solutions are considered when
 estimating the MACC. For example, there is evidence that shorter rotations mean less disturbances,
 hence more valuable and healthy trees for harvest and a better CO2 accumulation in wooden
 construction materials. The measure was estimated for Norway spruce. Shortening its rotation from 110
 to 100 years is assumed to result in a wood yield increase of 10 percent (a conservative estimate). The
 average growing stock in this period is about 650 m3 and we have assumed that 10 percent more wood
 will be graded for lumber, having this average growing stock. Having 65 m3/ha more wood, the abatement
 potential is 65 tCO2/ha. The measure would cover 50 percent of the Norway spruce forests, or 850,000
 hectares. Considering a 10 percent higher carbon sink, the cost-effectiveness of the shortened rotations
 is estimated, considering average productivity, harvestable volumes from the yield tables, and operational
 costs (tending works, thinning and final harvesting operations). The revenues were estimated using data
 provided by the NFA, current prices for different grades of wood (obtainable from an average stand, with
 an average productivity), and the average assortment of grades estimated on the basis of yield tables. The
 operational costs were also documented by NFI Romanian harvesting companies.




175
  Discount rate used is three percent
176
   The estimates were made by Dr. Marian Dragoi, associate professor of the University of Suceava, Romania, in
coordination with other local experts in the field
Sustainable management of protection forests was the third measure considered for MACC . The
measure is based on the assumption that Natura 2000 management plans will be enforced, resulting in
compulsory environmentally-friendly harvesting operations, the reduction of timber harvested as salvage
product, decreased damage to remnant trees, and less salvage products, in the long run. The impact on
CO2 sink is assumed to equal the amount of timber currently harvested as salvage products from
protection forests, which is 5 m3 per year per hectare. The measure is assumed to be applied on 5,000
hectares per year. Net baseline benefits were calculated based on average cost paid by the NFA for the
protected areas. Green benefits (after the implementation of the measure) have two components: the EU
level of €33 per hectare from the implementation of this measure and the compensation of €25 per year
per hectare, to be paid through the Rural Development National Program.177 The cost and revenue data
were provided by the NFA.

      Figure 8.10. The proposed forestry measures are highly cost efficient and provide a significant
                 abatement potential
                 Marginal Abatement Curve for Forestry




      Source: Staff calculations based on estimates and research provided by Dr. Marian Dragoi, associate professor, University of
      Suceava, Romania.


 Financing needs for the three priority measures were evaluated: afforestation, sustainable
 management of protection forests, and sustainable management of production forests. (See Table 8.3).
 The measures evaluated as highly cost efficient: two of them–protection forest management and
 production forest management–have positive net benefits (negative net costs), and the third measure–
 afforestation–has negligible positive net costs. The total discounted net cost of all three measures for the

177
      To compensate the landowners for giving up harvesting operations for a period of 5 years
period 2015-2050 is negative (or provides higher revenue than required costs) and equals -€86 million.
If benefits are not taken into account, the cost is €115 million for the same period or just 0.002 percent
of GDP. The schedule of costs requires approximately equal amounts of funding annually. The benefits,
however, appear later in the projected period, mostly after 2030, because forestry measures require
significant time to produce benefits.
  Table 8.3: Forestry green spending is beneficial for the economy
              Schedule of forestry green costs, millions of 2010 Euros
                                       2015-        2020             2030         2040       Total 2010-2050
                                        2020        -                -            -
                                                     2030             2040         2050


                                                      not discounted                             Discounted*

        Euros, million
        Gross costs                            37           49               46             47             115
        Net costs (net of benefits)            33                6      -116         -145                      -86
        Percentage of GDP:
        Gross costs                      0.0040      0.0026           0.0020       0.0017                0.002
        Net costs (net of benefits)      0.0036      0.0003          -0.0049      -0.0052               -0.002
  *Discount rate is three percent



CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Support Sustainable Forest Management. Forestry in Romania is a key sector for mitigating climate
change, as it removes 27 percent of GHG emissions annually. Forest based mitigation measures can
include conserving existing CO2 sinks, enhancing carbon sinks and reducing the trade-off between the
sinks, and tangible and intangible benefits from other land uses. Adaptation measures in forestry will
also benefit agriculture, and energy sectors enhancing efficiency of agriculture (forest belts) and
providing a source of renewable energy for rural areas. Sustainable management of forests is
instrumental for achieving Romania’s international obligations and EU directives.

Policy measures that mitigate climate change and contribute to growth. First, Romania should update
the technical norms and simplify regulations for smallholder forestry to make sustainable forest
management financial and technically viable. Also, Romania should promote afforestation outside of
forests and update the National Program for Afforestation. Afforesting agricultural and degraded lands
should be sourced both from budgetary sources (e.g. Environmental Fund) and the EU, in line with the
provisions of the National Afforestation Program and the New Forest Code. Moreover, to facilitate
management of the Natura 2000 sites, it should be aligned with the overall forest management, the
compensation process of Natural 2000 should be transparent, the regulations to implement Natura 2000
should be in place, and the available funds to purchase private land in areas designated for Natura 2000
should be used.
Monitoring and analysis. Romania should improve capacity for monitoring the contribution of forest
management to mitigation of climate change. Creating and implementing a transparent and updated
monitoring system for CO2 removal together with a review of the modeling and analysis would help
provide more accurate assessments of the contribution of forests to climate change mitigation.


Forest fires. Romania should gradually improve the system for forest fires detection, monitoring and
management. The potential increase in forest fire incidence should motivate improving the system for
detecting, monitoring and managing all forest damaging phenomena, including fires, pests, drought and
invasive species. Risk maps based on scientific evidence should inform the gradually establishment of an
effective and efficient system, and should include the involvement of other relevant sectors.

Forest road accessibility. To improve the contribution of forests to carbon sequestration, it is critical to
improve road accessibility. To achieve it, financing provided for forest roads should be based on the
economic rationale, including the contribution to climate change mitigation. The current distribution of
markets and capacity for timber harvesting and processing should also be considered. Raising awareness
for opportunities of financial support for road rehabilitation, maintenance and construction, including
using the networks available to the forest associations, will contribute to the improvement too.

Investment in new technology, marketing and processing. Priority should be given to co-financing
environmentally friendly technologies. Imported technologies should be adapted to the local context. To
encourage the development of new technologies, information regarding what “environmentally friendly”
entails should be provided.

Supporting small forest owners by adequate policy measures and incentives. Associations, several of
which are already operating effectively, could increase the economies of scale. The support for small
forest owners is specifically important within the Natura 2000 sites: it is necessary to assess the suitability
of using compensation to improve compliance with Natura 2000 requirements.

Strategic measures for CC adaptation. The technical norms for forest regeneration should include the
latest scientific findings on species distribution and suitability in the context of climate change. Romania
should introduce the silvicultural operations and forest regeneration that enhance adaptation. The
Government should mainstream scientific research on adaptation in forestry and the silvicultural practices
that enhance the resilience of forest stands to changing conditions. Moreover, it is important to invest in
afforestation of degraded lands, create forest belts, and enhance management of forests in watersheds
to reduce flooding, and to promote the necessary planning and to implement and enforce.

Forests can provide significant mitigation contributions to Romania at low cost, but some public
financing and good use of EU funds will be needed. Given the vast forests of Romania and opportunities
for restoring degraded lands, measures associated with forestry offer significant gains for Romania on
mitigation and adaptation in meeting its EU 2030 and 2050 targets and objectives. The frameworks for
 achieving EU-wide mitigation targets do not include forestry; therefore, implementation of these
 measures for mitigation would be voluntary actions. Financing needs for three priority measures that
 were evaluated--afforestation, sustainable management of protection forests, and sustainable
 management of production forests--equal €115 million (discounted178) for 2015-2050 or just 0.002 percent
 of GDP. The measures were evaluated as highly cost efficient: protection forest management and
 production forest management have positive net benefits (negative net costs), and the third measure–
 afforestation–has negligible positive net costs. When benefits are taken into account, the total discounted
 net cost of all three measures for 2015-2050 is a negative €86 million (benefits exceed costs). The schedule
 of costs requires approximately equal amounts of funding annually. The benefits, however, appear later
 in the projected period, mostly after year 2030, as forestry measures require significant time to produce
 benefits.

 A greener path for forest will require additional public spending. Financial support to landholders,
 especially private ones and in particular small landholders, will be necessary, likely in the form of public
 investments or financial support to buffer upfront costs. Other financing needs, which will fall primarily
 on the private sector, including for forest roads (although government can share information on possible
 financing assistance). Public investment and expenditures should focus on co-financing environmentally
 friendly technologies. EU funding available through the National Rural Development Program (NRDP) would
 not be adequate to cover the costs associated with these measures. However, necessary financing could
 be met by mainstreaming some of the necessary forestry actions into other EU-funded programs (such as
 ecological reconstruction, SMEs, education and extension, and other aspects of the NRDP), prioritizing
 where interventions are financed, and making sustainable management of forests profitable by reforming
 the policy and regulatory requirements for forest management, to help bring in private funds.




178
      At three percent discount rate
CHAPTER 9. A LOOK AT MITIGATION ACROSS SECTORS: A MARGINAL
ABATEMENT COST CURVE

CHAPTER SUMMARY

Marginal Abatement Cost Curves (MACC) are commonly used as a tool in evaluating emission reduction
technologies in terms of their potential mitigation impact (emissions abated) and unit cost (cost per ton
of CO2e abated). They are also considered to be a most efficient communication instrument used in
discussions of the abatement policies. MACC charts are designed to be a “brief”: they compare
technologies to be considered for implementation in a simple (easy to comprehend in a limited time) but
informative way. The technologies can be presented one by one or at various levels of aggregation,
including by blocks of technologies, by economic sector, or even by groups of sectors. In the MACC, each
technology has two characteristics: the level of abatement, Mt CO2e, which equals to the difference in
emissions produced by the new technology as compared to the technology it replaces (abatement
potential) and the cost of the technology per unit of abatement, Euro/tCO2e.

The MACC analysis in the Romania Green Growth study presents a cross-sectoral outlook of the benefits
and costs of the mitigation measures that are recommended in the Study on the basis of the sectoral
modeling and analysis. It includes four sectors: energy, transport, forestry and agriculture sectors all have
potential for abatement. Sector analysis conducted for the Romania Green Growth study resulted in a
selection of a short list of measures that constitute green package in each sector. The mitigation measures
from this list are evaluated in the MACC analysis. The timeframe of 2015-2050 is driven by Romania’s EU
commitments: the current 2030 climate package, for which most details have been agreed, and the
Roadmap 2050. The long run target of 2050 is crucial to the analytic work in the study, because the 2030
targets do not require much action from Romania.

The Romania MACC ranks the selected measures from most cost effective to the least cost effective.
The top measures in both cost effectiveness and abatement potential are in energy demand and electricity
supply sectors, however, several other measures also provide significant benefits, this relates to forestry
and agriculture. Measures in transport are more expensive and characterized by a limited abatement
outcome. Green actions across the four sectors will reduce emissions in the country by 45 Mt CO2 eq. in
2050, an equivalent of a 25 percent decrease from the level projected for Baseline in 2050. The largest
share of abatement – 48 percent of the total - is projected for electricity supply. Energy demand will
provide a third of the overall abatement, agriculture one-tenth, forestry five percent and transport two
percent. They range from the negative Euro -178 per ton CO2e abated in energy demand, to € 16/tCO2e
abated in energy supply, to €-0.1/tCO2 abated in forestry, to €12/tCO2e abated in agriculture, and to
€154/tCO2e abated in transport.
 CHALLENGES OF GREEN GROWTH ASSESSMENT AND MARGINAL ABATEMENT
 COST CURVES

 Marginal Abatement Cost Curves (MACC) have become a commonly used tool in evaluating emission
 reduction technologies, presenting them in terms of their potential mitigation impact (emissions
 abated) and unit cost (cost per ton of CO2e abated). They are also considered to be a most efficient
 communication instrument used in discussions of the abatement policies. In the 5th Assessment Report
 of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), published in 2014179, MACCs are described
 as a standard policy communication tool in assessing emission reductions and their cost effectiveness
 and one of “major approaches to reveal the economic potential of mitigation measures”. In addition, they
 are an efficient way to present complicated mitigation data in a clear way and a concise format, accessible
 for all audiences, including non-technical stakeholders. MACCs are specifically useful for decision
 makers, who, due to time limitations, cannot study the details of research and analysis of green
 technologies and who usually make decisions on the basis of briefs and summaries. MACC charts are
 designed to be a “brief”: they compare technologies to be considered for implementation in a simple
 (easy to comprehend in a limited time) but informative way. (Figure 9.1)

 How can MACCs increase the quality of decisions regarding prioritizing abatement measures? Clearly,
 they support budgeting decisions by showing the cost per abatement unit of various measures and
 compare abatement potential of measures relative to each other and across sectors. However, MACCs
 support decision making regarding mitigation much more because they facilitate more detailed review of
 the mitigation measures. First, the way the measures are presented (ranked by unit cost and not grouped
 by sector) helps discussions of various combinations of measures cross-sectorally, increasing the efficiency
 of the resulting mitigation program (lowering its cost and maximizing abatement) and leading to
 budgetary savings. Second, MACCs produced for different time periods (e.g., 2020, 2030, 2040 and 2050)
 help to schedule the implementation of the measures, and this is especially important because green
 growth requires long term planning and also because the sequence of measures affects the level of the
 total effort needed, both in terms of the overall cost and institutional support. MACCs produced for
 different time periods help realize that some measures provide benefits faster than other measures, and
 the implementation should be scheduled accordingly. For example, energy demand actions provide swift
 returns, but energy supply actions require large up-front investments with benefits delivered years into
 the future. Forestry measures require a stable investment flow and benefits occur with a time lag, but
 increase over a long term. This is reflected in a set of MACCs produced for different periods. With this
 knowledge, investments can be scheduled in an efficient way to guarantee that the results are achieved
 sooner rather than later and to maximize the present value of the benefits long term, a standard approach
 for green growth and climate change studies (in our study, in the timeframe to 2050).

 However, MACCs also have several limitations. They do not reflect all costs of the abatement measures.
 A way to think about it is to rationalize the negative net costs of some of the measures that can be seeing

179
      Mitigation volume, Chapters 3 and 7.
in various MACCs. Such negative net costs are typical for energy efficiency and forestry measures, but can
be appear as characteristics of abatement options found in other sectors as well. If the net costs are
negative, does it means that benefits exceed costs and the measures should be implemented with
a profit, making them an investment opportunity for the private sector. However, it does not happen
because there are hurdles (both financial and non-financial) that are not captured by the MACC analysis.
First, there is a cost of making an up-front investment. While such cost is lower for energy efficiency
measures than for many other types of abatement interventions, it can be quite large for the household
or business who would implement a measure. Second, there is a principal-agent problem (such as the
owner, operator, occupant, and bill payer of a building are separate entities). Third, there is a problem
with information about the measures, the benefits they bring and the ways to receive subsidies. Forth,
there is a cost of implementation among a large number of small entities (households, businesses). In
addition to these hurdles, MACCs do not support non-financial decisions related to implementation of the
abatement measures, including capacity building, behavior change effort, reactions of non-governmental
stakeholders, and other institutional considerations, and this has an implication for ease of implementation.
While being useful for decision makers, MACCs do not supply complete information needed to select
technologies, but rather provide a quick insight into the subject. More information is needed to make an
implementation decision or have an informed discussion.

  Figure 9.1. Why are Marginal Abatement Cost Curves Used?




MACCs are charts showing a set of technologies that would reduce emissions from economic activities.
The technologies can be presented one by one or at various levels of aggregation, including by blocks of
technologies within a sector (e.g., demand side energy sector technologies), by economic sector (energy,
transport, etc.), or even by groups of sectors (e.g., ETS sectors). In the MACC, each technology has two
characteristics: the level of abatement, Mt CO2e, which equals to the difference in emissions produced
 by the new technology as compared to the technology it replaces (abatement potential) and the cost of
 the technology per unit of abatement, Euro/tCO2e. The cost is computed in the following way. First, it is
 calculated as the net present value of the flow of investment and operational costs over the period of
 time from the base year (today or in the recent past) to a year in the future, which is selected as the final
 point of time for projections, e.g., year 2050 or year 2030.180 Second, the cost is calculated as marginal
 cost of technology replacement; as such, it equals the difference in cost between the new “green”
 technology and the current “non-green” options. Usually, the difference in cost is a positive number
 because new technologies tend to be more expensive than the old ones, but there are exceptions. Third,
 the cost is computed as net of benefits, which could also push the resulting net cost into negative
 numbers. In cases when the net marginal cost is negative, the technology is depicted on the left side of
 the chart, among the technologies that provide net benefits.181 (Figure 9.2)

      Figure 9.2. What is Marginal Abatement Cost Curve?




 The technologies in the MACC chart are ranked using the second characteristic, the unit cost of
 abatement. The abatement potential is usually presented for a year in the future, e.g., 2050. It is also
 common to present cumulative abatement potential, combining expected abatement for all the years
 between the present and the final year in the projections, e.g., 2015-2050.



180
    MACCs usually have a long time frame because many of the measures require years and even decades to
implement and the benefits are fully realized with a time lag from the conclusion of the implementation
181
   This issue has been extensively discussed in literature. A commonly asked question is why the green options that
presumably provide net revenue are not being implemented by the private sector. The answer is that they do not
provide net revenue: the MACC costs only include direct costs of the technology (e.g., in electricity supply, it would
be costs of building and operating a power plant), but do not include other costs, such as transaction costs, financing
hurdles, high upfront costs, the costs of information failure, non-financial costs (e.g., in housing energy efficiency,
the costs of inconvenience of moving out one’s house or tolerating construction noise), etc
METHODOLOGY

Overview of the MACC approaches

The MACCs are created through modeling, which is used to calculate two characteristics of the
technologies used in the MACCs: unit cost and abatement potential of technologies. Prior to modeling,
the list of technologies should be created and the baseline defined, since both costs and abatement are
calculated marginally to the baseline.

Selecting “green” – adaptation and mitigation - technologies for the MACC. The aim at this stage is to
select technologies that would replace the non-green ones. Technologies are selected within particular
sectors, and sector selection comes first. The MACCs can be built at a sector (or sub-sector) level, for the
economy overall, or even globally. It is recommended to involve stakeholders at this step to have in-
country information regarding the barriers to technology transfer and the measures to address these
barriers, such as regulations, fiscal and financial incentives and capacity building. Consultations at this
stage are usually conducted in the form of the workshops. Also, it could be useful to increase awareness
using dissemination of technology information, expert lectures, visits, and demonstration projects.

Modeling to estimate marginal cost and abatement potential of each technology. There is a wide
heterogeneity in the approaches to building MACCs. Each approach has its own benefits and deficiencies.
In particular, there are three basic modeling approaches to constructing MAC curves: a bottom-up
individual assessment of technologies/abatement measures, a bottom-up system modeling approach,
and macro-economic modeling. In the individual technology approach, the abatement costs are defined
at a technology level, commonly using cost-benefit models and often involving expert opinion. In this
approach, the total cost depends not only on the way the costs are derived, but also on the set of
abatement measures included in the analysis. Within this approach, each technology is evaluated
separately, in terms of implementation costs and abatement level. Total abatement and abatement costs
equal the sum of the individual technology characteristics.

The problem with this approach is that in real life climate policies overlap, implementation costs vary,
and sector-specific policies can interact with each other. As a result, this approach causes such problem
as negligence of technical, behavioral, intertemporal and economic interactions, double counting, limited
coverage of costs, path dependency, agency issues, and a limited treatment of uncertainty. Despite it, this
approach has been widely used in various studies to estimate the abatement cost and potential for
different economic sectors in many countries. For example, it was used by McKinsey and also by the UK
Government. Even now, with significant international experience using sectoral system modeling and a
combination of bottom-up engineering models and CGE models, individual technology approach is used
most often, mainly due to its transparency, ease in understanding of the calculations and the outcomes,
and lower costs.
Model-based systems approaches are receiving increasing acknowledgement. Various bottom-up (e.g.,
MARKAL and TREMOVE) and top-down (CGE) system models have been used to generate MAC curves in
order to include interactions among technologies and policies. The examples of the sector models used in
the energy and transport sectors include TREMOVE and MARKAL. TREMOVE assesses overall impacts on
costs and CO2 emissions, the ratio of which provides abatement costs that take account impacts of cost
increases or reductions on vehicle ownership, and travelled distance. (rebound effects). The transport
sector MARKAL includes energy demand, measured in vehicle kilometers, for various modes of transport:
air, car, bus, heavy goods vehicles, light goods vehicle, rail transport and two-wheeler. It has fuel
distribution networks to track fuel use by mode of transport. It includes different vehicle technologies:
internal combustion engine, hybrid, plug-in, battery, E85 (fuel mix), methanol and hydrogen. Technologies
are characterized by vehicle technical efficiency, capital cost, and lifetime.

MACCs can also be derived using CGE models. In a CGE model, emissions are usually modeled through
fuel used as input, using fuel emission coefficients and introducing constraints on emissions. The price
of carbon (carbon tax or carbon shadow price) is used to balance demand and supply and to produce the
cost of abatement. Deficiencies of MAC curves generated by the economy wide top-down models include
the lack of technological detail, disregard of market distortions and the reliance on historic data for the
calculation of future abatement costs. Costs of abatement are considered to be overestimated. To
minimize the deficiencies, various approaches to including bottom-up data in the top-down models are
used. For example, various mathematical approaches have been used to integrate detailed engineering
data in the CGE models through Social Accounting Matrices by estimating the allocation of capital, labor,
energy and material inputs among production activities in a way consistent with the engineering cost data.
Another type of approaches includes a recently introduced method of generating MACCs by combining
system modeling, decomposition analysis and uncertainty analysis. Another example of a combined top-
down and bottom-up approach aiming at a better assessment of the abatement costs suggests that top-
down models should include an explicit (not though fuel substitution) representation of abatement
technologies with such pollution abatement options as production factor substitution, output demand
reduction, and installation of abatement equipment other than fuel substitution.


Romania Marginal Abatement Cost Curve: approach

The MACC analysis in the Romania Green Growth study presents a cross-sectoral outlook of the benefits
and costs of the green technologies/measures that are recommended in the Study on the basis of the
sectoral modeling and analysis for the time period 2015-2050. The timeframe is driven by Romania’s EU
commitments: the current 2030 climate package, for which most details have been agreed, and the
Roadmap 2050. The long run target of 2050 is crucial to the analytic work in the study, because the 2030
targets do not require much action from Romania.

The MACC analysis is the last step in the Romania Green Growth analysis and is connected and
coordinated with the sector modeling. However, it is not part of the suite of models where the sectoral
modeling is used as inputs into macro modeling. MACC is connected with the sector modeling through
technology/green measure selection, which was done during the sector analysis (see Box 9.1), and
through sharing the input data: MACC analysis uses the technologies/measures recommended by sectoral
analysis and the same input data that was used for the sector analysis work.

The process of sector selection was defined by the sector analysis within the overall Romania Green
Growth study. First, the selection of sectors was done for the Romania Green Growth study overall, the
main criterion was the sector’s importance for mitigation and/or adaptation. Availability of data and
models was also taken into account. Second, out of the sectors selected for the study overall, we chose
for the MACC those where mitigation measures were prevalent and eliminated the sectors where
measures were limited to adaptation. This was done because MACCs are built to evaluate abatement
measures and therefore adaptation measures are irrelevant, as they are not aimed at emission reduction,
while mitigation measures serve exactly the abatement purpose. The adaptation sector that was included
in the Study but excluded from the MACC analysis is the water sector. Another sector present in the Study,
but not in the MACC analysis, is urban sector: the urban sector’s green measures are a combination of
transport, energy, etc. interventions at the urban level. Therefore, including urban sector in the MACC,
where energy and transport are already represented, would create double counting.

Energy, transport, forestry and agriculture sectors all have potential for abatement. In the energy sector,
while the country has a relatively high - approximately one-quarter - and growing (mainly due to wind
power development) share of renewable sources in power generation, energy supply is dominated by
fossils fuels, with more than a third of primary energy supply in coal and oil and another third in gas. The
remaining third is almost equally divided between nuclear and biofuels. At the same time, the country has
one of the best wind resources in Europe, which, combined with the low price of wind power, creates an
opportunity for abatement. Also, bioenergy resources are significant and should be utilized to lower
emission from the energy sector (emission factor of bioenergy is less than half of that of coal). Energy
supply side measures take a long time to implement, but the time frame of the study, 2015-2050, provided
enough time for the benefits to realize. In transport, regulatory measures could be used to create
incentives for households and businesses to buy less emission intensive vehicles and reduce the frequency
and length of driving. Afforestation is a central measure in forestry and, in fact, across sectors, promising
to provide high level abatement at a negative cost (with benefits exceeding cost in the long term). Forest
management is a critical preventive measure, aimed at keeping the trees healthy and therefore
supporting the potential of the forest to sequester carbon. Agriculture measures would support the
abatement of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide; these are low cost measures with a high
abatement outcome.

Technology selection. The approach to building a MACC for Romania used in the Romania Green Growth
study has some specifics, the main one is the way technologies/green measures were selected. The MACC
is the last step in the multi-sector modeling and analysis conducted within the study, and this provided an
opportunity for a technology/green measure selection for the MACC on the basis of an in-depth sector
analysis and modeling. As a result, the MACC includes the measures that were selected, analyzed and
recommended in the course of the analysis of each sector.
Sector analysis conducted for the Romania Green Growth study resulted in a selection of a short list of
measures that constitute green packages 2015-2050 in each sector. The mitigation measures from this
list are evaluated in the MACC analysis (see Box 9.1 with a description of the selected measures). This
approach is considered appropriate for the overall study because it provides for the consistency of the
recommendations presented in sector analyses and in the MACC analysis. Also, this approach supports
a more detailed discussion of the mitigation measures (the measures are described in detail in the sector
chapters), as opposed to a more superficial overview of a broader set of available, but not necessarily
recommended technologies. Some other studies, however, have a different approach and estimate the
costs and the abatement potential of all globally available and potentially relevant for the country
abatement technologies (e.g., McKinsey studies in a number of countries).


 Box 9.1. Selected technologies for the MACC analysis in transport, forestry and agriculture

 Transport sector. Unlike in other sectors in the Study, the transport sector analysis has an emphasis on policies
 as opposed to technological interventions. It identifies a wide range of measures including pricing instruments,
 technology, regulatory measures, operational efficiency measures, and investments. Since only the last type of
 measure is suitable for a MACC analysis, we have a limited number of transport sector green measures included
 in the MACC analysis. Three measures were included in the transport MACC: vehicle scrappage scheme, ultra-low
 emissions vehicles (ULEV) subsidy and electric vehicle infrastructure investment, and electric vehicle fleet. All
 transport measures included in the analysis have high costs, above Euro 150 per tCO2a abated. This high costs
 can be explained by the co-benefits that are not internalized in the total costs (see more on this subject earlier in
 this section).

 Forestry sector. Climate change mitigation in forestry is achieved through CO2eq sequestration. This requires
 planting more trees and supporting forest health through sustainable forest management. The main mitigation
 measures selected in the Romanian forestry sector as a result of the sector analysis are afforestation, sustainable
 management of production forests for timber, and sustainable management of protection forests.
 
             Afforestation of agricultural lands helps with both mitigation and adaptation to climate change: new
 forests contribute to CO2 sequestration; they also, if established as forest belts, can support adaptation.
 Afforestation of degraded or abandoned lands is still the main option of mitigation in the forestry sector in
 Romania due to the large area where such measures are applicable. Degraded lands inventory, conducted by
 MARD in 2012, estimated that approximately 115,000 hectares or 14 percent of the degraded land is suitable for
 afforestation.
             Enhancing Protected Area Management. Romania has an obligation to meet the directives
 associated with Natura 2000. To lift the current challenges to achieving Natura 2000 objectives, there is the need
 to develop a simpler way of compensating private property holders and also clarifying how compensation is
 determined. Identifying a way to compensate communities managing public lands under Natura 2000 is equally
 important.
             Improving Sustainable Management of Production Forests. While modern forest management uses
 financial rotation of forests in many EU countries and globally, Romania is behind many of its comparators in this
 area: its forest rotation exceeds 100 years for most of indigenous species of forest trees. The proposed green
 measure is shortening the average rotations for the most important forest species. Shorter rotations mean less
 disturbances and more valuable and healthy trees harvested as main yield. The results could be significant: in
ten years, the yield can increase by 10 percent.

Agriculture. In the agriculture analysis for the MACC, two mitigation measures are considered: minimum tillage
    and manure management. The No tillage measure reflects the benefits of using no tillage as compared with
    the current practice of using full tillage in the fields. The area covered by the measure is based on the arable
    land, which is susceptible to desertification. While desertification is the threat and motive of the
    minimum tillage scheme, the poor manure management (collecting, storage, treating, applying) of the past
    is the motive for the new measure "composting manure”. Farmers taking up on this measure undergo
    stringent practices in terms of storage and treatment of manure, which impacts GHG savings per animal units
    (not per ha).


Estimation of the MACC parameters. Romania’s MACC is a combination of sectoral curves, each of
    which was built using most appropriate approach for each sector. The approach used in each sector
    depends on data availability, accessibility and quality, as well as on the availability of the models.
    For the electricity supply, the specifications of the curve (potential abatement and cost of the
    generation technologies per unit of abatement) were calculated using a system model
    TIMES/MARKAL. For the energy demand, a bottom-up detailed engineering model was used (see
    Box 2 with a detailed example of the approach in the energy sector). In the forestry, agriculture,
    and transport, a bottom-up Excel-based approach was used, and the measures are evaluated
    individually. In both agriculture and forestry, the calculations are done based on detailed sector
    data provided by Romanian experts specifically for this Study. In transport, local data are not
    available for many of the measures because there is no experience with these measures in the
    country; therefore, data from the comparator countries were used. As a result, transport sector
    estimates are based on a combination of local and global data. In all sectors, the timeframe for the
    analysis was 2015-2050. Discounting was used for both net cost and emissions. The same discount
    rate as used in sector modeling was applied to the MACC calculations. It ranges from 3 percent in
    forestry to 5 percent in energy, a typical social discount rate. Costs (before discounting) are in real
    terms and the base year for discounting is 2015. The overall process of building a MACC for
    Romania is reflected in Figure 9.3.


Box 9.2. Approach to the MACC modeling in the energy sector

Energy demand

The MACC calculations for the energy demand measures were done using an Excel-based bottom-up model and
are based on very detailed data (see below). The MACC for energy demand includes end -use energy efficiency
improvement to be applied in the household sector, as these measures bring most immediate and effective
(with high potential abatement) results. The energy consumption in the household sector includes all energy-
using activities except personal transportation. Common end-uses associated with this sector include space
heating, water heating, cooking, lighting, air-conditioning, refrigeration and running a variety of electric and non-
electric appliances. The future energy consumption in the residential sector are driven by various factors,
including changes in population, urbanization rates, household income, dwelling size and type, dwelling floor
area, energy-mix, energy efficiency of appliances, appliances diffusion rate and standards, and household
 preferences and behaviors.

 The approach used required collecting a wide range of data, which can be grouped into three categories:
 energy consumption data, socio-economic and demographic data (population, household size, housing stock
 attributes, etc.), and technology data (technology penetration, such technology attributes as emission intensity
 and unit costs, etc.). The data were collected from many different sources including several national, regional
 and international publications. In particular, Romania’s National Institute of Statistics (INS), EU’s Eurostat and the
 World Bank’s World Development Indicators are the primary sources of data. The household activity parameters
 were used to project the future end-use service demand. The base year is 2015. The projections of end-use service
 demand are made through the year 2050 with 5 years of interval.

 The model used a simple Excel-based bottom-up framework for projecting the penetration of each technology
 during the period of 2015-2050 under two scenarios - Baseline and Green. The Baseline scenario reflects a
 moderate view of the future energy demand based on a continuation of the current trends and provides a useful
 point of comparison for the impacts of choices and/or of changes in alternative low carbon policies. In the Baseline
 scenario, population increase and economic growth are the key driving factors that influence the outlook of
 energy demand in the household sector. The Green scenario is designed to reflect the EU’s energy and climate
 strategies, including the 2030 framework for climate and energy policies and the Roadmap for moving to a low
 carbon economy in 2050. The Green scenario includes two phases: the first one runs from 2015 to 2030 and
 follows the EU 2030 strategy. The second phase follows the EU’s 2050 roadmap to low carbon economy and runs
 from 2030 to 2050. The Green scenario involves increased (as compared with the Baseline scenario) energy
 efficiency improvements by households. Major energy efficiency improvement measures include use of more
 efficient lighting and electric appliances, retrofitting buildings with wall, window and roof insulation, and heating
 and air conditioning system improvements.

 Electricity supply

 The MACC calculations for electricity supply were done using an energy supply system model TIMES/MARKAL ,182
 which is an optimization model. In the MACC analysis, the model helped determin e the marginal cost and
 abatement potential of each of the following eight green (renewable or low carbon) generation options: solar
 photovoltaic (PV), concentrated solar power (CSP), more hydro (as compared with the installed capacity), more
 wind, biomass, natural gas plants with installed carbon capture and storage (gas CCS), coal plants with carbon
 capture and storage (coal CCS), and nuclear. The model constructed the best (minimum cost) mix of generation
 sources to achieve a desired abatement level in eight different cases, corresponding to eight green generation
 technologies. This meant eight scenario runs, one for each of the green generation options. Abatement level was



182
    TIMES (an acronym for The Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System) is an economic model generator for local,
national or multi-regional energy systems, which provides a technology-rich basis for estimating energy dynamics
over a long-term, multi-period time horizon. The model does multi-year optimization (computes the least cost path
of an energy system for the specified time frame) and can be used at the global, multi-regional, national,
state/province or community level to test a series of policy options, such as CO2 constraints, taxes or subsidies. The
structure of TIMES is defined by variables and equations determined from the data input provided by the user. This
information collectively defines each TIMES regional model database, and therefore the resulting mathematical
representation of a Reference Energy System for the region. The database comprise both qualitative and
quantitative data
      set as a constraint, and each scenario maximized generation from one out of the eight generation sources,
      considering many other variables/constraints in the model: production/transformation facilities; transportation,
      transmission, and distribution networks; various resource, technical., socio-economic, environmental and other
      constraints including the size of the plants, their capacity factor, the need in the back -up capacity, etc.). For
      example, in scenario 1, solar PV was set to be maximized in the electricity supply system, and the rest of the
      generation technologies was selected by the model. The model also calculated the cost of such system and the
      cost of the baseline system. The difference between these two costs constituted the marginal cost, which was
      then converted into the net present value.
      The model is data intensive, and the input data included a number of variables: those related to energy demand
      (GDP, population, households, etc., and elasticities of demand), primary energy and material resource potential
      and costs, policy settings (emission restrictions, emission taxes, subsidies to technologies, etc.), and a description
      of technologies (or processes) that transform commodities (fuels, materials, energy services, emissions). The key
      data sources were Eurostat, The World Bank, International Energy Agency, and World Energy Resources. In
      addition, the energy demand data from the bottom-up demand model developed in-house to compute energy
      demand by various types of energy consuming services was use (see Energy demand section above).


 Data. IPCC recommends using National Communications data for the MACCs. Since Romania is an Annex
 1 country, the main climate change data are available in the 6th National Communications183. However,
 the Romania MACC in the Study required detailed data for particular measures, as well as interrelated
 abatement and cost data. Such data were not available from the National Communications. Therefore,
 it was necessary to use other sources, both local and global. Some of the local data were collected
 specifically for the MACC study; this relates to all data used for the agriculture and forestry MACC
 calculations. Transport and energy MACC analysis was based on a combination of the global and
 localdata, which were collected and used for sector modeling and then utilized again for the
 MACC calculations. This guaranteed consistency between the sector analysis and the MACC analysis.




183
        UNFCCC,         2010:      6th    National     Communication     of     Romania       to    UNFCCC:
https://unfccc.int/files/national_reports/annex_i_natcom/submitted_natcom/application/pdf/6th_nccc_and_1st_
br_of_romania[1].pdf
      Figure 9.3. Building a Marginal Abatement Cost Curve for Romania: steps of the process




FINDINGS

The outcomes of the analysis are presented in the cross-sectoral MACC chart (Figure 9.4 and table 9.1).
The chart includes the main options for abatement in four sectors - energy, forestry, agriculture, and
transport - and the two characteristics of these options: net present value of their cost over the period
2015-2050 and the abatement they are projected to provide in year 2050 when the implementation is
completed and the benefits are fully realized. This longer time frame is necessary to capture the full
benefits in the calculations. Total annual abatement in year 2050 reaches 45 MtCO2e. The chart shows
that several household energy efficiency measures have negative costs (benefits are exceeding the costs),
this includes energy efficient lighting, energy efficient air conditioning, and energy efficient household
appliances (refrigerators and washing machines). Also, several technologies in power supply, forestry and
agriculture have positive, but very low cost, this includes solar PV, wind, hydro and concentrated solar, as
well as forest protection management and housing insulation. The least cost efficient technologies are in
the transport sector.

A review by sector shows that energy efficiency measures are most beneficial, they have both high
abatement potential and low, mostly negative cost. Electricity supply measures also deliver significant
abatement level at a relatively low (but positive) cost. Forestry provides large abatement potential.
Agriculture measures – no tillage and manure management – are relatively cost efficient; they also
promise to provide a significant abatement benefit. The transport measures, however, have very high
costs and, at the same time, a limited abatement potential. This is consistent with the discussion of the
transport MACCs in literature and is explained by the nature of the transport mitigation: the transport
measures have multiple objectives, including, apart from abatement, reduced pollution, lowered traffic
controlled noise, reduced number of accidents, and improved quality of life. Abatement is not necessarily
the main objective or the main benefit of these measures; in some cases, such as with urban congestion
control, the objective is not abatement, but economic and social development (urban growth and
improved quality of life). Therefore, the transport measures have, by their nature, many co-benefits.
However, including these co-benefits in the calculation of the net cost is difficult, as no precise estimates
of many of such benefits are available and using the existing approximations would significantly reduce
the level of precision of the MACC costs that we use in our calculations. The examples of the
approximations that could be used in our calculations are the cost of a lost life or a traffic injury, the
potential municipal budget revenue from developing urban business friendly infrastructure, etc.

Energy sector provides most cost efficient measures and the highest overall abatement. The most
effective measure (the one that has the highest abatement potential) in energy demand is building
insulation, followed by the usage of efficient lighting. In electricity supply, the highest abatement can be
achieved from the development of electricity generation using natural gas plants with installed carbon
capture and storage (gas CCS), and a similar level of abatement will result from the expanded usage of the
coal-based plants with carbon capture and storage (coal CCS). Among renewable energy options, the
highest abatement potential is in wind, followed by biomass, then solar Photovoltaic (solar PV), then
hydro generation and solar CCS. Development of nuclear generation would also reduce abatement, in the
amount comparable with that of hydro generation. Cost-wise, the most efficient electricity supply options
are Solar PV and wind, followed by solar CSP, biomass and nuclear. Gas CSP would require higher
expenses, and coal CSP is the most expensive option reaching Euro 40 per tCO2e abated. Several demand-
side measures provide absolute net benefits (or have negative net costs); this includes the recommended
measures to expand the usage of efficient lighting, efficient air conditioning, efficient refrigerators and
efficient washing machines.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The MACC work derives from the analysis and modeling of all the relevant sectors in the study. The
MACC chart is simply a presentation of the findings of the sector work, transformed to match the MACC
approach. When the MACC data from all sectors is put in one chart, it creates a clear and simple picture
comparing green measures by costs and benefits across sectors. The MACC analysis is based on a detailed
sector analytic and modeling work that identified the areas where mitigation efforts would be most
effective and proposed particular mitigation measures for implementation. Based on this outcome, the
MACC analysis estimated the MACC parameters (the unit cost of abatement in the period 2015-2050 and
the potential for abatement in 2050) for the MACC curve for each of the selected measures. The resulting
MACC ranks the selected measures from most cost effective to the least cost effective. The top measures
in both cost effectiveness and abatement potential are in energy demand and electricity supply sectors,
however, several other measures also provide significant benefits, this relates to forestry and agriculture.
Measures in transport are expensive and characterized by a limited abatement outcome.

Green actions across the four sectors will reduce emissions in the country by 35 Mt CO2 eq. in 2050, an
equivalent of a 23 percent decrease from the level projected for the Baseline in 2050. The average costs
and abatement potential in each of the four sectors analyzed are also reflected in Figure 9.5. The largest
share of abatement – 48 percent of the total - is projected for electricity supply. Energy demand will
provide a third of the overall abatement, agriculture one-tenth, forestry five percent and transport two
percent. They range from the negative Euro -178 per ton CO2e abated in energy demand, to € 16/tCO2e
abated in energy supply, to €-0.1/tCO2 abated in forestry, to €12/tCO2e abated in agriculture, and to
€154/tCO2e abated in transport. Costs of each measure are in Table 9.1.


The Romania MACC can increase the quality of decisions regarding prioritizing the proposed abatement
measures. In addition to supporting budgeting decisions by showing the cost per abatement unit of
various measures and compare abatement potential of measures relative to each other and across
sectors, it can support decisions regarding the implementation of the proposed green actions. MACCs
help realize that some measures provide benefits faster than other measures, and the implementation
should be schedules accordingly. In particular, the Romania MACC can help to schedule investments in
an efficient way to maximize the present value of the benefits in the long term, a standard approach for
green growth and climate change studies (in our study, in the timeframe to 2050). However, it cannot
support non-financial decisions regarding capacity building, behavior change effort, reactions of non-
governmental stakeholders, and other institutional considerations, which is quite important. In case of
Romania, not surprisingly, the MACC shows that the scheduling of the green actions should start with
energy efficiency measures because they have the lowest (negative) net cost, low investment cost, bring
benefits very fast, and have low implementation barriers. Next, the measures in forestry also need to be
scheduled to start early on. They have a relatively low annual cost, require no upfront investment, and,
while benefits occur with a time lag, they accumulate in the future, so an early start is possible and
desirable to maximize the benefits. These are no-regret measures. Measures in energy supply, vice versa,
require large up-front investments with benefits delivered years into the future and the implementation
requiring strategic, complicated, and politically charged decisions. In case of the energy supply measures,
the MACC provides only one element of a very big and complicated picture needed to make decisions. In
transport, the proposed measures have high unit cost and their implementation should be guided by co-
benefits (benefits other than emission reduction); they should be implemented where and when they can
bring important health benefits (by lowering pollution), reduction in the rate of traffic accidents, decrease
of traffic congestion, and improved quality of life.
Figure 9.4. Romania Marginal Abatement Curve, cross-sectoral, 2050




Note: How to read the MACC. The height of each column shows the average cost of abating one ton of CO2 by 2050. The chart is ordered from left to right from the measures with the
lowest cost to the ones with the highest cost. The width of each column shows the GHG emission reduction potential of the measures in year 2050, when all the measures have been
fully implemented.
Sources of data: sector technical reports developed through “Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program”, 2015 ; calculations are done using a tool developed
at the World Bank.
Figure 9.5. The highest abatement potential is in energy supply, negative costs are in energy demand and
             forestry
               Emission reduction by sector, 2050, and average cost of the green measures, 2015-2050
  Table 9.1. Abatement cost and potential, by measure

              Sector / Measures             Abatement cost,



           Sector / Measures             Abatement cost,      Abatement potential, Super Green
                                      €/t CO2eq., 2015-2050         compared with BAU,
                                                                   kt CO2eq./year (2050)
Energy demand
Households, Efficient Lighting                -161                         3,790
Households, Efficient ACs                      -87                          294
Households, Efficient Refrigerators            -82                          816
Households, Efficient Washing                  -71                         2,445
machines
Households, Insulation                         9                           5037
Electricity supply
Solar photovoltaic (PV)                       5.0                          1,552
Wind                                          6.9                          2,686
Hydro                                         12.5                          896
Concentrated Solar Power (CSP)                14.2                          854
Biomass                                       15.6                         1,702
Nuclear                                       15.9                         1,065
Gas with Carbon Capture and                   19.7                         4,357
Storage
Coal with Carbon Capture and                  36.1                         3,884
Storage
Forestry
Protection forest management                 -0.23                          900
Production forest management                 -0.04                          568
Afforestation                                 0.11                          360
Agriculture
No tillage                                    14.4                         2,172
Manure management                             10.0                         1,200
Transport
Fuel Price                                   0.13                           147
Scrappage Scheme                             0.36                            0
Vehicle Registration Tax                     2.28                           151
Parking Pricing                              3.01                           14
Urban Cong Pricing                           9.60                           36
Air Travel Taxation                          11.84                          26
Ultra-low Emission Vehicles                  26.19                          23
Public Sector EV                38.54    24
Bus EV                          46.77    30
Speed                           64.77    242
Eco Driving                     337.97   61
Low Emissions Zones             402.72   40
Investment in Walking Cycling   533.24   18
Smarter Choices                 683.31    9
Technical Papers
Agriculture Sector Technical Report, Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Country
Assessment, June 2015.

Energy Sector Demand Technical Report: Long-Term End-Use Service Demand Analysis (ESDA) In
Romania, Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Country Assessment, June 2015.

Energy Sector Supply Technical Report: Achieving Mitigation of Emissions from Energy Supply using a
TIMES-MARKAL Model for Romania, Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Country
Assessment, June 2015.

Forestry Sector Technical Report: Opportunities for Mitigation and Adaptation through Forests, Romania
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Country Assessment, June 2015.

A Marginal Abatement Cost Curve for Romania, Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth
Country Assessment, June 2015.

Transport Sector Technical Report, Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Country
Assessment, June 2015.

Urban Sector Technical Report: A Technical Assessment of the Energy and Emission Impacts of
Alternative Development Patterns in the Bucharest-Ilfov Region, Romania Climate Change and Low
Carbon Green Growth Country Assessment, June 2015.

Water Sector Technical Report, Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Country
Assessment, June 2015.
REFERENCES

A. Lebedys and Y. Li. 2014. Contribution of the Forestry Sector to National Economies, 1990-2011. Forest
Finance Working Paper FSFM/ACC/09. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome.

Abrudan, I.V., Marinescu, V, Ignea, G. and Codreanu, C. 2005. "Present situation and trends in
Romanian forestry" in Legal Aspects of European Forest Sustainable Development: Proceedings of the
6th IUFRO 6.13.00 Group Meeting. Editura Universitatii Transilvania din Brasov, Romania:157–171 .

Abrudan, Ioan Vasile, Viorel Marinescu, Ovidiu Ionescu, Florin Ioras, Sergiu Andrei Horodnic, and Radu
Sestras. 2009. “Developments in the Romanian Forestry and its Linkages with other Sectors” in Notulae
Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca: 37 (2): 14-21

Abrudan, Ioan Vasile. 2012. “A Decade of Non-State Administration of Forests in Romania:
Achievements and Challenges” in International Forestry Review Vol.14 (3): 275-284

Aghion, Philippe, Daron Acemoglu, Leonardo Bursztyn and David Hemous. 2011. “The Environment and
Directed Technical Change.” Growth and Sustainability Policies for Europe (GRASP) project of the
European Commission (EC). Working Paper 21. Brussels: EC.

Albu, Anca Nicoleta, Marius Lungu, and Liliana Panaitescu. 2010. “Influence of Forest Curtains on Crops
in South Dobrogea” in Research Journal of Agricultural Science, 42 (3): 367-371.

Almihoub, Ali Ahmed Ali, Joseph M. Mula and Mohammad Mafizur Rahman. 2013. "Marginal Abatement
Cost Curves (MACCs): Important Approaches to Obtain (Firm and Sector) Greenhouse Gases (GHGs)
Reduction" in International Journal of Economics and Finance. Volume 5, No. 5, 2013. School of
Accounting, Economics and Finance, Faculty of Business and Law, University of Southern Queensland,
Australia.

Amacher, G.S., Brazee, R.J. and Deegen, P. 2011. "Faustmann Continues to Yield" in Journal of Forest
Economics, 17 (3): 231-234.

Andreas Kopp, Rachel I. Block, and Atsushi Iimi. 2011. Turning the Right Corner: Ensuring Development
through a Low-Carbon Transport Sector. World Bank: Washington D.C. Available at: http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2013/05/31/000445729_20130531
125005/Rendered/PDF/780860PUB0EPI0050240130right0corner.pdf

Aphekom (Improving Knowledge and Communication for Decision Making on Air Pollution and Health in
Europe). 2011. Summary Report of the Aphekom Project 2008 - 2011. Available at:
http://www.aphekom.org/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=5532fafa-921f-4ab1-9ed9-
c0148f7da36a&groupId=10347

Association for Promoting Electric Vehicles in Romania (AVER). Available at: www.aver.ro.

Atanasiu, B., M. and Economidou, J. Maio. 2012.The Challenges, Dynamics and Activities in the Building
Sector and its Energy Demand in Romania. D2.1 of WP2 from Entranze Project. Available at:
http://www.entranze.eu/files/downloads/D2_1/D2_1_Short_country_                 summary_report_-final-
Romania_july.pdf (accessed on 26 August, 2014).

Author unknown. 2003. Monitoring Plan for Changes in Carbon Stocks in Forest Plantations.
(Afforestation of Degraded Agricultural Land Project in Romania). Agreement between National Forest
Administration: Romsilva and Prototype Carbon Fund.

Autonomous Thermal Energy Distribution Bucharest (RADET). 2015. About Us. Available at:
http://www.radet.ro/despre.php.
AVENSA Consulting. Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan Bucharest – Ilfov Conglomeration; Technical
Report: Transportation Surveys 2015.

Badea O. and Neagu S. 2010. "Volume Growth Losses for Trees and Forest Stands in the Romanian
Intensive Monitoring System" in Proceedings of the Romanian Academy. Series B, 2013, 3, p. 261-268.

Badea Ovidiu and Stefan Neagu. 2010. “Volume Growth Losses for Trees and Forest Stands in the
Romanian Intensive Monitoring System” in Proceedings of the Romanian Academy. Series B. 2010 (3):
261–268.

Badea, Ovidiu, Andrzej Bytnerowicz, Diana Silaghi, Stefan Neagu, Ion Barbu, Carmen Iacoban, Corneliu
Iacob, Gheorghe Guiman, Elena Preda, Ioan Seceleanu, Marian Oneata, Ion Dumitru, Viorela Huber, Horia
Iuncu, Lucian Dinca, Stefan Leca and Ioan Taut. 2012. "Status of the Southern Carpathian Forests in the
Long-Term Ecological Research Network" in Environmental Monitoring Assessment 184:7491–
7515.

Baker, Jonathan, et al. 2014. "Quantifying the Impact of Renewable Energy Futures on Cooling Water
Use" in JAWRA Journal of the American Water Resources Association 50.5: 1289-1303.

Balash, Peter, Christopher Nichols and Nadejda Victor. 2013. "Multi-Regional Evaluation of the U.S.
Electricity Sector Under Technology and Policy Uncertainties: Findings from MARKAL EPA9rUS Modeling"
in Socio-Economic Planning Sciences. Volume 47, Issue 2, 2013, pp 89 -119. Elsevier. Available at:
http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:soceps:v:47:y:2013:i:2:p:89-119
BERD. 2011. Assessment of the Biomass Chains Including Technologies and Cost Structure. Bucharest.
Bertelsmann Stiftung: Sustainable Governance Indicators (SGI). 2014. Georgy Ganev, Vesselin Dimitrov,
Frank Bönker (Coordinator). Romania Report. Gutersloh, Germany.

Bhattacharyya, S. C. and G. R. Timilsina. 2010. “Modelling Energy Demand of Developing Countries: Are
the Specific Features Adequately Captured?” in Energy Policy 38: 1979-1990.

Bianco, V., O. Manca, S. Nardini and A. A. Minea. 2010. “Analysis and Forecasting of Nonresidential
Electricity Consumption in Romania” in Applied Energy 87: 3584-3590.

Biennenvaartinfo. Inland Navigation. Available at:
http://www.binnenvaart.be/en/binnenvaartinfo/scheepstypes.asp
Bloomberg. 2010. Carbon Markets - North America - Research Note. Bloomberg New Energy Finance.
Bockel, L., Sutter, P., Touchemoulin, O. and Jonsson, M. 2012. Using Marginal Abatement Cost Curves
to Realize the Economic Appraisal of Climate Smart Agriculture. Policy Options. Rome. Food and
Agricultural Organisation.

Bohateret VM. 2012. "Readjusting Romania’s Forestry Policy with a View to the Year 2050" in Journal
of Settlements and Spatial Planning. mr. 1/2012.

Börjesson, Pål and Leif Gustavsson. 2000. "Greenhouse Gas Balances in Building Construction : Wood
versus Concrete from Lifecycle and Forest Land-Use Perspectives" in Energy Policy 28 (9), pp. 575-588.

Borlea GF, Ignea G. 2006. Lucrările sesiuni ştiinţifice Pădurea şi dezvoltarea durabilă (The Present
Forest Policy and the Market for Forest Products). Braşov, Romania: 2005-2006. 633-638

Borncamp, Steven, of Romania Green Building Council. Interviewed in July 2014.


Borz, Stelian A., Rudolf Derczeni, Bogdan Popa and Mihai-Daniel Nita. 2013. Regional Profile of the
Biomass Sector in Romania. FOROPA (Biomass to the Masses). Romania: Brasov. Available at:
http://www.foropa.eu/files/country_reports/country%20report%20romania.pdf

BP.      Statistical     Review    of     World      Energy.      Reviewed         online               at
http://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/about-bp/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-
energy.html in June 2003

Brouwer, Roy, Luke Brander, Onno Kuik, Elissaios Papyrakis and Ian Bateman. 2013. A Synthesis of
Approaches to Assess and Value Ecosystem Services in the EU in the Context of TEEB. Final Report. VU
University Amsterdam: Institute for Environmental Studies.

Bucharest Statistical Yearbook. 2012.

Building Performance Institute Europe (BPIE). 2014. Renovating Romania: A Strategy for the Energy
Renovation         of         Romania’s         Building        Stock.        Available        at:
http://bpie.eu/renovating_romania.html#.VWxEQzLGVyU.

Busuioc Aristita, and Alexandru Dumitrescu. 2011. Downscaled Climate Change Projections for
Romania (a presentation). Prepared by National Meteorological Administration: Bucharest.

Capros P., Van Regemorter D., Paroussos L., Karkatsoulis P., Fragkiadakis C., Tsani S. and Charalampidis I.
The GEM-E3 Model Reference Manual. Available at: http://www.e3mlab.ntua.gr/manuals/GEMref.PDF

CBI Climate Change Task Force. 2007. Climate Change: Everyone's Business. London: CBI.

Cevero, R. 2005. Accessible Cities and Regions: A Framework for Sustainable Transport and Urbanism in
the 21st Century. University of California at Berkeley Working Paper UCB-ITS-VWP-2005-3. Available at:
http://www.its.berkeley.edu/publications/UCB/2005/VWP/UCB-ITS-VWP-2005-3.pdf

Chang, S.J. 2001. "One Formula, Myriad Conclusions, 150 Years of Practicing the Faustmann Formula in
Central Europe and the USA" in Forest Policy and Economics, 2 (2), 97-99.

Chen, Wenying. 2005. "The Costs of Mitigating Carbon Emissions in China: Findings from China MARKAL-
MACRO Modeling" in Energy Policy.Volume 33, pp 885-896. 2005. Elsevier. Global Climate Change
Institute, Tsinghua Univeristy, Beijing.

Chira D., Danescu F., Geambasu N, Rosu C., Chira F., Mihalciuc V., and Surdu A. 2005. "Particularitati
Ale Uscarii Fagului in Perioada 2001-2004" in Annals of Forest Research 48:3-20.

Chira, Danut, Florin Danescu, Nicolae Geambasu, Constantin Rosu, Florentina Chira, Vasile Mihalciuc
and Aurelia Surdu. “Beech Decline Characteristics in 2001-2004” in Anal ICAS 48: 3-20.

CJ Pen and M Hoogerbrugge of European Metropolitan Network Institute (EMI). 2012. Economic Vitality
of               Bucharest.         The             Hague.               Available              at:
file:///C:/Users/wb457923/Downloads/Report%20EMI_Case_Study_Bucharest.pdf.

Colliers International. 2011. Global Central Business District Parking Rate Survey. Available at:
http://downtownhouston.org/site_media/uploads/attachments/2011-07-
19/Colliers_International_Global_Parking_Rate_Survey_2011.pdf

Comisia Nationala de Prognoza. Proiecţia Principalilor Indicatori Macroeconomici Pentru Perioada 2014
– 2017. Varianta de iarna, 5 Martie 2014.
Covenant of Mayers Committed to Local Sustainable Energy. Sustainable Energy Action Plans. Available
at: http://www.covenantofmayors.eu/actions/sustainable-energy-action-plans

Covenant        of       Mayors.         Signatories.        Reviewed         online         at
http://www.covenantofmayors.eu/about/signatories_en.html?q=Search+for+a+Signatory...&country_s
earch=ro&population=&date_of_adhesion=&status= on September 6, 2013.

Criqui, P. 2009. The POLES model: POLES State of the Art LEPIIPEPE, CNRS Grenoble and ENERDATA
s.a.s.

Danish Energy Agency, OECD and UNEP Riso Centre. 2013. National Greenhouse Gas Emissions Baseline
Scenarios.   Learning     from  Experiences     in    Developing    Countries.   Available     at:
http://www.unepdtu.org/Newsbase/2013/04/ New-Publication-Launched--National-Greenhouse-Gas-
Emissions-Baseline-Scenarios

Dellink, Rob, Marjan Hofkesb, Ekko van Ierlanda and Harmen Verbruggenb. 2004. "Dynamic Modelling
of Pollution Abatement in a CGE Framework" in Economic Modelling. Volume 21, Issue 6, December
2004, pp 965–989. Elsevier. Available at:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264999303000877

Directive 2014 2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 on the
Deployment         of        Alternative     Fuels       Infrastructure.       Available       at:
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/urban/cpt/index_en.htm.

Drăgoi, M., Palaghianu, C. and Miron- Onciul, M. 2015. "Benefit, Cost and Risk Analysis on Extending
the Forest Roads Network: A Case Study in Crasna Valley (Romania)" in Annals of Forest Research 1-13.

Dragoi, Marin. 2010. “Compensating the Opportunity Cost of Forest Functional Zoning - Two
Alternative Options for the Romanian Forest Policy” in Annals of Forest Research 53(1): 81-92.

Duduman ML, Isaia G, and Olenici N. 2011. "Ips Duplicatus (Coleoptera: Curculionidae, Scolytinae)
Distribution in Romania. Preliminary Results" in Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Brașov. Series II,
Vol. 4 (53) No.2: 19-27.

Duduman, M.-L., Olenici, N., Valetina, O. and Laura, B. 2013. The Impact of Natrual Disturbances on the
Norway Spruce Special Cultures Situated in North Eastern Romania, in Relation to the Management Type.
International Union of Forest Research Organizations (IUFRO).

Dumitraşcu, Monica, Ines Grigorescu, Gheorghe Kucsicsa, Carmen-Sofia Gragota and Mihaela Năstase.
2011. “Assessing the Potential Distribution of the Invasive Plant Species Related to the Key Environmental
Driving Forces in Comana Natural Parkâ" in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Environmental Science and Technology: B735-B742. Rhodes, Greece, 8-10 September,
2011.

Ekins, P., Kesicki, F. and Smith, A. 2011. Marginal Abatement Cost Curves: A Call for caution. London,
United Kingdom: Energy Institute, University of College London.

Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP). Tool for Rapid Assessment of City Energy
(TRACE): Helping Cities Use Energy Efficiently. Available at: http://esmap.org/TRACE

ENTRANZE (2014). Data Tool (Online). Available at http://www.entranze.eu/tools/interactive-data-tool
(accessed on 26 August, 2014).

Environmental Change Institute (ECI). Oxford University Centre for the Environment.

EU Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 2002 2002 (2002/91/EC) and its Recast (2010/31/EU)


Europe in a Changing Climate. Country Report for Romania: Biodiversity Report. Prepared by Centre for
Climate Adaptation. Available at: http://www.climateadaptation.eu/romania/biodiversity/

European Association for Coal and Lignite (EURACOAL). Romania. Reviewed online                             at
http://www.euracoal.org/pages/layout1sp.php?idpage=77 in 2014.

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development (MARD). 2007. Forestry and Forest Industry in Romania. Wood Sector Study. Bucharest.

European Business Aviation Association (ABAA). Aviation Taxes in Europe: a Snapshot. 2013. Available at:
http://www.ebaa.org/documents/document/20140116101401-aviation_taxes_in_europe_-
_a_snapshot_jan_2014.pdf

European Commission (EC). 2010. Green Paper on Forest Protection and Information in the EU: Preparing
Forests for Climate Change. Prepared by Secretariat (SEC). 163 Final. Brussels.

European Commission (EC). 2011a. A Roadmap for Moving to a Competitive Low Carbon Economy in
2050.   COM/2011/0112       final.   Brussels.  Available   at:    http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52011DC0112

European Commission (EC). 2011b. White Paper: Roadmap to a Single European Transport Area –
Towards a Competitive and Resource Efficient Transport System. Brussels, March 28, 2011. (COM) 2011
144 final. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/strategies/doc/2011_white_paper/white_paper_com%282011
%29_144_en.pdf.

European Commission (EC). 2012. Position of the Commission Services on the Development of
Partnership Agreement and Programs in Romania for the Period 2014-2020. Ref. Ares (2012)1240252 -
19/10/2012.

European Commission (EC). 2013a. EU Energy, Transport and GHG Emissions Trends to 2050- Reference
Scenario 2013. Prepared by Directorate General for Energy (DG ENER), Directorate General for Climate
Action (DG CLIMA), and Directorate General for Mobility and Transport (DG MOVE). Brussels: EC.
Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/transport/media/publications/doc/trends-to-2050- update-2013.pdf

European Commission (EC). 2013b. Recommendation for a Council Recommendation on Romania’s
2013 National Reform Programme and Delivering a Council Opinion on Romania’s Convergence
Programme for 2012-2016. COM (2013) 373 final. Brussels, May 29, 2013. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/nd/csr2013_romania_en.pdf.

European Commission (EC). 2014. The 2015 Ageing Report: Underlying Assumptions and Projection
Methodologies. Prepared by Directorate General for Economic and Financial Affairs (DG ECFIN). Brussels:
EC.                                          Available                                              at:
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/european_economy/2014/pdf/ee8_en.pdf

European Commission (EC). 2015. Consumer Prices of Petroleum Products Including Duties and Taxies.
Available                                                                                      at:
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/2015_04_13_with_taxes_1747.pdf

European Commission (EC). Agriculture and Climate Change. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/climate-change/index_en.htm
European Commission (EC). Europe 2020 Targets: Climate Change and Energy. Prepared by Directorate
General for Climate Action (DG CLIMA). Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/g-
gas/progress/docs/13_energy_and_ghg_en.pdf.

European Commission (EC). Horizon 2020. The EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation.
Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/

European Commission (EC). Multiannual Financial Framework 2014-20. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/budget/mff/index_en.cfm

European Commission (EC). Overview of CAP Reform 2014-20. December 2013. Prepared by Directorate
Generale Agriculture and Rural Development, Unit for Agricultural Policy Analysis and Perspectives.
Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/policy-perspectives/policy-briefs/05_en.pdf
European Commission (EC). Regional Innovation Monitor Plus: Bucharest-Ilfov. Available a:
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/regional-innovation-monitor/base-profile/bucharest-
ilfov.

European Commission Joint Research Center (JRC). 2012a. Submission of Information on Forest
Management Reference Levels by Romania.

European Commission Joint Research Center (JRC). 2012b. Assessing Agriculture Vulnerabilities for the
design of Effective Measures for Adaptation to Climate Change (AVEMAC Project).. Available at:
http://mars.jrc.ec.europa.eu/mars/Projects/AVEMAC

European Cooperation in Science and Technology (COST). 2011. Buses with High Level of Service:
Fundamental Characteristics and Recommendations for Decision- Making and Research. Results from
35 European cities. Final report – COST action TU0603, October 2011. Available at:
http://www.uitp.org/sites/default/files/cck-focus-papers-
files/BHLS_COST_final_report_October2011.pdf

European Environment Agency (EEA). 2015. SOER 2015 - The European Environment - State and Outlook
2015. A Comprehensive Assessment of the European Environment's State, Trends and Prospects, in a
Global Context. Available at: http://www.eea.europa.eu/soer.

European Environment Agency. 2011. GHG Trends and Projections in Romania .

European Union (EU). 2014a. Assessment of the 2014 national reform programme and convergence
programme for Romania: Council Recommendation. Staff Working Document (SWD) 424 Final. Brussels:
EU.

European Union (EU). 2014b. Database on Energy Saving Potentials (Online). Available at
http://www.eepotential .eu/esd.php (accessed on 26 August, 2014).

European Union (EU). 2014c. EU Energy, Transport and GHG Emissions Trends to 2050: Reference
Scenario 2013. Luxembourg: EU.

European Union (EU). 2014d. Energy Prices and Costs in Europe. SWD 20 Final. Brussels: EU.

European Wind Energy Association (EWEA). 2013. Wind in Power: 2013 European Statistics. Available at:
http://www.ewea.org/fileadmin/files/library/publications/statistics/EWEA_Annual_Statistics_2013.pdf

Eurostat. 2010. Agricultural Census 2010.
Eurostat.         2012.        Motorization        Rates.       Reviewed       online       at
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/table.do?tab=table&init=1&language=en&pcode=tsdpc340&plugin=
1 on April 11, 2015.

Eurostat. 2013. Agriculture - Greenhouse Gas Emission Statistics. October 2013. Eurostat. 2014a.
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery Statistics.
Eurostat. 2014b. Annual National Account (Online). Available at http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu
/portal/page/portal/national_accounts/data/database (accessed on 25 August, 2014).

Eurostat. 2014c. Energy Statistics (Online). Available at http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/
page/portal/energy/data/database (accessed on 25 August, 2014).

Eurostat. 2014d. Population Projections (online). Available at http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu
/portal/page/portal/population/data/database (accessed on 25 August, 2014).

Eurostat. 2015a. Load Capacity of Self-propelled Vessels and Dumb and Pushed Vessels by Date of
Construction. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-datasets/-/iww_eq_age_loa

Eurostat. 2015b. Number of Vessels by Date of Construction. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-datasets/-/iww_eq_age.

Eurostat. 2015c. Population with Tertiary Education Attainment by Sex and Age. Available at:
http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=edat_lfse_07&lang=en.

Eurostat. 2015d. Share of Renewable Energy in Gross Final Energy Consumption. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/table.do?tab=table&init=1&language=en&pcode=t2020_31&plugin
=1

Eurostat. 2015e. Tertiary Educational Attainment, Age Group 25-64 by Sex and NUTS 2 Regions. Available
at: http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=tgs00109&lang=en

Executive Unit for Financing Higher Education, Research, Development and Innovation, and Ministry of
Education and Science Research (MECS). 2014. Strategia Naţionala pentru Cercetare şi Inovare 2014-
2020 (Research and Innovation Strategy 2014-2020). Bucharest. Available at:
http://www.cdi2020.ro/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/STRATEGIA_Versiunea-tehnica_Februarie-
2014.pdf.

Fabian, Kesicki. 2012. "Costs and Potentials of Reducing CO2 Emissions in the UK Domestic Stock from a
Systems Perspective" in Energy and Buildings. Volume 51, pp 203–211, 2012.

Fabian, Kesicki. 2013. "Marginal Abatement Cost Curves: Combining Energy System Modelling and
Decomposition Analysis" in Environmental Modeling & Assessment. Volume 18, Issue 1, pp 27-37,
2013.

Fekete B, Vorosmarty C and Grabs W. 2002. High-Resolution Fields of Global Runoff Combining
Observed River Discharge and Simulated Water Balances, Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 16:3 15-1 to
15-10.

Food      and      Agriculture   Organization        Statistics    (FAO      STAT).      Available   at
http://faostat3.fao.org/download/P/PP/E

Food and Agriculture Organization. Irrigation and Drainage Paper 56: Table 24, Seasonal Yield
Functions. Accessed on May 24, 2012 from http://www.fao.org/docrep/x0490e/x0490e0e.htm.
Forest Research and Management Institute (ICAS). 2013. Carbon Sequestration Report over 10 year
Period for 6000 Hectares. Bucharest.

FRD Center Market Entry Services. 2011. Romanian Furniture Sector - 2011 Market Overview. Report
prepared for the Trade and Investment Promotion Section, Embassy of the Republic of Poland in Romania.

Gavrilescu, Camelia. 2014. Agricultural Commodities and Processed Products Ratio in the Romanian
International Agrifood Trade. Institute of Agricultural Economics, Romanian Academy, Bucharest.

Georgescu, Olga. 2009. Romanian Forest Policies for Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change.
Presentation made at FAO-REU Budapest, 2010.

Green Growth Knowledge Platform (GGKP). Available at: www.ggkp.org.

Hlásny T and Turčáni M. 2009. "Insect Pest as Climate Change Driven Disturbances in Forest
Ecosystems" in Strelcová et al. (eds) Bioclimatology and Natural Hazards, Springer Nederlands pp. 165-
178.

Hlásny T and Turčáni M. 2009. "Insect Pest as Climate Change Driven Disturbances in Forest
Ecosystems" in Strelcová et al. (eds) Bioclimatology and Natural Hazards. Springer Nederlands, 165-
178.

Ian Sue Wing. 2008. "The Synthesis of Bottom-Up and Top-Down Approaches to Climate Policy Modeling:
Electric Power Technology Detail in a Social Accounting Framework" in Energy Economics. Volume 30, pp
547-573, 2008. Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, MIT, Center for Energy and
Environmental Studies and Department of Geography and Environment, Boston University, United States.

IATA Economics. 2008. Air Travel Demand. Available at:
https://www.iata.org/whatwedo/Documents/economics/air_travel_demand.pdf

Institute for Energy and Transport, European Union (EU). 2012. Heat and Cooling Demand and Market
Perspective. JRC Scientific and Policy Report EUR 25381 EN. Luxembourg: EU.

Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP). 2011. Europe’s Parking U-Turn: From
Accommodation to Regulation. Available at:https://www.itdp.org/europes-parking-u-turn-from-
accommodation-to-regulation/

Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP). 2014. European Parking Best Practices: The
Power of Parking. Available at: https://www.itdp.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/Euro-Parking-Fact-
Sheet.pdf

Institute of Energy, European Union (EU). 2009. Electricity Consumption and Efficiency Trends in
European Union: Status Report 2009. JRC Scientific and Policy Report EUR 24005 EN.

Institutul National de Statistica (INS). 2011. Census. Available at:
http://www.recensamantromania.ro/rezultate-2/

International Energy Agency (IEA). 2005. Energy Statistics Manual. Paris.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2014a. Energy Efficiency Indicators: Fundamentals on Statistics. Paris.

International Energy Agency (IEA). 2014b. World Energy Outlook 2014. International Financial Corperation
(IFC). EDGE Green Buildings Rating Tool.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2014. Romania: IMF Country Report No. 14/87. Washington, D.C.

International Transport Forum (ITF) and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2008. Greenhouse Gas Reduction Strategies in the Transport Sector: Preliminary Report. Available
at: http://www.internationaltransportforum.org/pub/pdf/08ghg.pdf/

Ioja CI, Patroescu M, Rozylowicz L, Popescu VD, Verghelet M, Zotta MI and Felciuc M. 2010. "The
Efficacy of Romania’s Protected Areas Network in Conserving Biodiversity" in Biological Conservation
143:2468–2476.

Ivan, Gheorghe. 2012. “Innovative Technology for Establishment and Maintenance of Crop Protection
Forestry Belts and Combating of Drought and Desertification” in Annals of the University of Craiova -
Agriculture, Montanology, Cadastre Series. Vol. XLII 2012/2: 359-365.

Jamus Lim. May 23, 2010. “Environmentally-Friendly Growth Without the Pain” in Prospects for
Development.         Washington,          DC:        World         Bank.        Available at:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/prospects/environmentallyfriendly-growth-without-the-pain#1.

Jebaraj, S., S. Iniyan. 2006. “A Review of Energy Models” in Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
10: 281-311.

Jorge Morales Pedraza. 2015. Electrical Energy Generation in Europe: The Current and Future Role of
Conventional Energy Sources in the Regional Generation of Electricity. Springer International Publishing.

Jorgenson, D. W. 1984. "An Econometric Approach to General Equilibrium Analysis" in M. Hazewinkel and
A.H.G. Rinooy Kan (eds.), Current Developments in the Interface: Economics, Econometrics, Mathematics
, Dordrecht, D. Reidel, 1982, 125-157.

Kaya, Yoichi and Keiichi Yokoburi. 1997. Environment, Energy, and Economy: Strategies for
Sustainability. Tokyo: United Nations University Press.

Kesicki, Fabian and Neil Strachan. 2011. "Marginal Abatement Cost (MAC) Curves: Confronting Theory and
Practice" in Environmental Science & Policy. Volume 14, pp 1195-1204, 2011. Elsevier. UCL Energy
Institute, University College London.

Kesicki, Fabian. 2013a. "Marginal Abatement Cost Curves: Combining Energy System Modelling and
Decomposition Analysis" in Environmental Modeling and Assessment. Volume 18 (1), pp 27-37. 2013.

Kesicki, Fabian. 2013b. "What Are the Key Drivers of MAC Curves? A Partial-Equilibrium Modelling
Approach for the UK" in Energy Policy. Volume 58, pp 142-151, 2013. UCL Energy Institute, University
College London.

Knorn, J.A.N., Kuemmerle, T., Radeloff, V.C., Keeton, W.S., Gancz, V., Biris, I.-A. et al. 2013. "Continued
Loss of Temperate Old-growth Forests in the Romanian Carpathians Despite an Increasing Protected Area
Network" in Environmental Conservation, 40 (2), 182-193.

Lange H, Økland B, and Krokene P. 2006. "Thresholds in the Life Cycle of the Spruce Bark Beetle under
Climate Change" in Interjournal for Complex Systems, 1648.

Lau, L. 1984. Comments on Mansur and Whalley's Numerical Specification of Applied General
Equilibrium Models: Estimation, Calibration and Data. In H. Scarf, J. B. Shoven (eds), 127-137.

Leather, James and the Clean Air Initiative for Asian Cities Center Team. 2009. Rethinking Transport and
Climate Change, Asian Development Bank Development Working Paper Series No.10, December
2009.

Lehner, B., G. Czisch, and S. Vassolo. 2001. Europe’s Hydropower Potential Today and in the Future.
EuroWasser, Center for Environmental Systems Research, University of Kassel, Kassel. Available at:
http://www.usf.uni-kassel.de/ftp/dokumente/kwws/5/ew_8_hydropower_low.pdf.

Mansur, A., and J. Whalley. 1984. Numerical Specification of Applied General Equilibrium Models:
Estimation, Calibration and Data. In H Scarf. and J. B Shoven (eds.), 69-126.

Marcotullio PJ, A Sarzynski, J Albrecht, N Schulz and J Garcia. 2013. “The Geography of Global Urban
Greenhouse Gas Emissions: an Exploratory Analysis” in Climatic Change. 121:621–634.

McCallum, S. et al. 2013. Support to the Development of the EU Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change:
Background report to the Impact Assessment, Part I – Problem Definition, Policy Context and Assessment
of     Policy      Options.     Environment      Agency        Austria,     Vienna.      Available    at:
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/adaptation/what/docs/background_report_part1_en.pdf

McKane, Aimee, Lynn Price, and Stephane de la Rue du Can. 2008. Policies for Promoting Industrial Energy
Efficiency in Developing Countries and Transition Economies. Vienna: United Nations Industrial
Development Organisation.

Mihaila Raduc. 2010. Bucharest - Sustainable Mobility Case Study. School of Business, Economics and Law,
Goteborg                          University.                        Available                        at:
http://gul.gu.se/public/pp/public_courses/course39824/published/1288099728894/resourceId/15862
469/content/Bucharest_Radu.pdf.

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD). 2011. Rehabilitation and Reform for Irrigation
Systems.

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD). 2013. National Rural Development Program
2014-2020.

Ministry of Economy. 2013. Strategia Naţionala pentru Export 2014-2020 (National Strategy for Exports
2014-2020). Bucharest. Available at: http://www.minind.ro/strategia_export/SNE_2014_2020.pdf

Ministry of Economy. 2014. Strategia Naţionala pentru Competitivitate 2014-2020 (National Strategy for
Competitiveness           2014-2020).           Bucharest.                       Available               at:
http://www.minind.ro/PROPUNERI_LEGISLATIVE/2014/SNC_2014_2020.pdf.

Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC). 2012. National Strategy on Climate Change 2013
– 2020. Bucharest.

Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC). 2013a. Romania’s 2013 Report for the Assessment
of Projected Progress under Decision no. 280/2004/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
Concerning a Mechanism for Monitoring Community Greenhouse Gas Emissions and for Implementing the
Kyoto Protocol. Paper commissioned to Institutul de Studii si Proiectari Energetice (ISPE).

Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC). 2013b. Romania’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory
1989-2011. Bucharest.

Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC). 2013c. Romania’s Sixth National Communication
on Climate Change and First Biennial Report. Bucharest.

Ministry of Environment and Forests. 2010. Romania’s Fifth National Communication on Climate
Change under The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Bucharest.

Ministry of Internal Affairs: General Inspectorate for Emergency Situations. 2013a. Reducing Vulnerability
to Risks, Supporting Adaptation to Climate Change and Developing Disaster Management Systems.
Explanatory Note. Bucharest.

Ministry of Internal Affairs: General Inspectorate for Emergency Situations. 2013b. Risk Analysis of
Fires. Bucharest.

Monsalve, Carolina. 2013. Controlling Greenhouse Gas Emissions Generated by the Transport Sector in
ECA: Policy Options, World Bank Transport Paper TP-40, February 2013. Available at:
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTTRANSPORT/Resources/336291-1227561426235/5611053-
1229359963828/TP40- Final.pdf

Moog, M. and Borchert, H. 2001. "Increasing Rotation Periods During a Time of Decreasing Profitability of
Forestry — a Paradox?" in Forest Policy and Economics, 2 (2), 101-116.

Moss, R. et al. 2007. Realizing the Potential of Eenergy Efficiency. Targets, Policies and Measures for G8
Countries. United Nations Expert Report.

Municipality of Vaslui. 2009. Sustainable Energy Action Plan of Vaslui 2011-2020.

Nabuurs, G.J., O. Masera, K. Andrasko, P. Benitez-Ponce, R. Boer, M. Dutschke, E. Elsiddig, J.
FordRobertson, P. Frumhoff, T. Karjalainen, O. Krankina, W.A. Kurz, M. Matsumoto, W. Oyhantcabal, N.H.
Ravindranath, M.J. Sanz Sanchez, and X. Zhang. 2007. "Forestry" in Climate Change: Mitigation.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [B. Metz, O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, L.A. Meyer (eds)], Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
Nabuurs, G.-J., Schelhaas, M.-J., Mohren, G.M.J. and Field, C.B. 2003. "Temporal Evolution of the
European Forest Sector Carbon Sink From 1950 to 1999" in Global Change Biology, 9 (2), 152-160.

Nakata, T. 2004. “Energy-Economic Models and the Environment” in Progress in Energy and
Combustion Science 30: 417-78.

National Environment Protection Agency (NEPA) of Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC).
2014. Raport Național Privind Starea Mediului Anul 2013 (National Report Regarding the Environment
Status). Romania: Bucharest. Available at: http://www.anpm.ro/documents/12220/2209838/RSM-
2013+fata+verso+final.pdf/76379d09-39c7-
4ef9-9f04-d336406eda62

National Forest Administration (Romsilva). 2014. Report regarding the Activity of NFA Romsilva in
2013.                                            Available                                        at:
http://www.rosilva.ro/files/content/bucuresti/meniu/comunicare/comunicate_de_presa/prg_activitat
e_2013.pdf.

National Institute of Statistics (INS). 2014. Romanian Statistical Yearbook 1990-2012 (CD-ROM). Bucharest.

National Institute of Statistics (NIS). 2011. Statistical Yearbook 2011. Available at:
http://www.insse.ro/cms/files/Annuar%20statistic/14/14%20Agricultura%20silvicultura_ro.pdf. National
Institute of Statistics (NIS). Press Release no.37, 11.02.2014.
Naucler, T. Enkvist, P.PA. 2009. Pathways to Low-Carbon Economy: Version 2 of the Global Greenhouse
Gas Abatement Cost Curve. New York: McKinsey & Company.


Naumann, Sandra, Gerardo Anzaldua, Pam Berry, Sarah Burch, McKenna Davis, Ana Frelih-Larsen, Holger
Gerdes and Michele Sanders. 2011. Assessment of the Potential of Ecosystem-based Approaches to
Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in Europe. Final report to the European Commission, DG
Environment.

Neşu, I. 1999. Perdele Forestiere de Protecţie a câmpului” Edit. STARTIPP, Slobozia.

Nicolas Ahouissoussi, James E. Neumann and Jitendra P. Srivastava (eds), 2014. Building Resilience to
Climate Change in the South Caucasus Region’s Agricultural Sector. World Bank: Washington, DC.

Noble-Soft Systems Pty Ltd. Answer- TIMES "Getting Started" Manual. January 2014. Available at:
http://www.iea-etsap.org/web/docs/ANSWER-TIMES%20Getting%20Started%20Manual-plus- Appendix-
Jan2014-final.pdf

O. Kiuila and T.F. Rutherford. 2013. "Methodological and Ideological Options: The Cost of Reducing CO2
Emissions: Integrating Abatement Technologies into Economic Modeling" in Ecological Economics. Volume
87, pp 62-71. Centre for Energy Policy and Economics, ETH Zürich; and Faculty of Economic Sciences,
University of Warsaw.

Official Journal of the European Union. 2010. Commission Decision of 22 October 2010 Adjusting the
Union-Wide Quantity of Allowances to be Issued Under the Union Scheme for 2013 and repealing Decision
2010/384/EU (notified under document C(2010) 7180). L279/34. 23.10.2010

Olenici N, Duduman ML, Olenici V, Bouriaud O, Tomescu R, and Rotariu C. 2011. "The First Outbreak of Ips
Duplicatus in Romania" in Delb H, Pontuali S (eds.): Biotic Risks and Climate Change in Forests. Proceedings
of the Working Party 7.03.10 Methodology of Forest Insect and Disease Survey in Central Europe, 10th
Workshop September 20th-23rd, 2010, Freiburg, Germany. Berichte Freiburger Forstliche Forschung Heft,
FVA: 135-140.

Osborn, H. 1984. “Estimating Precipitation in Mountainous Regions” in Journal of Hydraulic
Engineering, Vol. 110, No. 12.

P.R. Shukla. 1995. "Greenhouse Gas Models and Abatement Costs for Developing Nations: A Critical
Assessment" in Energy Policy. Volume 23, No. 8, pp 677-687. Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad, India.

Paltsev, S., Reilly, J., Jacoby, H., Eckaus, R., McFarland, J. and Sarofim, M. 2005. The MIT Emissions
Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) Model: Version 4. Cambridge, USA: MIT Joint Program on the Science
and Policy of Global Change.

Pandey, R. 2002. “Energy Policy Modelling: Agenda for Developing Countries” in Energy Policy 30: 97-
106.

Pavelescu, Florin-Marius. 2013. "Long-Term Forecast" in Building Blocks in Modeling a Market Economy:
the Dobrescu Macromodel of Romania. Corina Saman and Bianca Pauna (eds.) New York: Nova Publishing
Inc.

Plan Urbanistic de Detaliu (PUD) (Detailed Urban Planning). Romania.

Planul Integrat De Dezvoltare Urbană(Pidu) Pentru Polul De Creştere (Pc) Braşov. Available at
http://www.brasovcity.ro/documente/public/constructii-urbanism/planul-integrat-de-dezvoltare-
urbana.pdf
Popa, Bodgan and Camille Bann. 2012. An Assessment of the Contribution of Ecosystems in Protected
Areas to Sector Growth and Human Well Being in Romania: Improving the Financial Sustainability of the
Carpathian System of Protected Areas (PAs). Final Report.

Popovici, V. 2011. “Power Generation Sector Restructuring in Romania—A Critical Assessment” in
Energy Policy 39: 1845-1866.

Railway Pro. 26th February 2013 Issue. European Funds Warm up Modernization Works in Romania.
Available at http://www.railwaypro.com/wp/?p=11645.

Regia Autonomă de Transport Bucureşti (RATB) (Bucharest Autonomous Transportation). Statistici
2014. Reviewed online at www.ratb.ro/statistici.php on April 26, 2015.

Remme, Uwe, Gary Goldstein, Ulrich Schellmann and Christoph Schlenzig. 2001. MESAP/TIMES - Advanced
Decision Support
for Energy and Environmental Planning. Institute of Energy Economics and Rational Use of Energy (IER),
University of Stuttgart and International Resources Group (IRG). Available at:
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.114.5609&rep=rep1&type=pdf

RENEXPO Southeast Europe. 7th International Conference - Biomass in Romania. Available at:
http://www.renexpo-bucharest.com/biomass-conference.html

Robinson, Sherman, Andrea Cattaneo, and Moataz El-Said. 1998. Estimating a Social Accounting Matrix
Using Cross Entropy Methods. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute.

Sanga, G. A. and G.D.M. Jannuzzi. 2005. Impacts of Efficient Stoves and Cooking Fuel Substitution in Family
Expenditures of Urban Households in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Sao Paulo: International Energy Initiative
(IEI), Latin America.

Senatla, Mamahloko, Bruno Merven, Alison Hughes and Brett Cohen. 2013. Marginal Abatement Cost
Curves: Mitigation Decision Support Tools. Mitigation Action Plans & Scenarios (MAPS). Issue 11. Cape
Town: South Africa.

Seymore, R., Inglesi-Lotz, J. and Blignaut, J. 2014. A Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory for South
Africa: A Comparative Analysis. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews (34), 371-379.

Smakhtin, V., Revenga, C. and Doll, P. 2004. "A Pilot Global Assessment of Environmental Water
Requirements and Scarcity" in Water International, 29, 307–317. (DOI:10.1080/02508060408691785)

Stancioiu, P.T. , Abrudan, I.V., Dutcha, I. Marinescu, V., Ionescu O., Ioras, F., Horodnic, S.A. and Sestras, R.
2010. "The Natura 2000 Ecological Network and Forests in Romania - Some Implications on Management
and Administration" in International Forestry Review Vol.12(1).

Stanilov, Kiril. 2007. “Housing Trends in Central and Eastern European Cities During and After the Period
of Transition" in Stanilov (ed), The Post-Socialist City: Urban Form and Space Transformations in Central
and Eastern Europe After Socialism. Dordrecht: Springer.

Stockholm Environment Institute. 2012. LEAP: Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Screening Exercise: For LEAP
and Excel. Stockholm: Stockholm Environment Institute.

Suganthi, L. and A. A. Samuel. 2012. “Energy Models for Demand Forecasting—A Review”in Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 16: 1223-1240.

SWARCO MIZAR. Urban Traffic Management, Romania, Bucharest 2007-2014. Available at:
http://www.swarco.com/mizar-en/Projects/ITS-References/URBAN-TRAFFIC-MANAGEMENT,- Romania,-
Bucharest-City-of-Bucharest
Transport & Mobility Leuven (TREMOVE). Information available at: http://www.tremove.org/.
Trombik J., Hlasny T., Dobor L. and Barcza Z., 2013. "Climatic Exposure of Forests in the Carpathians:
Exposure Maps and Anticipated Development" in International Scientific Conference for PhD students.

U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2013. Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas
Resources: An Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States. Available
at : ttp://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/worldshalegas/
UK Department for Transport. Factsheets: UK Transport Greenhouse Gas Emissions.

UK Government. Vehicle Tax Rebate Tables. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/vehicle-tax-rate-tables

United Nations (UN). 1982. Concepts and Methods in Energy Statistics, with Special Reference to
Energy Accounts and Balances: A Technical Report. Studies in Methods Series F No. 29. New York.

United Nations (UN). 2008. International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities:
Revision 4. ST/ESA/STAT/SER.M/4/Rev.4. New York.

United Nations (UN). 2011. International Recommendations for Energy Statistics (IRES): Draft version. New
York.

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 2014. Report of the Individual
Review of the Annual Submission of Romania Submitted in 2013. FCCC/ARR/2012/ROU. Available at
http://unfccc.int/resource /docs/2014/arr/rou.pdf (accessed on 25 August, 2014).

United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and International Center on Small Hydro
Power (ICSHP). World Small Hydropower Development Report. 2013. Available at:
http://www.smallhydroworld.org/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf/Europe_Eastern/WSHPDR_2013_Romani
a.pdf

Upham, Paul, Paula Kivimaa and Venla Virkamäki. 2013. "Path Dependence and Technological
Expectations in Transport Policy: the Case of Finland and the UK" in Journal of Transport Geography.
Volume 32, pp 12-22. Centre for Integrated Energy Research and Sustainability Research Institute,
University of Leeds; Finnish Environment Institute; and Department of Management and International
Business, Aalto University School of Business.

Urban Access Regulations. Overview of Low Emission Zones. Available at:
http://urbanaccessregulations.eu/general-overview/low-emission-zones-overview

Wächter, Petra. 2013. "The Usefulness of Marginal CO2-e Abatement Cost Curves in Austria" in Energy
Policy. Volume 61, pp 1116-1126, 2013. Institute of Technology Assessment of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Institute of the Environment and Regional Development, Vienna University of Economics and
Business Administration.

William R. Sutton, Jitendra P. Srivastava, and James E. Neumann (eds). 2013. Looking Beyond the Horizon:
How Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Responses Will Reshape Agriculture in Eastern Europe and
Central Asia. World Bank: Washington, DC.

Woods, A. and Coates, K.D. 2013. "Are Biotic Disturbance Agents Challenging Basic Tenets of Growth and
Yield and Sustainable Forest Management?" in Forestry, 86 (5), 543-554.

World Bank ESCAP. 2013a. Romania Regional Development Program: Improving Energy Efficiency in
Brasov, Romania: TRACE City Energy Efficiency Diagnostic Study.
World Bank ESCAP. 2013b. Romania Regional Development Program: Improving Energy Efficiency in
Cluj-Napoca, Romania: TRACE City Energy Efficiency Diagnostic Study.

World Bank ESCAP. 2013c. Romania Regional Development Program: Improving Energy Efficiency in
Ploiesti, Romania: TRACE City Energy Efficiency DiagnosticSstudy.

World Bank. 2008. Forest Sourcebook. Agriculture and Rural Development Department. World Bank:
Washington DC.

World Bank. 2009a. Internal documents of Romania Forest Development Project. Analysis of the
Economic Impact of Forest Road Rehabilitation.

World Bank. 2009b. World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington, D.C.

World Bank. 2011. Romania Functional Review: Environment, Water and Forestry. Vol 2: Forestry.

World Bank. 2013a. A Country Economic Memorandum. Romania: Reviving Romania’s Growth and
Convergence          Challenges          and          Opportunities.       Available  at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/18028709/reviving-romanias-growth-
convergence-challenges-opportunities-country-economic-memorandum

World Bank. 2013b. Balancing Act: Cutting Energy Subsidies while Protecting Affordability. Washington,
D.C.

World Bank. 2013c. Energy Sector Rapid Assessment. Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green
Growth Program, Component B Sector Report. Washington, D.C.

World Bank. 2013d. Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program Transport Rapid
Assessment Report, November 2013.

World Bank. 2013e. Support to the Government of FYR Macedonia: Transport Sector Green Growth and
Climate Change Analytical Work. Mitigation Report. Prepared by Atkins and iC Consulenten.

World Bank. 2014a. Summary of Sector Rapid Assessments and Recommendations for Incorporating
Climate Actions in the 2014-2020 Sectoral Operational Programs in Romania. Component B Synthesis
Report. Washington, D.C.

World Bank. 2014b. World Development Indicators (Online Data Bank). Washington, D.C.

World Bank. 2014c. Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program Component B
Sector Report: Urban Sector Rapid Assessment. Washington, D.C.

World Bank. 2015. Strengthening Recovery in Central and Eastern Europe - EU11 Regular Economic
Report. July 2014.

World Energy Council. 2013. World Energy Resources: 2013 Survey. Available at:
http://www.worldenergy.org/publications/2013/world-energy-resources-2013-survey/

World Energy Council. Gas in Romania. Available at:
http://www.worldenergy.org/data/resources/country/romania/gas/

WSP Group. 2008. Urban Transport Master Plan – Bucharest, Sibiu, and Ploiesti. Final Report.
EuropeAid/123579/D/SER/RO. Available at: http://www.scribd.com/doc/72999182/Master-Plan-
Transport-SB-1#scribd.
