    STRENGTHENING
                         FINANCIAL                             Governance Global Practice: Public Resource
                                                               Mobilization and Management (GGP/PRMM)
                                                               Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Team


                    REPORTING,
    STRENGTHENING
                                   MSMES
Completion Report: Connecting Voices of MENA initiative, co-
     financed by the Micro-, Small-, and Medium Enterprise
                       (MSME) Technical Assistance Facility
Table of Contents
Acronyms ...................................................................................................................................................... 2
Executive Summary....................................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction / Background............................................................................................................................ 6
CV MENA ....................................................................................................................................................... 7
Program Activities ......................................................................................................................................... 9
       1.      Bootcamps .................................................................................................................................... 9
       2.      Solutions Labs ............................................................................................................................. 14
       3.      Exchange Forum.......................................................................................................................... 16
       4.      Ma’arefah.................................................................................................................................... 20
       5.      Research and Training ................................................................................................................. 21
Leveraging Outcomes ................................................................................................................................. 24
Lessons Learned / Considerations for the Future ....................................................................................... 27
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................... 27




                                                                                                                                                1|Page
Acronyms

AA             Accounting and Auditing
AAA            Association of Accountants and Auditors
ACCA           Association of Chartered Certified Accountants
AFAA           Arab Federation of Accountants and Auditors
AICPA          American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
ASA            Accountability State Authority
CFR            Corporate Financial Reporting
CGFR           Corporate Governance and Financial Reporting
CNCC – CSOEC   Conseil Supérieur de l’Ordre des Experts-Comptables - Compagnie Nationale des
               Commissaires aux Comptes (France)
CPA            Certified Public Accountant
CPD            Continuing Professional Development (See CPE)
CPE            Continuing Professional Education (See CPD)
CSO            Civil Society Organization
CV MENA        Connecting Voices of Middle East and North Africa
EFSA           Egyptian Financial Supervisory Authority
ESAA           Egyptian Society of Accountants & Auditors
EU             European Union
FCCA           Fellow Chartered Certified Accountant
FSAP           Financial Sector Assessment Programs
IFRS           International Financial Reporting Standards
ISA            International Standards on Auditing
IAASB          International Accounting and Auditing Standards Board
IAESB          International Accounting Education Standards Board
IASB           International Accounting Standards Board
IESs           International Education Standards
IFAC           International Federation of Accountants
IFIAR          International Forum of Independent Audit Regulators
IFRS           International Financial Reporting Standards
LACPA          Lebanese Association of Certified Public Accountants
MENA           Middle East and North Africa
MoF            Ministry of Finance
MSMEs          Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
NGO            Non-Governmental Organizations
OECM           Ordre des Experts Comptables Maroc
OECT           Ordre des Experts Comptables Tunis
PACPA          Palestinian Association of Certified Public Accountants
PAFA           Pan African Federation of Accountants
PAO            Professional Accountancy Organization

                                                                                         2|Page
PWAT      Palestinian Women’s Accounting Technician (Project)
ROSC AA   Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) Accounting and Auditing
SAAP      EU-Egypt Association Agreement Programme
SAI       Supreme Audit Institution
SAICA     South African Institute of Chartered Accountants
SME       Small and Medium Enterprise
SMP       Small and Medium [accounting] Practices
SOE       State Owned Enterprises
TF        Trust Fund
UNCTAD    United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
XBRL      eXtensible Business Reporting Language




                                                                                   3|Page
Executive Summary
With support from the World Bank Micro-, Small-, and Medium Enterprises Technical Assistance Facility
for MENA Trust Fund (MSME TF), the Connecting Voices of Middle East and North Africa (CV MENA)
Initiative advanced interventions to increase awareness and provide technical assistance to strengthen
the accounting and auditing legal/regulatory, institutional, and professional capacity to enable the
development of Small and Medium [accounting] Practices (SMPs) and the MSME sector. CV MENA
Initiatives included:

       Bootcamp workshops which gathered policymakers and stakeholders to discuss and advance
        key issues related to MSME financial reporting,
       Solutions Lab virtual conference events which brought together experts and regional
        counterparts to learn and engage on key themes and emerging issues related to accountancy
        and MSMEs,
       Exchange Conferences which brought regional leaders and experts together in face-to-face
        annual forums to share knowledge and experience on issues related to MSME reporting and
        governance,
       Maarefah Community of Practice online moderation and events which allowed participants from
        around the MENA region and world to connect remotely and partake in ongoing dialogue on
        issues inherent to MSME reporting, and
       Pilot Training and Research support which was linked to overall CV MENA objectives of
        enhancing the provision of accountancy services provided to and reporting provided by MSMEs.

Over 1,000 participants were reached through four Bootcamp workshops, four Solutions Lab virtual
conferences, two Maarefah events, and three Exchange Conferences. Two research studies were
supported in furtherance of the goal of enhancing MSME financial reporting and accountancy. These
explored the regional challenges and issues facing SMPs – which predominantly serve the accountancy
needs of the MSME community in MENA, as well as analyzing the national challenges found in the
provision of services to MSME clients in Palestine specifically. Additionally, through effective use of
funds and by leveraging international partners and organizations active in the area of accountancy, the
World Bank was also able to contribute to two training programs to the region on the subjects of
international standards of accounting and auditing thereby enhancing the skill and ability of
professionals serving MSME clients in MENA.

In addition to these results, this initiative has had collateral impact in facilitating agreement for the free
use of audit software to enhance the quality of audit services provided to MSMEs, acting as catalyst for
development of projects in the area of female accounting technician training, providing convening
forces to encourage development of audit regulators to strengthen MSME audit practices, and laying
the foundation for audit quality assurance systems which will benefit SMP firms and their MSME clients.

Although the initiative has accomplished much, the issue of strengthening accountancy for MSMEs is a
long term challenge and as such must be met with continued funding, support and activities in order to
make measured progress. In order to maintain achieved gains as well as to continue the battle to
promote high quality in accountancy throughout the MENA region so as to benefit and support MSME



                                                                                                  4|Page
growth, development and contribution to economy and society, it is recommended that engagement,
financing and assistance remain strong.

This report was prepared by Gabriella Kusz, Sr. Financial Management Specialist, and reviewed by
Manuel Vargas, Lead Financial Management Specialist, under the guidance of Hisham Waly, Practice
Manager, of the Governance Global Practice MENA Team.




                                                                                     5|Page
Introduction / Background
MSMEs consistently cite access to finance as a primary obstacle to growth, and empirical evidence
shows that small firms face more financial constraints and are more affected by these constraints than
large entities. Sound, reliable financial information is critical to expanding access to credit and
promoting investment and growth in the MSME sector. Given the majority presence of MSMEs and the
link between financing and growth, it is important to ensure an adequate lending infrastructure to
support MSMEs. Weak accounting standards and practices, as well as low capacity to comply with
relevant requirements, can restrict significantly MSME access to credit.

Banks and non-banks rely primarily on collateral-based lending. They cite MSME transparency (lack of
reliable or available information) as the primary reason for high loan to value collateral requirements for
SMEs, followed by SMEs being perceived as less stable and with less competent management than
larger corporate firms.

A primary determinant of MSME access to loans is the quality of information they can provide.
Corporate Financial Reporting (CFR), the combination of all the accounting and auditing activities in an
entity, provides reliable, timely, and relevant financial information to a variety of stakeholders,
domestically and internationally. Stakeholders such as investors, tax authorities, creditors, regulators,
and employees rely on financial information for a range of decision-making purposes including
extending credit and monitoring risks. A well-functioning CFR framework plays a key role in financial
systems and markets, functioning as part of the international financial architecture. It is critical to
creating an environment in which commercial businesses thrive. Better reporting quality improves
project identification and selection, lowers the cost of capital translating into faster growth.

High quality financial information is not only important for facilitating MSME access to finance, but for
MSMEs in managing their internal finances, making decisions regarding their allocation of internal
resources, and overall business and financial planning. MSMEs with strong systems of management
accounting, internal control and financial reporting are better able to assess the health of their business,
make better informed financial and business decisions, and grow and develop their operations.

The socio-political and economic issues facing the countries in the region present a formidable backdrop
against which all CFR work needs to be considered if reforms are to be consistently implemented and
sustainable. Bank strategic documents, Financial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAP), and Reports on
the Observance of Standards and Codes -Accounting and Auditing (ROSC AA) that were conducted over
the past decade have documented particular CFR needs.

The challenges identified demonstrate the remarkable opportunities to work with governments of the
region and other development partners in order to identify solutions to the various needs in the
business environment.




                                                                                                6|Page
MSMEs can be constrained by over-regulation, and limited
capacity. These obstacles can increase the cost of doing
business, or foster a culture of non-compliance and informality.     ENHANCING
MSMEs need a simplified accounting and financial reporting
framework, with requirements commensurate with their size,           IMPACT /
the types of transactions they conduct, and their limited range
of stakeholders. It is important that they not be hampered with
                                                                     LEVERAGING
unnecessary or unduly complex regulations, as many MSMEs             RELATIONSHIPS
lack the capacity or resources to comply. Thus, an ideal system
would strike the appropriate balance between promoting               A key aspect of the MSME TF
improved financial information and lessening the regulatory          funded CV MENA activities has
burden, particularly with regard to requirements that entail         been the leveraging of the
significant costs, without corresponding benefits. The proposed      Bank’s relationships with
activities should provide the required analysis to help countries    international regulators,
take informed decisions on best simplified accounting and            professional associations,
financial reporting framework with due consideration                 academics and non-profits to
alignment with tax legislation and statutory audit requirements.     enhance the impact of the
A “one-size-fits-all? approach to financial reporting and auditing   funding available and deliver
requirements ignores the capacity constraints that SMEs face         greater than anticipated
and unnecessarily increases the cost of doing business for those     results.
enterprises, which generally drive economic growth. In
addition, by increasing the requirements for MSMEs,                  As an example, through
governments may create disincentives for businesses to               generous in-kind support, CV
operate in the formal sector.                                        MENA was able to provide an
                                                                     additional training event
CV MENA                                                              entitled ‘IFRS for Educators’
                                                                     which trained professors from
Connecting Voices of MENA (CV MENA) is a regional initiative of      throughout the MENA in
the World Bank Governance Global Practice that promotes              teaching international
improved financial management practices in both the public           accounting standards and good
and private sectors. Its aim is to support the demands of            practices to the MSME
citizens throughout the Arab World for better governance, a          accountants of tomorrow.
voice in public affairs, and social and economic inclusion. CV
MENA supports capacity building in the area of financial
management, facilitates the development of a professional
community, and supports the sharing and transfer of
knowledge both within countries and across the region.

The initiative benefitted from an initial Bank-executed grant of
USD 250,000 from the MENA MSME Facility Trust Fund (MSME
TF) to finance the 2013 “CV MENA The Exchange? Forum. The
support evolved to other activities of CV MENA, including
through an additional grant of USD 450,000 of the MSME TF.

The CV MENA activities supported by the MSME TF took place
from FY13-16.



                                                                                         7|Page
8|Page
Program Activities
The MSME TF supported several CV MENA interventions: (1) Bootcamps; (2) Solutions Labs; (3)
Exchange Fora; (4) Ma’arefah; as well as (5) Research and Training programs; to both increase
awareness and provide technical assistance to strengthen the accounting and auditing legal/regulatory,
institutional, and professional capacity to enable the development of SMPs and the MSME sector.

The activities under this program intended to contribute to higher-level outcomes such as building a
healthy business climate and private sector-led growth that incorporates the six pillars of CFR
architecture: Accounting Standards; Statutory and Regulatory Framework; Monitoring and Enforcement;
Education and Training; Accountancy Profession and Ethics; and Auditing Standards. The activities
completed under the program are listed and explored in further detail below by category.

    1. Bootcamps

Bootcamps involve gathering a group of decision makers and experts to address a particular issue
through a focused and intensive discussion considering technical and non- technical factors; this group
then returns with prospective solutions and a work program to help implement them. The experience is
documented through Solution Papers, which are brief notes describing how a specific challenge or
problem was addressed in a collaborative and pragmatic fashion. Under the MSME TF the following four
Bootcamps were completed:
Supporting Lebanese Association of Certified Public Accountants (LACPA) Quality Assurance &
Lebanese Audit Firms Quality Control Systems Development
(December 2013)

This Bootcamp event sought to support the development and implementation of a system of audit
quality assurance for Lebanon. Through presentations by the World Bank, Conseil Supérieur de l’Ordre
des Experts-Comptables and Compagnie Nationale des Commissaires aux Comptes (CNCC / CSOEC) as
well as by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), roughly 25+ Lebanese SMP
participants were provided practical skills training on the subject of creating internal firm systems of
quality control and supporting the development of a LACPA systems of audit quality assurance. The end
goal of this event was to enhance such systems so that they may be better able to ensure processes and
procedures which enhance the quality of the services they provide to MSMEs. The event included a
large degree of discussion and interaction between the participants and presenters and concluded with
the creation of a recommendations paper for LACPA and Lebanon regarding the creation of a system of
audit quality assurance in the country.


The Evolving Field of Audit Regulation - Charting the Path Toward Independent Audit Regulation
in Morocco & Tunisia with a View to Enhancing Audit Quality for Large and SMP Firms (January
2015)

Under the broad umbrella of seeking to strengthen audit quality for audit firms of all sizes (in particular -
SMPs) throughout Morocco and Tunisia, the World Bank in cooperation with the International Forum of
Independent Audit Regulators (IFIAR) and the CNCC / CSOEC, the World Bank facilitated the “The
Evolving Field of Audit Regulation? Workshop. This event brought together representatives from the

                                                                                                 9|Page
profession, Ministries of Finance, Central Banks, Capital Markets Authorities, Supreme Audit Institutions
and other relevant stakeholders to discuss the evolution of audit regulation within these two countries
and to open dialogue and discussion on country progression toward independent audit regulation. This
event was structured as a 2-day workshop and offered:

    •       An opportunity for the Ordre des Experts Comptables Maroc (OECM) and the Ordre des
            Experts Comptables Tunis (OECT) to provide an overview of the current state of audit
            regulation in their countries;
    •       Presentation and insight from the CNCC-CSOEC France regarding Professional Accountancy
            Organizations (PAOs) role in supporting and facilitating transition towards a system of
            independent audit regulation;
    •       Introduction to the subject of independent audit regulation, what that means for the
            development of audit regulation in emerging countries, and an overview of IFIAR as an
            organization;
    •       Insight into the systems of independent audit regulation in France, the Netherlands,
            Germany, and the United Kingdom; and
    •       National discussion on how to gradually progress toward a system of independent audit
            regulation.

A key output of this activity was a Solutions Paper which outlined key actions in progressing the gentle
shift toward independent audit regulation in Morocco and Tunisia. In brief, the three tangible next steps
agreed by the Moroccan working group included: (a) Enhancing the audit quality assurance system of
the OECM by including external representatives on the Control Committee of the OECM which is
responsible for overseeing the system of audit quality assurance; (b) Updating of the ROSC AA so as to
obtain a systems-view of the country’s current accountancy environment and (c) Enhancing
transparency of financial performance of entities by engaging with other stakeholder to discuss the
possibility of reducing the mandatory audit threshold from 50 Million Dirham to level more appropriate
to the size / needs of the Moroccan MSME sector.

Egypt University Accounting Education Workshop: Building the Foundation for Strong Accountants
to Serve the Needs of the Country’s Growing Micro-, Small- and Medium- Enterprise (MSME) Sector
(April 2015)

The Egypt University Accounting Education Workshop was held on April 22, 2015 in Amman, Jordan as a
continuation of an intensive training on International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) for Educators,
sponsored in part by the World Bank and the IFRS Foundation. This workshop brought together
stakeholders of accounting education in Egypt to discuss the role and importance of accounting
education in promoting a strong economy by preparing future accountants, to share insight regarding
the strengths and challenges facing university accounting education in the country and to provide input
for the direction of future activities in the area of accounting education reform. Emphasis was placed on
the key role which university accounting education reform may play in building skills and capacity for
practitioners to contribute to MSME development and broader economic growth and development. This
is in particular as individuals with strong university accounting education may emerge to provide
services as small and medium accountancy practitioners – supporting MSMEs in their accounts
preparation, financial planning and growth, and business strategic development.




                                                                                             10 | P a g e
Participants included Accounting Professors from both public and private universities throughout Egypt:
Assiut, Cairo, Shorouk, Suez Canal, Mansoura Universities, American University of Cairo and Sadat
Academy. Participants also included representatives and practitioners from the Egyptian Financial
Supervisory Authority (EFSA), the Accountability State Authority (ASA), the Egyptian Society of
Accountants & Auditors (ESAA), and the Syndicate of Commerce.

Through intensive group discussion, participants were asked to identify and agree upon key challenges
facing both the reform process and content of university accounting education programs. After
thorough consideration and group facilitation, the following challenges identified by participants
emerged:

   1. Procedural Challenges: The long and tedious process to change course listings and go through all
      the approvals significantly stifles changes and the desire to innovate and modify curriculum in
      line with good practices. As such, changes are typically only done every five years. Therefore, if
      there are significant updates on standards that justify adding a new course, they may not be
      able to implement this in a timely fashion.

   2. Content Challenges: There has been no input from the market as relates to course offerings.
      There is a new initiative to include certain stakeholders as representatives in the committees to
      ensure that the curriculum meets the demands of the market; however this should be sure to
      include MSME sector representatives to ensure their voice and needs are heard. Additionally,
      there are not enough professional or practical degrees and there is a gap between the education
      at university which can be more theoretical and the demands of the market. This causes
      challenges when students graduate and seek employment with SME or other enterprise as they
      may understand the theory behind the subject, but not how to practically apply the theory to
      the benefit of the enterprise. Finally, methods of teaching are not up-to-date and the emphasis
      is on unidirectional lecturing. In order for students to be more effective employees for MSMEs,
      they need to have curriculum which includes more case studies that mirror the realities of
      working for MSME in accounting field.

   3. Contextual / Skills Challenges: Large class sizes make it difficult for professors to provide the
      attention / support needed to adequately educate on a complex subject such as accountancy.
      Compounding this challenge is the lack of time available for research and training needed by
      faculty. This is particularly true when it comes to educating students on specialty areas such as
      the practical application of accounting theory for MSMEs. Finally, there is a lack of incentive for
      skills enhancement and knowledge update, especially after an academician reaches “Professor?
      degree / level. Reflection needs to be made regarding how academicians can be incentivized to
      strengthen and improve their skills set and stay abreast of changes / innovations in the
      marketplace (MSMEs) as well as in the profession (evolving nature of standards promulgation).

A key output of this activity was the creation of an Event Summary Report and sharing of this report
with key stakeholders as well as with representatives from the European Union engaged in the
project entitled “Enhancing the Accountancy and Auditing Profession in Egypt? which is supported
by the EU-Egypt Association Agreement Programme (SAAP) and is implemented by the Ministry of
International Cooperation in Egypt.




                                                                                            11 | P a g e
Strengthening Accounting Qualification in Egypt: Building the Foundation for Strong Accountants
to Serve the Needs of the Country’s Growing Micro-, Small- and Medium- Enterprise (MSME) Sector
(June 2015)

The Strengthening Accounting Qualification in Egypt workshop brought together representatives from
the Ministry of Finance, Syndicate of Commerce - Accountants and Auditors Section, Egyptian Society of
Accountants and Auditors (ESAA) and other relevant stakeholders to discuss the key challenges facing
the strengthening of qualification of SME accountants and auditors in Egypt and to lay the foundation
for future activities in the area of accountancy qualification. The event identified key next steps to feed
into the larger European Union (EU) funded program that has an emphasis on strengthening accounting
qualification in the country.

Special emphasis was placed on the following topics:

    •   Role and importance of strengthening accountancy qualification in order to support enhanced
        quality of service provision and benefit to SME sector and overall economy;
    •   International standards and good practice in strengthening accountancy qualifications;
    •   Case studies of international examples of countries which have undertaken successful gradual
        strengthening of their accountancy qualifications and their impact on MSME and
        entrepreneurial skills building;
    •   Discussion regarding current situation of qualification in Egypt;
    •   Facilitated discussions on strengthening accountancy qualification in Egypt;
    •   Next Steps to feed into the EU sponsored project in Egypt and also form a basis upon which
        World Bank may further support development of the accountancy profession in Egypt.

A key outcome of this event was active group discussion regarding how the country may progress the
issue of strengthening accountancy qualification. It is hoped that the commencement of dialogue on this
subject may be carried further through the ongoing European Union project on the subject. During the
course of the workshop, the following three areas were agreed and possible suggestions were offered
for additional reflection and consideration:

    •   Strengthening of the requirements for practice as an auditor to align with the IAESB IESs
        including instituting the requirement for passage of professional examination, inclusion of
        Continuing Professional Development (CPD) ongoing education and attainment of appropriate
        professional experience in order to be registered with the Ministry of Finance.

    •   Development of the system of audit oversight and audit quality assurance to ensure continuous
        provision of high quality financial information and ongoing improvement amongst audit firms.
        This is particularly true for small and medium audit practitioners (who provide the vast majority
        of services to MSMEs) as they typically do not maintain access to quality control systems found
        within larger audit firms.

    •   The need for professional designation as accountants and consideration of the country context,
        international standards and good practices, and need for well trained professional accountants
        in the country. This is particularly relevant to the discussion of strengthening MSMEs as many
        MSMEs may not require audit services; however, they would require advice, consulting services
        and support of professional accountants to grow and develop their businesses.


                                                                                              12 | P a g e
13 | P a g e
   2. Solutions Labs
                                                                  BY THE NUMBERS
Solutions Labs operate in partnership with the Bank’s Video
                                                                  With the generous support of
Conferencing system to connect participants across the MENA
                                                                  the MSME TF, the CV MENA
region to discuss and address key issues facing corporate
                                                                  Initiative has been able to reach
financial reporting throughout the region. Through the MSME
                                                                  an estimated 1,000 accounting
TF, four Solutions Lab events were conducted. These are
                                                                  professionals, government
detailed further below:
                                                                  stakeholders and MSME
International Standards on Auditing (ISA) Implementation          participants with its
for Small and Medium Practitioners (SMPs)                         combination of Solutions Labs
(December 2013)                                                   virtual conferences, Maarefah
                                                                  Community of Practice events,
This Solutions Lab was held on December 9-10, 2013. Prior to      Exchange Conferences, and
the presentations, participants had brief country-specific        Bootcamp workshops. This has
discussions on the main issues and developments regarding the     allowed the message of the
subject matter. Formal presentations opened with Mr. Hechmi       importance of reforming and
Abdelwahed of the Tunisian Ordre des Experts Comptables           strengthening financial
speaking on the topic of “ISA: Resources, Guides and Best         reporting in strengthening
Practices in ISA Training for SMPs?. Mr. Phil Cowperthwaite of    MSMEs, in the context of an
the Canadian Association of CPAs added to this introduction       enabling governance
with a presentation and discussion on the subject of “Tailoring   framework, to be effectively
ISA Standards and Adding Value in Micro and Small Audits?.        spread throughout the MENA
Formal presentations were concluded with the intervention by      region.
Ms. Inge Saeys of the Belgian Association of CPAs and Board
Member of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC)
Small and Medium Practices Committee, who spoke on the
subject of “International Experiences in Supporting SMPs in
Belgium?. Following the conclusion of formal presentations,
participants were invited to participate in an hour and a half
interactive discussion session where each country was given
the opportunity to give comments or ask questions of the
experts or other participants.

During the first day, the sessions were held in Arabic for
Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Yemen, Palestine, and Egypt. The second
day sessions were delivered in French for Djibouti, Morocco,
and Tunisia. On both days, live-streaming was available for
anyone to join regardless of physical location.

The participants were targeted to ensure their engagement in
the subject and their benefit from it. In total, 177 attendees
participated: 105 participants attended the video-conference in
person, while 72 participants were logged in via web-streaming.
In total, 88% of participants were male gender and 12% were
female.


                                                                                      14 | P a g e
Islamic Finance as a Tool for Financial Inclusion and Micro-, Small-, and Medium Enterprise
(MSME) Development
(February 2015)

This Solutions Lab was the first MSME-focused interactive regional event convened by the World Bank
for MENA representatives to address key issues facing accountancy within the framework of Islamic
Finance and access for MSMEs. This initiative helped to support the development of the MSME
community by providing a combination of country-focused discussion and good practice to raise
awareness and address key issues of Islamic Finance. This included discussions to improve the enabling
environment for MSMEs through supporting accounting measures for easier access to finance. 61
participants attended the event.

Building an MSME Enabling Environment: How Can Accounting & Auditing (AA) Policy and
Capacity be Developed to Meet this Objective?
(June 2015)

Countries throughout the MENA region are challenged by the need to devise accounting policy which
balances the need for strong accounting information with the abilities and capacities of MSME
businesses to undertake preparation and creation of such documentation. In some countries, there is no
distinction between the basis of accounting required for the preparation of accounts by larger / listed
companies and the basis of accounting required for use by smaller and medium sized enterprises. The
result is that MSMEs in MENA countries face a burden in regards to their preparation of accounts as the
basis required by law is in some cases overly complex / not tailored to the needs of preparers and users
of MSME financial statements.

To address this issue, this Solutions Lab was designed to stimulate discussion on the IFRS for SMEs basis
of accountancy which offers enhanced balance of the financial reporting and capacity of MSMEs.
Additionally, this Solutions Lab offered insight into the case of Pakistan and also a global view of other
countries which have successfully sought to modify their basis of accounting to allow for a less rigorous /
more suitable basis of accounting to meet the needs of MSMEs and their stakeholders.

This Solutions Lab was designed to: (a) emphasize the importance of addressing and undertaking actions
on accounting auditing policy for MSMEs in a comprehensive manner; and (b) result in participating
countries reflecting upon and developing national dialogue regarding how they can best craft accounting
and auditing policy and capacity in a manner which foments MSME development.

This event was presented in English language with Arabic language translation for those participating in
the Country Offices. There were two presenters Mr. Arif Masud Mirza, BA(Hons), FCCA, Association of
Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) who discussed the issues related to creation and application of
MSME accounting policy in practice and specifically the cases seen in Pakistan and Michelle Fisher,
Senior Technical Manager, International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) who spoke regarding the
IFRS for SMEs and the Micro Enterprise Reporting Initiative as well as the need for balance in the
creation of national policies for accountancy for MSME enterprises. In satisfaction surveys, an
overwhelming majority of respondents noted that this event achieved its stated objectives, that the
content, format and quality of presenters was excellent and that participants’ skills increased as a result
of this event.


                                                                                              15 | P a g e
Role and Ability of Professional Accountancy Organization
(PAO) to Support SMPs / SME Development During Times of
Instability and Fragility
                                                                   WHAT ARE
(March 2016)                                                       MSMES SAYING?
In recognition of the strong link between SMPs and SMEs and in     “It was a pleasure to get to
order to best position PAOs to support SMP establishment,          know the team of the World
development and provision of high quality services during times    Bank [through this event]. The
of political, social and / or economic challenge, the “Role and    situation of instability that
Ability of PAOs to Support SMPs / SME Development During           Tunisia has known since the
Times of Instability and Fragility? Solutions Lab was developed.   revolution, enabled us, as
This Solutions Lab sought to address the key issues of: (a)        [audit] professionals, to
engaging, communicating and advancing SMP / SME                    measure the importance of the
communities during times of instability and fragility; (b) key     support we provide to small and
success factors in undertaking pilots/ projects which have been    medium enterprises and
able to target and enhance SME / SMP needs; and (c)                awareness of deficiencies and
recommendations and suggestions for other PAOs, audit firms,       improvements we should try to
and others operating in times of instability. This Solutions Lab   put in place to give them a
featured presenters from the Ordre des Experts Comptables de       more effective role.?
Tunis (OECT) – Mr. Wassim Khrouf - who shared his experience
and knowledge in operating during times of political instability   -   SMP Participant, Solutions
to support SMPs, the South African Institute of Chartered              Lab “Role and Ability of
Accountants (SAICA) – Mr. Patrick Kabuya – who shared the              PAOs to Support SMP /
experiences of SAICA South Africa in operating in times of             SME Development During
economic instability and the American Institute of Certified
                                                                       Times of Instability and
Public Accountants (AICPA) – Mr. George Willie - who lent his          Fragility?
knowledge on disaster preparedness and planning ahead of
natural and man-made disasters.

    3. Exchange Forum

The Exchange is a major annual forum, which provides a
channel for dialogue, enabling countries to share experiences
and good practices. It promotes intra-regional cooperation and
stimulates interest in improving governance and financial
management in the public and private sectors, including
corporate financial reporting for MSMEs. The following details
the three Exchange conferences, co-financed by the MSME TF,
which have occurred in each of 2013, 2014 and 2015:
“Strengthening Accountancy as a Foundation for MSME
Sector Development and Job Creation? / Amman, Jordan
(June 2013)

This Exchange event was positioned at the crossroads of three
different, yet interrelated topics: MSMEs development,
accountancy (broadly defined to include budgeting, planning,

                                                                                      16 | P a g e
accounting, reporting, auditing, and taxation) and job creation. This Exchange conference offered
several sessions which explored the importance of strong accountancy in underpinning MSME growth,
development and access to finance – all with a view to aiding this sector of the economy in contributing
to job creation. As the countries of the MENA region seek to transition and provide both social and
economic opportunities to their citizens, The Exchange functioned as a catalyst bringing together 100+
high level policy makers, regulators, academics, the accountancy profession, Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs) from throughout the region to discuss how we may achieve this objective together.
Event Session Highlights
   One Size Fits All? Developing Financial Reporting Standards for Micro Entities. This session featured
    speakers from United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the South
    African Institute of Chartered Accountants and touched upon current efforts to develop and devise
    frameworks of accounting which are best suited to the needs of Micro- Enterprises as well as cases
    of countries and organizations which had successfully developed and implemented such standards.
   Creating Legislative Frameworks which Facilitate MSME Accountancy. This session explored cases of
    countries throughout the MENA and Mediterranean region which had undertaken legislative
    reform and changes in accountancy order to best support MSME development.
   Regional Cooperation: Working Together to Further Financial Reporting. This session provided
    insight into the regional professional accountancy organizations (PAOs) in the region which support
    accountancy development and reform at a regional level.
   From ROSC AA to Reform. This session discussed and presented the relationship between the World
    Bank’s ROSC AA and the development of accounting reform projects.
   Accountancy Education, Certification and CPD - the Key to Strong Financial Information and Growth.
    Research and exploration into the need for strengthening accounting education at the university
    and PAO level was presented as well as recent studies and analysis of accounting education at the
    global level.
   Building Accounting and Financial Skills Necessary for MSME Growth. Accounting Technicians are
    playing an increasingly important role in supporting MSME growth and development – this session
    engaged presenters and participants in active dialogue on the subject of Accounting Technicians in
    the broader accounting profession.
   Enhancing Women Entrepreneurs' Capacity in Accountancy. This session featured presenters from
    successful MSME development projects who spoke on the role and importance of accountancy in
    MSME creation, development and access to finance.
   Supporting SME / SMP Development and Growth. Presentations by the IFAC and the Tunisian
    professional association highlighted work which both organizations had been undertaking to
    support SME / SMP development at the national and international levels.
   Furthering the Quality of MSME Financial Information through Sound Systems of Quality Assurance.
    Quality assurance systems may play an effective role in improving the quality of audit services – in
    particular for those Small and Medium audit Practices (SMPs) which predominantly provide services
    to MSMEs. Discussion focused on the building blocks for audit quality assurance systems and
    international good practices in the development of such systems.




                                                                                            17 | P a g e
   A Fine Balance: The Role of Regulation in Furthering MSME

                                                                     A
    Development. Discussion centered on the role which
    regulators may play in enhancing financial reporting
    quality and in improving the overall quality of services
    provided by auditors to MSME clients.                            COMPREHENSIVE
The event concluded with workshop on the subject of teaching         APPROACH
IFRS for SMEs provided in coordination between the World
Bank and the IFRS Foundation. Specific focus of this training        The CV MENA Initiative was
session was placed on supporting instructors (whether they be        designed and undertaken in a
professors or PAO Staff) in understanding the framework of           manner which allowed separate
IFRS for SMEs education, the key aspects of IFRS for SMEs            activities to build upon one
which differ or should be highlighted during instruction, and        another and to mutually
key methods and case studies for transferring knowledge on           reinforce overarching goals and
the standards.                                                       objectives.
“Strengthening Financial Management Institutions -                   One such example can be seen
Strengthening MENA? Exchange Conference / Abu Dhabi,                 through the inclusion of a
UAE                                                                  session on Islamic Finance and
(June 2014)                                                          its potential opportunities for
                                                                     SMEs presented during the
The June 2014 CV MENA Exchange event was designed to focus           June 2014 Exchange
on the important role which financial management institutions        Conference. Discussion and
play in both public and private sectors in facilitating the          feedback initially obtained from
achievement of strong MENA region countries, poverty                 this conference session helped
reduction and shared prosperity. The event welcomed over 200         lay the groundwork for the
participants and was structured as two streams: one focusing         development of a virtual
on public financial management and the second focusing on            Solutions Lab conference on
Corporate Financial Reporting (CFR). CFR Sessions were               this subject as well as a
designed to focus on the importance of institutions and the          Maarefah educational event
strengthening of structures, systems and operations for those        which drilled down to the
institutions integral to the production of high-quality financial    particular subject of Islamic
information for the private sector.                                  banking.

In the MENA region private sector, MSMEs provide over 80% of
the region’s total business activity. Although this element of the
economy plays such a strong role, it continues to face extreme
obstacles in the areas of financial institution lending capacity,
enterprises’ creditworthiness, liquidity of the financial
intermediaries, and the availability of risk-sharing instruments.
Compounding these challenges are the non-conducive legal and
regulatory frameworks, poor financial infrastructure,
information asymmetry, and a weak judicial and legal system.
Sound, reliable financial information is critical to expanding
access to credit and promoting investment and growth in the
MSME sector.

Attendees representing Ministries of Finance, PAOs, audit


                                                                                         18 | P a g e
firms, regulators, non-governmental organizations, international organizations, capital market
authorities, universities and others converged for this event.

Event Session Highlights

      Corporate Financial Reporting Reform. Panelists shared their experience in driving CFR reform
       within their own countries, as well as abroad. Discussions focused on the challenges facing CFR
       development and the manner in which panelists and their organizations worked to overcome
       such challenges and achieve success.

      Charting the Path Toward the Adoption and Implementation of IFRS in general, and IFRS for
       SMEs in particular. Participants from the World Bank, Egypt, Morocco and others presented
       their national experiences in developing plans for adoption and implementation of IFRS and IFRS
       for SMEs. Discussions centered on what was learned from this process, providing insight and
       guidance to all attendees about their own respective national efforts.

       Islamic Finance - An Opportunity for Large and SME Businesses. Attendees had an opportunity
       to hear from experts from regional organizations and firms, the Islamic Finance Knowledge
       Center (IFKC), and the World Bank. They shared their perspectives regarding the rise of Islamic
       Finance, its development within MENA and Southeast Asia— and opportunities for
       governments, accountancy professionals and MSME businesses around the world.

      Audit Regulation and Quality Assurance – Furthering the Quality of Services Among Large and
       SMP Firms. This session brought together panelists from the regulatory sector, international
       organizations and the profession to showcase the issues, challenges and experiences related to
       audit regulation and quality assurance for listed companies and SMEs alike.

      Integrated Reporting: An Introduction to the Concept and Practice. The session provided a
       foundational introduction to the concept of integrated reporting. Representatives from the
       Harvard Business School, the Global Reporting Initiative, the American Institute of Certified
       Public Accountants Business Reporting, Assurance & Advisory Services and XBRL Unit, and
       ARAMEX Corporation offered an overview of the subject of integrated reporting.

      The Role of Professional Accountants as Business Advisors Supporting MSME Development.
       Several views were presented regarding the positioning of professional accountants as advisors
       to businesses, as well as in facilitating the development of micro-, small- and medium-sized
       enterprises.

To supplement and build upon the momentum of the Exchange Conference event, the day following the
conclusion of the conference, a workshop event entitled “Strengthening SMPs as Supporters of MSME
Development" was held. This event was co-organized in cooperation with IFAC and the Association of
Accountants and Auditors (AAA) of the UAE and offered participants from the MENA Region innovative
insight into how best to support SMPs in their provision of high quality services to MSMEs.

Event sessions focused on the following issues:
    Appropriate application of ISA, efficiency advice for practitioners, and current guides and
        resources for their proper application.
    Provision of information technology support to SMPs and how to support and select appropriate
        audit software.

                                                                                         19 | P a g e
      Development and research in managing SMP practices.
      Expanding SMP services beyond audit and toward supporting integrated reporting and other
       business advisory services crucial to MSME development.

“From Vulnerability to Resilience? Exchange Conference / Hammamet, Tunisia
(May 2015)

This Exchange Conference focused on the transition away from a state of vulnerability towards
increased resilience. Vulnerability and resilience represent two related yet different approaches to
understanding the response of systems and actors to change. Drawing together over 200+ participants
from Ministries of Finance, Supreme Audit Institutions (SAIs), PAOs, State Procurement Departments,
State Owned Enterprises, universities, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), and other key ministry
representatives and stakeholders of governance reform this event offered sessions exploring the
importance of strong governance institutions in managing public resources, supporting service delivery,
promoting citizen engagement, and underpinning Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise (MSME)
development and economic growth.



   4. Ma’arefah

Ma’arefah (“knowledge? in Arabic) is the CV MENA online Community of Practice (CoP) that serves as a
forum for ongoing dialogue and continuous peer-to-peer and expert knowledge exchange. Ma’arefah
serves to implement and sustain the results of The Exchange, as well as to build upon and extend these
benefits to those unable to personally attend Boot Camps and Solutions Labs. Under the MSME TF,
Ma’arefah online moderation was made possible and two specific online events were hosted which
addressed issues / areas of interest to MSME participants:




                                                                                          20 | P a g e
       Basel III and the Implications for Islamic Banking –

                                                                      RESPONDING TO
        During the Solutions Lab event entitled “Islamic Finance
        as a Tool for Financial Inclusion and MSME
        Development? participants noted the potential role
        which Islamic Finance may provide in enhancing                THE NEEDS OF
        opportunities for access to finance. In particular,
        participants were drawn to the ability of Islamic
                                                                      MSMES
        Finance to provide bank lending opportunities to              400+ MENA region SMP
        MSMEs. During the Solutions Lab event question and            accounting practitioners were
        answer session, it was noted that certain aspects of          asked the following question
        Basel III requirements may impact such efforts. As such,      “How likely do you think SMEs
        the Maarefah Event “Basel III and the Implications for        are to seek assistance from
        Islamic Banking? was developed which allowed further          their accounting firm in the
        exploration of this topic and provided online                 implementation of Integrated
        participants the ability to delve deeper into the Basel III   Reporting in the next five
        requirements for banking institutions and how and             years?? Overwhelmingly (76%)
        what impact this may have on Islamic Banking and              noted the likelihood of having
        MSME access to finance.                                       to support MSMEs in integrated
       Integrated Reporting: An Introduction –The research           reporting activities. With
        report entitled “A SNAPSHOT OF KEY ISSUES FACING              funding from the MSME TF, CV
        SMPS AND THEIR SME CLIENTS IN THE MENA REGION?                MENA designed and delivered
        noted the importance of the growing field of Integrated       an online virtual learning
        Reporting within the MENA region and the emerging             session on integrated reporting.
        role that this is expected to play for SMEs. Surprisingly,
        this research noted that an estimated 62% of SMP
        respondents in MENA Sample Countries reported that
        their clients had sought their help on this topic, versus
        the global average of 29% of SMP respondents world-
        wide. Additionally, when asked regarding what their
        expectation was regarding MSMEs requests for help
        with integrated reporting in the future, over ¾ of SMP
        respondents noted the likelihood of such requests for
        assistance. In order to prepare SMP practitioners and
        facilitate assistance to MSMEs on this subject, an
        introductory session on Integrated Reporting and an
        open discussion regarding the value and role of such
        reports and information was developed and delivered
        to the region to commence dialogue on the issue.


    5. Research and Training

Innovative research and training pilots were supported as they
related to the broader goal of improving the quality of financial
reporting and audit practices for MSME clients. These are
detailed further below:



                                                                                         21 | P a g e
Research Paper: A Snapshot of Key Issues Facing SMPs and Their SME Clients in the MENA Region
(May 2014)

To collect and analyze research on this subject, CV MENA collaborated with the International Federation
of Accountants (IFAC)'s SMP Committee Quick Poll Survey which was established in 2011 to obtain key
views and perspectives on the challenges and issues facing SMPs and their SME clients in the key focus
countries of Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Palestine, Lebanon, and Jordan. To facilitate MENA region
participation and data, experts traveled to each of these six countries and presented on why such Quick
Poll information is important for understanding SMP growth, financial sector development as well as
providing insight to the important link between SMPs and their SME clients. Through the provision of six
on-location presentations and survey polling stations, the experts encouraged the participation of 403
MENA region SMP representatives in the Quick Poll. Utilizing the data collected, a summary report
entitled “A SNAPSHOT OF KEY ISSUES FACING SMPS AND THEIR SME CLIENTS IN THE MENA REGION?
was produced which identified, among other issues, the growing field of Integrated Reporting within the
MENA region and the importance of this field to SMEs.

Training: IFRS Training for Educators Regional Workshop
(April 2015)

The three-day IFRS for Educators workshop was sponsored in part by the World Bank and the IFRS
Foundation. This workshop which was held in Amman, Jordan on April 19-21, 2015 was attended by
roughly 60 accounting professors from throughout the MENA region (Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine,
and Egypt) and instructors. Key sessions included focus and instruction on: the benefits of
framework-based IFRS teaching; the link between objectives, concepts, principles and rules in IFRS;
and training on how to use select teaching material to develop students’ ability to make the
judgments and estimates to apply IFRS. The overarching goal was to enhance the ability of
instructors to transfer IFRS knowledge to students – thereby better preparing graduates for the
accounting needs of MSMEs upon entrance to the marketplace.




                                                                                           22 | P a g e
Research Paper: The Adequacy of Accountancy Professionals
in Meeting the Needs of Palestinian MSMEs (April 2016)
                                                                   STARTLING
                                                                   STATISTICS
In recognition of the value of proper accountancy and the role
of accountants in contributing to MSME growth and                  “91 % OF PALETSINIAN MSME
development, this paper explored the current levels of quantity    RESPONDENTS NOTED THAT
and quality of accountancy professionals in Palestine and the      THEY DID NOT USE ANY FORM
sufficiency of these levels to meet the needs of the country’s     OF ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
MSME population. Given the unique needs and financial              WHEN PREPARING THEIR
constraints experienced by MSMEs when seeking external             FINANCIAL REPORTS?
accounting services, these firms typically source their external
accounting services from SMPs as opposed to larger                 Research conducted under the
international accounting firms. As such, special emphasis was      “Adequacy of Accounting
placed on the adequacy of SMPs and independent accountancy         Professionals in Meeting the
professionals and technicians (for example, bookkeepers) to        Needs of Palestinian MSMEs?
meet the needs of the MSME sector in Palestine.                    provided some startling results
To better understand the relationship between MSMEs and the        – only around 9% of the roughly
accountancy profession as well as other areas of need this         400 MSMEs surveyed used any
research undertook:                                                form of accounting standards.
       A review of existing literature on MSMEs and the           The lack of use of any standards
        accountancy profession;                                    whatsoever calls into question
       A survey of a representative sample of MSMEs               the accuracy and usefulness of
        regarding their use of accountants and their financial     the current form of financial
        management needs;                                          accounting and reporting
       A study on the current number of accountants               utilized by most MSMEs. This
        conducted by desk review and interviews with relevant      suggests a strong opportunity
        stakeholders;                                              for engaging the broader
       A study on the qualifications of accountants; and          accountancy profession in
       A gap analysis of whether the current quality and          supporting MSME accounting
        quantity of accountants meets the financial                and financial reporting accuracy
        management needs of MSMEs.                                 and in providing MSMEs with
                                                                   the financial information
The following is an overview of the key findings and areas of      necessary to undertake
recommendation:                                                    effective resource allocation,
       Undertake awareness building regarding the important       financing and business
        role which accountants and auditors may play in MSME       decisions.
        financial reporting, access to finance, growth and
        development.
       Strengthen accounting curriculum at universities so as
        to better meet the needs of the market.
       Provide opportunities for specialization amongst
        accountancy personnel.
       Support elaboration of the PACPA Audit Quality
        Assurance System.
       Organize and unify the broader accountancy

                                                                                      23 | P a g e
       profession.

This paper also highlighted areas for future examination and research and provided a guide for ongoing
efforts in this regard.

The paper was disseminated with the Palestinian participats to the Solutions Lab of March 2016 on the
Role and Ability of Professional Accountancy Organization (PAO) to Support SMPs / SME Development
During Times of Instability and Fragility.

Training, Educating and Facilitating Employment of Female Accounting Technicians Amongst
MSMEs - Palestinian Women’s Accounting Technician (PWAT) initiative (2015):

During the first Exchange Conference (June 2013) the session entitled “Enhancing Women
Entrepreneurs' Capacity in Accountancy? commenced an ongoing dialogue on the subject of
entrepreneurs, accounting technical skills and MSME growth and development. As this dialogue
continued, an interest emerged amongst Palestinian stakeholders (the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, the
Palestinian Association of Certified Public Accountants and the AMIDEAST training organization) to
undertake a pilot project training marginalized women in foundational accounting skills and knowledge
so as to become bookkeepers for MSME businesses. In coordination with the World Bank, under the
PWAT Project 70+ women candidates were trained in accounting education and job preparedness and
through a coordinated employment fair were exposed to MSMEs and SMPs with an interest in seeking
accounting support.



Leveraging Outcomes
The MSME TF co-financed CV MENA activities that have enhanced the professional skills and knowledge
of numerous attendees, participants and observers, as well as influencing other outcomes. The following
examples highlight some of the broader influence which MSME TF activities have had on MSME financial
reporting, auditing and services:




                                                                                          24 | P a g e
   Enhancing the Quality of MSME Audits by Increasing

                                                                   PALESTINIAN
    Access to SMP Audit Software - Memorandum of
    Understanding (MoU) Between Arab Federation of
    Accountants and Auditors (AFAA) and the CNCC/ CSOEC to
    Provide Small and Medium Audit Practice Software for           WOMEN’S
    Free: During the Exchange Conference (June 2014) session
    on audit quality, a conversation began between audit
                                                                   ACCOUNTING
    professionals from the region and presenters from the          TECHNICIAN
    French Direction du Développement et des Partenariats
    Internationaux of the CNCC / CSOEC. This conversation          PROJECT (PWAT)
    stemmed from the presentation by representatives from
    the CNCC/CSOEC who had noted that they had developed           The MSME TF and CV MENA
    software specifically suited to the needs of SMPs so as to     activities have acted as a
    best suit their MSME clients and deliver high quality audits   catalyst for the development of
    on a smaller scale. MENA region professionals noted that       new and emerging ideas in the
    they had been struggling with this same challenge – how to     area of accountancy / MSME
    deliver high quality audits for MSME clients when the          development. In the case of the
    market is not providing cost-effective and accessible audit    PWAT project, the Exchange
    software to SMP practitioners. Through successive MSME         conference’s session on Gender
    TF activities (Solutions Labs and Bootcamps) this              and MSME development
    conversation developed into organizational dialogue            provided the foundation for
    between the AFAA and the CNCC/CSOEC regarding the              Palestinian counterparts to
    possible use of the CNCC/CSOEC software. The result has        support training for women
    been the signing of an MoU between these two entities to       accounting technicians to
    provide the aforementioned audit software to MENA              support MSME businesses.
    region professional associations of accountants and their      Feedback on the PWAT project
    members at no charge – and an agreement to engage in           has been strong with many of
    training and education on the application of the software      the female trainees expressing
    so as to ensure quality provision of audit services for the    that the skills acquired would
    MSMEs in the region.                                           assist in the attainment of
                                                                   employment OR in their own
   Strengthening       MSME      Financial   Reporting       By   start-up SMEs.
    Strengthening Regulators - National Dialogue and Study
    Report Regarding the Creation of an Independent Audit
    Regulator in Tunisia: The issue of audit quality and the
    impact which poor quality audits may have on MSMEs and
    the economy has been at the heart of CV MENA initiative
    activities co-financed by the MSME TF. In Tunisia, after a
    successful Bootcamp event on independent audit
    regulation and the need for oversight over SMP auditors,
    the OECT (Tunisia) and the World Bank co-hosted a follow
    on event to convene stakeholders from the government
    and the private sector to continue national dialogue
    regarding the need for enhanced regulation of the audit
    profession. Following this second event, the government
    and profession undertook a study to outline a vision for the
    future of the accounting and auditing profession and the
    role of regulation in promoting greater quality audits for

                                                                                      25 | P a g e
    MSME clients.

   Creating Audit Quality Assurance for MSME Clients in Lebanon - Enacting a System of Audit
    Quality Assurance Targeted to MSMEs in Lebanon: Following the conclusion of the Bootcamp
    workshops in December 2013, a Solutions Paper was provided to the Lebanese Association of
    Certified Public Accountants (LACPA) in December 2013 which provided recommendations for
    moving forward in the establishment and operation of a system of audit quality assurance which
    would effectively target SMP practitioners so as to enhance their quality and improve services
    provided to MSMEs. In the months following the conclusion of this event and resulting report, the
    World Bank worked to engage with the LACPA and the AICPA to design and develop a training
    program for Lebanese reviewers who could oversee and inspect SMP audit firms under a system of
    audit quality assurance. In November 2015, the AICPA flew experienced American trainers to Beirut
    to conduct a workshop and share their knowledge and materials on training with roughly 20
    reviewers to support their education and preparation in conducting audit quality reviews under the
    emerging LACPA system.




                                                                                          26 | P a g e
Lessons Learned / Considerations for the Future
In reflecting on the achievements of the past three years under the CV MENA activities, the following
highlight some of the key lessons learned:

-   Leveraging networks and relationships with international NGOs, professional associations and
    academia are integral to delivering results.
-   Being flexible with regards to the focus / theme of planned and anticipated events is critical to
    ensuring relevance of events / activities, as financial reporting and accountancy environments are
    in a constant state of evolution and therefore an event envisioned 2 years in advance may need to
    be modified closer to the date of delivery in order to ensure appropriateness.
-   Engaging beyond the close of a financed event / activity is crucial to achieving outcomes and
    impacts needed to further the ultimate goal – in the case of these activities – enhancing accounting
    and auditing quality for MSMEs.
-   Following up with counterparts on a regular basis to continue the momentum of activities is
    important to ensuring that issues raised and ideas developed during workshops and conferences do
    not fall to the wayside, but rather are remembered and acted upon in due time.
-   Nothing can be accomplished without financing. Although coordination, communication and
    engagement are important, if consistent financing is not available it is very difficult to make any
    progress.

In regards to next steps, Team Task Leaders and Project Coordinators will undertake the following:

-   Continued follow up with national counterparts and key contacts on the subjects of MSME financial
    reporting, accounting and auditing.
-   Continue support to the stakeholders in the MENA region which have actively participated in CV
    MENA activities.
-   Continue efforts to source funding for MSME-related financial accounting / reporting / auditing
    needs for the region, in order to be able to continue to deliver and build upon the successes seen
    under the MSME TF-supported CV MENA activities.

Conclusion
The MSME TF co-financing of the various CV MENA activities noted in previous sections have had
significant impact on raising awareness and developing skills related to the quality of financial reporting
and auditing provided to MSMEs. The most important impacts have been the increase in awareness of
the need for strengthened accounting and auditing for MSME clients by engaging them in dialogue and
discussion on the issues, serving the needs of MSMEs and their SMP service providers through provision
of virtual events, in-person trainings and facilitated workshops to convene leaders and policymakers on
the subject and catalyze further action, and by supporting ongoing dialogue and project work on the
subject beyond the scope of CV MENA activities. The issue of strengthening accountancy for MSMEs is a
long term challenge and as such must be met with continued funding, support and activities in order to
make measured progress. In order to maintain achieved gains as well as to continue the battle to
promote high quality in accountancy throughout the MENA region so as to benefit and support MSME
growth, development and contribution to economy and society, it is recommended that engagement,
financing and assistance remain strong.


                                                                                              27 | P a g e
