Report No: ACS14124




Assessing Disability in Working Age Population
A Paradigm Shift: from Impairment and Functional Limitation to the Disability
Approach


Jerome Bickenbach, Aleksandra Posarac, Alarcos Cieza, Nenad Kostanjsek



June 18, 2015



GSPDR




 Document of the World Bank


                                                                          i
Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of
the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-
750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                       ii
                                                Table of contents

Acknowledgments ...............................................................................................................v
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................ix
Introduction..................................................................................................................... xvii
Chapter 1: Disability and Disability Assessment ............................................................... 1
   Chapter 1: Summary ....................................................................................................... 1
       What is disability assessment? ................................................................................... 1
       What is disability? ....................................................................................................... 4
       The credibility of disability assessment ....................................................................... 6
       Disability assessment and disability policy ................................................................. 7
Chapter 2: Models of Disability Assessment around the World .................................... 10
   Chapter 2: Summary ..................................................................................................... 10
       Disability assessment: classifying methodologies .................................................... 11
       Medical information and discretion.......................................................................... 12
       Impairment, functional limitation and disability ...................................................... 14
       Strengths and weaknesses of the disability assessment approaches ....................... 22
Chapter 3: Introduction to International Classification of Functioning, Disability and
Health................................................................................................................................ 29
   Chapter 3: Summary ..................................................................................................... 29
       The interactive model of the ICF ............................................................................... 30
       The structure and coding scheme of the ICF classification ....................................... 34
       ICF qualifiers.............................................................................................................. 37
       Performance and capacity ........................................................................................ 38
       ICF and ICD ................................................................................................................ 40
Chapter 4: Application of ICF to Disability Assessment .................................................. 41
   Chapter 4: Summary ..................................................................................................... 41
       Disability assessment and the lived experience of health......................................... 41
       The general case for ICF as a design framework for disability assessment .............. 43
       ICF and the paradigm shift in disability assessment ................................................. 46
       How might the ICF affect the practice of disability assessment? ............................. 49
       Current limitations in the usefulness of the ICF for reform ....................................... 50
       ICF disability assessment and human rights ............................................................. 51



                                                                                                                                      iii
       Conclusion ................................................................................................................. 53
Chapter 5: The Way Forward ........................................................................................... 55

Annexes
Annex 1: ICF Minimum Generic Set and Disability Set .................................................... 61
Annex 2: Examples of Disability Evaluation around the World ....................................... 65
Annex 3: Case Example: Applying the ICF to Disability Assessment: A Practical Case
Study Based on the Experience of Greece and Cyprus ..................................................... 72
Annex 4: A Note on Disability Policy and Disability Assessment in the United Kingdom. 88
Annex 5: Mandatory Disability Insurance Systems Overview ........................................ 114

Boxes
Box 1.1: Key Terms.............................................................................................................. 6
Box 1.2. Disability Assessment in the United States and United Kingdom ........................ 7
Box 3.1. ICF Qualifiers ....................................................................................................... 37

Figures
Figure 2.1: Bareme Table and Chart for the Hand ............................................................ 17
Figure 3.1: The Integrative Bio-Psycho-Social Model of Functioning, Disability and Health
........................................................................................................................................... 33
Figure 3.2: The Hierarchical Structure of the ICF .............................................................. 34
Figure 3.3: ICF Hierarchical Structure – An Example ........................................................ 35

Tables
Table 2.1. Impairment, Functional and Disability Approach to Disability Assessment: A
Summary of Characteristics .............................................................................................. 22
Table 3.1. Definitions of the Components of the Model of Functioning and Disability ... 31




                                                                                                                                           iv
                              Acknowledgments


This study was prepared jointly by the World Bank Group (WBG) and the World Health
Organization (WHO). The preparation was co-led by Aleksandra Posarac (WBG) and
Alarcos Cieza (WHO). Authors of the study are Jerome Bickenbach, Aleksandra Posarac,
Alarcos Cieza, and Nenad Kostanjsek.

Throughout the preparation, this work has benefited tremendously from many World
Bank colleagues who have been working on disability issues across the world, including
Melis Guven (Albania); Marina Petrovic and Elvira Anadolu (Azerbaijan); Boryana
Gotcheva (Bosnia and Herzegovina); Paulette Castel, Alessandra Marini, Nelson Gutierrez,
and Cristina Medina (Ecuador); Richard Florescu and Emil Tesliuc (Romania), and William
Wiseman and Sawkut Rojid (Seychelles). The study team was given the opportunity to
discuss disability assessment in Argentina, Brazil, Oman, and Kuwait as well.

The list of clients and partners who have generously shared their time and knowledge
with the study team and helped it test ideas about the content of the study is quite long.
The team is particularly grateful to Mr. Lenin Moreno, a Special Envoy of the United
Nations Secretary for People with Disabilities and former Vice-President of Ecuador; Mr.
Salim Muslimov, the Minister of the Labour and Social Protection of the Population of
Azerbaijan; Alana Officer from WHO, formerly WHO Coordinator for Disability and
Rehabilitation; Herman Kroneman from Dutch Social Security Institute; Filomena Pereira
from the Ministry of Education of Portugal; and many others.

The study team is grateful to peer-reviewers, Philip O’Keef and Maitreyi Das from the
World Bank and Somnath Chatterji from WHO. Special thanks to Ngoc-Dung Tran (WBG)
for excellent administrative support.




                                                                                        v
       Acronyms and Abbreviations


ADL    Activity of Daily Living
AMA    American Medical Association
AT     Assistive Technology
CRPD   Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
CCT    Conditional Cash Transfer
DAS    Disability Assessment System
ECDA   Evaluation Center for Disability Assessment
FCE    Functional Capacity Evaluation
FIM    Functional Independence Measure
IADL   Instrumental Activity of Daily Living
ICD    International Classification of Diseases
ICF    International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
ICPS   International Classification for Patient Safety
PIP    Personal Independence Payments
SSDI   Social Security Disability Insurance
SSI    Social Security Insurance
WBG    World Bank Group
WHO    World Health Organization




                                                                            vi
                                                                          Jerome Bickenbach
                                                                         Aleksandra Posarac
                                                                                     Alarcos Cieza
                                                                           Nenad Kostanjsek1




1 Dr. Jerome Bickenbach is the Disability Unit Policy Head, Swiss Paraplegic Research, Professor Emeritus in
the Department of Philosophy and Faculties of Law and Medicine at Queen's University, and permanent
visiting professor, Department of Health Sciences & Health Policy at the University of Lucerne. Aleksandra
Posarac is a Lead Economist with the World Bank and Program Leader for Health, Education, Social
Protection and Labor, Social Development, Poverty, Gender and Conflict and Fragility in the Philippines. Dr.
Alarcos Cieza is the WHO Coordinator for Prevention of Blindness and Deafness, Disability and
Rehabilitation. Prior to joining WHO in September 2014, she served as Chair and Professor of Medical
Psychology at the Faculty of Social and Human Sciences at the University of Southampton in the United
Kingdom. Nenad Kostanjsek is a Technical Officer in the WHO Classification, Terminology and Standards
Team within the Department of Health Statistics and Informatics. He is responsible for the International
Classification of Functioning Disability and Health (ICF), the International Classification for Patient Safety
(ICPS), the development of functioning properties in the context of the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) revision process and the linking of ICF and ICPS with related terminologies.



                                                                                                           vii
viii
                               Executive Summary

Background

The objectives of this study are to present the basics of assessing working age population
for disability benefits, to equip staffs at both the World Bank Group (WBG) and the World
Health Organization (WHO) with a basic knowledge of the issues surrounding disability
assessment, and to make a case for why adopting an approach to disability assessment
based on the WHO International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) i
is smart policy that corresponds well with the aims of modern disabil ity policy and a
recognition of the fundamental human rights of persons with disabilities, but also with
the aims of other economic and social policies, such as labor market and fiscal policies.
The report argues that, despite some limitations, there are good reasons for thinking that
the ICF can serve as a design structure for reforming disability assessment, both in high
income and low and medium income countries.

The study is a follow up work to the World Report on Disability that WHO and World Bank
published jointly in June 2011.ii The World Report made it clear that the process of
disability assessment is an important lever of disability policy in any country, yet little is
known about how disability assessment is conducted. This study responds to that
knowledge gap, but it also describes a paradigm shift in the assessment of disability, one
that moves from prevailing Impairment and Functional Limitation approaches to a
Disability-based approach. This paradigm shift, it is argued, makes sense given that labor
market policy is currently shifting towards maximization of labor force participation of
working age individuals experiencing poor health, and a fiscal policy increasing focused
on affordability and sustainability of public spending on social benefits, including disability
benefits.

Context

Disability assessment is a gate through which anyone who claims publicly or privately
provided disability related benefit, service or product has to pass. Every country has some
form of disability assessment, some government authorized agency or agent charged with
assessing whether a person is disabled or not, and to which degree. Most commonly and
most visibly disability assessment is linked to social security benefits. But it also applies
to eligibility for other social policy benefit: to access these benefits —from rehabilitation
services, to care services, to assistive devices, to disability social pension, to social
assistance in cash and in kind —people have to be officially declared to have a disability.

Disability assessment affects labor supply, government spending and individual welfare.
Through the power vested in them, disability assessors make decisions that affect tens of
millions of working age adults (on average 6 percent of working age population in OECD
countries in the early 2000s) and influence the allocation of national resources that often
surpass 1 percent of GDP in any given year (on average 1.8-1.9 percent of GDP in the



                                                                                             ix
OECD countries). Yet, not much is known about how efficiently or effectively assessment
processes are or the extent they meet basic credibility criteria such as validity, reliability
and transparency. Thus far, despite their influence over significant human and financial
resources, disability assessment systems and disability policies underlying them have
largely escaped research attention and scrutiny. This study is an attempt to start
responding to that situation.

The Study

Disability assessment and determination

Disability assessment is an authoritative determination about the kind and extent of
disability a person has, as part of a larger administrative process usually called disability
evaluation or disability determination . Disability assessment is part of a process that
determines the eligibility of a claimant for some social benefit, service or protection that
comprises a country’s disability policy. These programs include social security and
disability pensions; health and rehabilitation services; general social benefits such as
income support; and employment-related benefits, such as unemployment benefits and
workers’ compensation. The work capacity or work ability assessment is the most
prominent application of disability assessment, since being able to work is key to
economic self-sufficiency and social standing.

Historically, disability assessment, and especially work capacity assessment, has also been
closely linked to medicine, for the source of criteria of assessment, and the medical
profession for assessors and adjudicators of eligibility. Medical criteria —it is commonly
believed —are objective and clear and medical professionals are socially respectable and
reliable. Taken together, this meant that the medical professional made a good
‘gatekeeper’ to public benefits. But essential to understanding the challenges of disability
assessment is the controversy over the concept of ‘disability’ itself.

What is disability?

Since roughly the 1970s on, it was common to speak about two ‘models’ of disability: the
Medical Model of Disability and the Social Model of Disability. The Medical Model of
Disability purportedly claimed that disability was essentially a medical problem located
in an individual’s body that required a medical or rehabilitative response. This was
contrasted to the Social Model of Disability that denied that disability was fundamentally
a matter of the condition of a person’s body but was rather a social disadvantage
experienced by an individual, a disadvantage created entirely by social, cu ltural and
economic conditions and beliefs. In the last decade or so these debates have resolved in
favor of the consensus view that disability is a complex phenomenon that involves both
biomedical features of a person’s body or mind and the impact of the overall, physical
and social, environmental context in which the person carries out his or her life.

This interactional view of disability is the dominant one today and the most
commonsensical: disability clearly is not solely abo ut how a person’s body fu nctions, since



                                                                                            x
two people can have exactly the same impairment while one experiences a severe
disability and the other little or no disability because they live in very different contexts
that make very different demands on them. On the other hand, disability is not just about
these environmentally or socially-created disadvantages, because the body and how it
functions makes a difference as well. This interactional, or bio-psycho-social view of
disability is at the heart of the WHO’s ICF, formally endorsed by the World Health
Assembly in 2001.

The credibility of disability assessment

The credibility and perceived legitimacy of a country’s disability assessment procedure
depends on a few fundamental considerations. First, the assessments must be valid so
there are no ‘false positives’ (people receiving benefits, but are not disabled) or ‘false
negatives’ (people who should be r eceiving benefits, but do not). Second, they must be
reliable, in the sense that two assessors following the same rules and criteria, should
come to the same assessment of the same person (often called ‘inter -rater reliability’).
And third, the decisions must be transparent and standardized, so that the grounds for
the decision-making are publically known and their application in particular cases
independently evaluated. In short, the legitimacy of the disability assessment process
depends on it being, and be seen to be, impartial, fair and based on objective evidence.

Nonetheless, depending on the social purposes and political objectives a policy or
program is designed to serve, the criteria used for disability evaluation may extend
beyond medical or even disability-relevant considerations to broader social
considerations that may not be directly linked to the experience of disability. Historically,
sharp policy has been the most volatile and reactive to historical events (such as a
dramatic increase in the number of returning war veterans with injuries who demand
returning to their old jobs), demographic, economic and social factors. These forces have
often dramatically changed the objectives of the policy, but without altering the social
importance of securing accuracy in the assessment of disability.

Models of disability assessment around the world

Worldwide, strategies of disability assessment focus either on (i) health conditions and
the impairments associated with them; (ii) functional limitations in basic or simple
activities, understood independently of environmental or contextual differences; or (iii)
disability fully understood as an outcome of interactions between features intrinsic to the
person (health conditions, impairments and functional limitations) and the full range of
environmental factors that, possibly uniquely, characterize the overall lived-context of
the individual. Each approach has its strengths and weaknesses.

Impairment approach : Assessing work capacity on this approach is entirely a matter of
measuring the severity of an underlying health condition and associated impa irments.
Although simple and straightforward, and by far the most common approach used
worldwide, the Impairment approach has been strongly criticized both technically in
terms of reliability and in terms of the underlying assumption that inferences from


                                                                                           xi
severity of impairments can validly be made to levels of work capacity, without in any way
taking into account the impact that features of the work place environment – how the job
is structured, stress levels, the physical conditions, and the social and attitudinal
conditions of employment. The interactional model, and evidence supporting it, strongly
suggests that this approach is inadequate and distorts the assessment process.

Functional Limitation approach: This approach arose in the 1970s in response to criticism
of the Impairment strategy from rehabilitation professionals who argued that physical
examination and medical history-taking are an insufficient evidentiary basis for assessing
work disability. They argued that a person’s work capacity depended on the extent to
which the person could perform very basic actions such as lifting, standing, walking,
sitting, carrying, pushing, pulling, climbing, balancing, stooping, kneeling, crouching,
crawling, reaching, handling, fingering, talking, feeling, hearing, and seeing. These
‘functional capacities’ were thought to be essential predictors of work capacity. To assess
these capacities a range of Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE) tools, mostly health
condition specific, were developed and recommended for disability assessment.

The Functional approach has been plagued with disappointing results in developing valid
and reliable FCEs that have application, not only across health conditions, but
internationally. There is also the concern that FCEs tend to focus on a person’s deficits—
the capacities that the individual has lost —when it is commonly agreed a person’s
physical and mental assets and strengths are equally important information for a work
disability assessment. Finally, Functional approach suffers from the same problem as the
Impairment approach: it only indirectly, by proxy, assesses work disability. Although both
information about impairments and functional limitations in the performance of basic
activities is essential for disability assessment, especially for work disability, equally
important is information about the impact of the working environment on work disability.

Disability approach: The Disability approach attempts to directly assess disability rather
than indirectly infer disability from a proxy impairment or functional capacity
assessments. Direct assessment, in principle, gives equal consideration to all
determinants of disability—medical, functional, environmental and personal. The
disability approach, in its purest form, would be fully individualized and based on direct
evidence. It would strive to provide valid assessment directly on evidence, on the
assumption that the true object of assessment must be the person-environment,
interactive outcome rather than any intrinsic feature of the person (impairment or
functional capacity).

For many decades, although the Disability approach was acknowledged to be the
theoretically optimal approach, it was argued that either the Impairment or the
Functional Limitation approaches were preferable, because the very concept of
‘disability’ remained controversial and it was simply not practically feasible to colle ct and
analyze information not only about the person (health condition, impairments, and
functional limitations) but also about the person’s physical, human -built, attitudinal,
social, political and cultural environment in order to produce a valid and complete



                                                                                           xii
disability assessment. The second in particular is a substantial challenge to the Disability
approach. And it is a challenge that the ICF, if it can successfully assist countries in
transitioning to the Disability approach, must address.

Introduction to ICF

In May 2001, the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) of
the WHO was endorsed by the World Health Assembly. The ICF provides a comprehensive
and standardized framework and language for the description of Functioning and
Disability. The ICF model is the clearest expression of the interactive model of disability
about which there is worldwide consensus and it is certainly the only model that has
received unanimous international endorsement. As an international standard, the ICF
provides separate classifications of the components of Functioning and Environmental
Factors, each of which is composed of domains (chapters and blocks) and categories.
Qualifiers are provided to describe the extent of the problems in Functioning, that is, the
extent of Disability denoted by each domain and category variable.

‘Functioning’ in the ICF as an umbrella term including all aspects and dimensions of how
humans function and act, from the concrete functions (and structures) of the human body
and mind to the variety of simple and complex actions that a person engages in. These
simple and complex actions are conceptualized from the perspective of the intrinsic
capacities of the person to perform actions (the perspective of Capacity), and in terms of
the actual performance of these actions in interaction with the complete context in which
the person lives (the perspective of Performance).

Depending on the dimension of Functioning of interest, Disability is denoted as a matter
of Impairments of Body Functions and Body Structures, Limitations in Activities and
Restrictions in Participation. Functioning and Disability are thus overarching terms that
identify these parallel dimensions. Although Functioning is conceptually linked to a health
condition (a disease, disorder, injury or natural process such as aging), it is not a direct
causal consequence but rather the overall experience of living with a health condition.
The key issue is that Disability is created both by the underlying Health Condition and
associated Impairments and by the lowered or raised levels of Capacity to perform
Activities & Participation that result from Environmental Factors. Health state and
environmental factors are therefore both determinants of Disability .

Disability assessment and the application of ICF

There is a growing recognition, certainly in the academic literature, that disability
assessment should be based on the full, contextualised lived experience of health rather
than merely on diagnosis, impairments or functional capacity evaluation. This is Disability
approach, which not only directly assess disability status, rather than indirectly inferring
disability from impairments or functional capacity, it also captures the person -
environmental interactive model of disability, universally understood as the most
defensible model of disability. Since the ICF is based on this model, it is reasonable to




                                                                                         xiii
turn to it as a feasible design framework for reforming disability assessment procedures
for social, health, and employment policy.

First of all, the fact that ICF is the international standard classification of functioning and
disabilities generates three sources of added value in the application of the ICF as a design
framework for disability assessment:

ICF is an optimal data reporting structure: As ICF is a complete information collection
structure, with an exhaustive and mutually exclusive list of domains, it offers the prospect
of providing the full range and detail of information required for a complete disability
assessment. Moreover, ICF not only helps coordinate existing data, it also identifies
informational gaps, in particular information about the work environment that, as has
been shown, greatly enhances the validity and reliability of work disability determination.

ICF is the basis for process legitimacy: Standardization of process, procedure and
evidence is the administrative solution to challenges to legitimacy, and this is what the
ICF can provide. Documentation of information in the language of ICF not only provides
comparability, it also secures accountability. As the internationally accepted, scientific
basis for describing the determinants and outcomes of functioning, disability and health,
ICF is a solid basis for making the case for the legitimacy of a disability assessment
procedure.

ICF is an international platform for assessment and measurement: Recent work on the
development of ICF Core Sets and other breakthroughs in measurement strategies relying
on ICF as an exhaustive, and consistent, classification of all domains of Functioning and
Environmental Factors, have led to useable instrumentation with direct application to
disability assessment.

ICF and the paradigm shift in disability assessment

Important as these general considerations are, realistically a country would need a strong
argument for engaging in substantial reform of its disability assessment procedure. The
basis for that argument is that the ICF captures the important paradigm shift in our
understanding of disability. This worldwide recognized and adopted interactional
conceptualization of disability calls for appropriate adjustments in disability policy,
including disability assessment procedure. The arguments include:

First, ICF offers the prospect of feasibly constructing a complete functioning profile for
the purposes of assessment, a profile based not merely on what a person cannot do, but
also including the person’s assets and strengths. ICF also offers the ability to
systematically record the presence of environmental facilitators and barriers, and their
impact on the person ’s performance in his or her actual context. These informational
ingredients are fundamental to the Disability approach.

Secondly, ICF, for the first time, creates the conceptual and practical structure to predict
disability trajectories over time in order to be able to flexibly respond to changing social



                                                                                            xiv
circumstances. Predicting how disability plays out in a person’s life over time is not only
beneficial for anticipating economic and social costs of disability, it also makes it possible
to implement health and rehabilitation (including vocational) interventions that can, for
example by building on a person’s assets and strengths untouched by a chronic health
condition, limit the overall impact of health problems. Essentially, it can help keep a
person on the job, instead of leaving the labor market. With demographic ageing, it is
becoming increasingly important to identify, and if possible, modify, ageing trajectories
as individuals age into, or age with, chronic health conditions.

Thirdly, the fundamental ICF distinction between capacity and performance makes it
possible to identify and target interventions that are key to programs such as return to
work. An ICF-based disability assessment points us toward both sets of determinants of
disability – intrinsic health conditions and impairments, on the one hand, and
environmental factors on the other. Rehabilitation therapists have traditionally adopted
this understanding of disability in their work, looking both at interventions that enhance
a person’s capacity, and at ways of improving performance by means of environmental
facilitators, from assistive technology to workplace modifications.

Implicit in the ICF model is an important message related to the equalization of working
environment to maximize performance irrespective of the functioning profile. Ensuring
equality of capacity across the citizenry is beyond human knowledge and ingenuity – since
people will always be intrinsically, and often irremediably, different in the health
conditions they experience, their impairments and functional deficits and assets. People
have different Functioning profiles and there is only so much humans can do medically
and therapeutically to ‘equalize’ human capacity in general or work capacity in particular.
Performance is a different matter. Although there are many practical reasons why
achieving equalized work performance is also beyond our grasp, it is not an impossibility:
the working environment, across the labor market, could in principle be made fully
accessible to all workers, whatever their Functioning profile. If achieving this goal is
unfeasible, striving for it is a plausible policy objective; indeed, according to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , it is a matter of basic human rights.

Despite these important assets, ICF also has limitations that need to be addressed. In
particular, much of the explanatory power of ICF’s interactive model depends on the
crucial relationship between Environmental Factors and complex domains such
employment. Yet, critics have argued that the ICF may lack the theoretical capacity to
live up to the demands that disability assessment procedures would require of it. Despite
attempts to measure the impact of the built environment on performance, at this point
there are no tested and usable tools for identifying the key environmental determinants
of work performance, let along measuring this impact. The Environmental Factors
classification, moreover, is so lacking in detail as to be of little use in concrete applications,
such as disability assessment. The application of the ICF component of Personal Factors,
in part because of the vagueness of its definition, risks the unintended consequence of
ascribing the inability of a person to perform successfully at work, not to the absence of




                                                                                               xv
workplace accommodations or suitable assistive technology, but to personal motivational
failure.

Challenges to the shift toward the Disability approach

There are essentially two major challenges that need to be addressed: First, although all
countries, regardless of their level of development, could benefit from shifting toward a
more valid and equitable Disability approach to disability assessment, for many middle
and in particular lower middle and low income countries, transitional processes need to
be put into place to make it possible to move from an Impairment or Functional Limitation
approach to a full Disability approach. Countries need to be assured that there are stable,
transitional reforms that can be put into place in a sequence and at a pace that is
practically feasible, given the country’s resources, political system, and social and cultural
context. The second challenge is addressing the potential burden of integrating
information about environmental factors for disability assessment. This pertains both to
technical concern for data comparability, for which ICF is of considerable assistance, but
also to more practical problem of accessing this information by means of data collection
and measurement tools, which at the moment do not exist.

Conclusion

This study makes the general case for countries to make the shift in their disability
assessment procedures toward what is called here the Disability approach, which directly
assesses the phenomena of disability, both in terms of the health conditions and
impairments of an individual, but also, and significantly for work capacity determinations,
in terms of the features of the environment that shapes the disability experience. This
study also makes the general case for using the resources of the ICF, its interactive model
of disability and classifications, as a design framework for realizing the Disability approach
to disability assessment. There is no simple, one-size-fits-all ICF template that can
transform a country’s disability assessment and evaluation procedures into those that
implement the full Disability approach. And the ICF has limitations that need to be
addressed with future research. Still, this study makes a plausible case for countries to
build on the conceptual and practical resources the ICF offers to make the important
paradigm shift in their disability assessment procedures, toward the more scientifically
based and equitable Disability approach.




                                                                                           xvi
                                    Introduction

Background

The objectives of this study are two-fold. First, it presents the basics of assessing working
age population for disability benefits. Increasingly, the operational staffs of the World
Bank (WBG) and the World Health Organization (WHO), as well as of other development
organizations, are being requested by governmental policy agencies for technical advice
and assistance on how to reform their disability assessment system. Often these inquiries
seek advice on how to base disability assessment practices on a contemporary
understanding of disability. This study therefore aims to equip staffs of both institutions
with a basic understanding of the issues surrounding disability assessment and in
particular to introduce them to the understanding of disability found in the WHO’s
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). iii Secondly, while
acknowledging limitations, both in conception and implementation, it makes a case for
why adopting the ICF approach to disability assessment may be smart policy that
corresponds well with the aims of modern disability policy that focuses on social and
economic inclusion for individuals with disabilities, in the context of a recognition of their
fundamental human rights. The adoption of ICF, for reasons given, may also assist
countries, of all levels of income and capacity, of meeting their objectives in other
important policy areas, such labor markets and fiscal policies.

This study is a follow-up to the World Report on Disability that WHO and WBG published
jointly in June 2011.iv The World Report attracted enormous interest in and attention to
disability, both as a human rights and development phenomenon. It remains the most
authoritative report of its kind, extensively used by researchers, academics, policy makers
and civil society organizations across the world. Originally written and published in
English, it has been translated into a number of languages, including French, Spanish,
Chinese, Portuguese, Japanese, Korean, German, Turkish, Arabic, and Romanian—
amplifying its influence on policy makers and practitioners. The World Report uses WHO’s
ICF and its bio-psycho-social and person-environmental interactive approach to disability
as a methodological framework. As will be described in more detail below in Chapter 3,
the ICF approach understands disability as an outcome of an interaction between a
person with a health condition and his or her physical, attitudinal and social
environmental factors.

As a follow-up to the World Report, the World Bank and WHO agreed to jointly undertake
two activities. The first activity was to develop and put into public use a comprehensive
survey on Functioning and Disability (working title: Model Disability Survey) that will
provide information on the lived experience of people with disabilities and can be used
by countries to design and monitor the implementation of disability policies. After several
years of development and testing, the survey is available for public use and is currently
being implemented in several countries, including Sri Lanka, Oman and Nepal.v The survey



                                                                                          xvii
responds to a finding in the World Report (Chapter 2) that in 2010 the state of data about
disability across the world was very poor and its recommendation to take steps to mend
the situation.

The second joint activity, of which this study is the result, was to take a closer look at the
processes of disability assessment —an important lever of disability policy in any
country— and prepare a study on these processes. The preparation of the World Report
revealed that, despite its significance, little is known about disability assessment or the
variety of procedures used around the world, especially in low income settings. This study
responds to that finding by beginning to fill in the knowledge gap abou t this important
public institution, focusing on definitions, conceptual issues, approaches and
methodologies, and the policy demands and expectations it is expected to meet. A crucial
next stage would be an empirical study that reveal, and structurally classify, the plethora
of disability assessment operational details that have developed, often without planning,
at the country level.

While filling in the knowledge gap, the study goes a step further by making a case for a
paradigm shift in the assessment of disability—one that moves away from one grounded
in the prevailing Impairment and/ or Functional Limitation approaches to one that is
informed by an ICF disability-based approach. The case is built on two sets of arguments.
The first set is conceptual and normative. As the United Nations Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) vi has been signed and ratified by the majority of the
world’s countries, the bio -psycho-social and person-environment interactive approach to
disability, which is at the foundation of the CRPD, has become a guiding principle of their
disability policies. However, the operationalization and practical application of the
disability approach, including especially its application in disability assessment, is laggi ng
in most countries. The reason is that the experience and knowledge from countries that
have adopted the ICF into their disability assessment systems is not readily available. In
many countries there is a wide discrepancy between a general macro level and up to date
conceptual approach to disability, and an operational reality that still reflects old concepts
and approaches. Moreover all countries, regardless of resource constraints can in
principle benefit from this shift in paradigm, especially as the shift can be progressive with
a gradual realization of benefits at each transitional step.

The second set of arguments contends that the paradigm shift is a smart move for
countries because it responds directly to the demands of other important public policies.
Two of these stand out: labor market policy whose orientation has shifted toward
maximization of labor force participation of working age individuals experiencing ill
health, and fiscal policy whose focus has shifted to concerns about the affordability and
sustainability of public spending on social benefits, including disability benefits. Here the
case for a paradigm shift in how countries assess disability is grounded in powerful, and
very pragmatic, considerations that are found worldwide across all countries, irrespective
of their income level.
Context



                                                                                          xviii
Put simplistically, disability assessment is a gate through which anyone who claims any
publicly or privately provided disability related benefit, service, or product has to pass.
Every country has some form of disability assessment, however informal, and some
government authorized agency or agent charged with assessing whether a person is
disabled or not, and to which degree. Most commonly and most visibly disability
assessment is linked to social security benefits. But it also applies to eligibility for a wide
range of benefits—from rehabilitation services, to care services, to assistive devices, to
disability social pension, to social assistance in cash and in kind.

Disability assessment affects labor supply, government spending and individual welfare.
Through the power vested in them, disability assessors make decisions that affect tens of
millions of working age adults and influence the allocation of national resources that
often surpass 1 percent of GDP in any given year. Yet, not much is known about how
efficiently or effectively assessment processes are or the extent they meet basic
credibility criteria such as validity, reliability and transparency. Thus far, despite their
influence over significant human and financial resources, disability assessment systems
have largely escaped research attention and scrutiny.

Disability assessment has a significant impact over labor supply, in particular in the middle
and higher income countries. As a consequence of disability determination, millions of
working age adults leave the labor market every year and move onto some form of
disability benefit. The OECD seminal report, published in 2010, vii estimated that in 2007,
on average, about 6 percent of working age population in OECD was out of the labor
market and on long term disability benefits (rising to 10-12 percent in some countries in
the north and east of Europe). This rate was higher than the pre 2008-crisis
unemployment rate. The situation reflects a growing trend in the numbers of working age
adults leaving the labor market because of poor health and seeking disability pension.
This is puzzling, because the health status of the population has steadily improved over
the same period. The report concludes that “Working -age disability policy is one of the
biggest social and labor market challenges for policy makers.” viii

Many countries spend significant public resources on disability benefits. The OECD
average is about 1.8-1.9 percent of GDP, but in some of the OECD countries it is as high
as 3-4 percent. Many new members of the European Union and European countries not
in the EU, as well as countries in Central Asia, spend between 0.5 and 1.0 or more of GDP
on disability pensions alone. With population ageing and a tightening fiscal situation, the
sustainability of public spending on disability benefits has come under close scrutiny in
many countries. Certain forms of disability benefits may not be sustainable and other
policy tactics need to be developed.

Disability assessment does not exist in a policy and institutional vacuum. The decision
taken by working age adultsix to knock on its doors is driven by many factors:




                                                                                            xix
First, it depends on the country’s disability policy and how it defines disability, what
criteria and processes it specifies for deciding who is disabled and who is not, and the
range of benefits available to people assessed as disabled. For example, in many
countries, 20 years ago, mental health conditions, except in cases of severe mental
disorders, would not be recognized by relevant regulation as a reason to be assessed as
disabled. Similarly, musculoskeletal disorders, including lower back pain, were simply not
considered disabilities but normal incidents of ageing. These days it is more commonly
recognized that both mental health conditions x and musculoskeletal disorders are leading
causes of working age disability; yet the social security law in many countries still limit the
definition of disability to physical and sensory conditions.

Another feature of disability policy that strongly influences the rate by which working age
adults leave the labor market are the basic parameters of social security benefits. In
particular replacement rates for disability pension tend to be higher (often over 80
percent) and the vesting periods shorter than for old-age pensions. In many countries
disability pensions automatically turn into old-age pensions once the disabled individual
reaches mandatory retirement age, although the pension amount is unchanged.
Furthermore, disability status is often linked to many other benefits, such as subsidized
(“discounted” utility bills), transportation tickets, increased rates of other benefits, health
insurance coverage and so on. In the United States, a person receiving a social security
disability social insurance benefit qualifies for Medicare after 24 months. Although in low
and middle income countries the range and level of benefits is very different, often the
dynamics are similar, with similar consequences for the labor market.

Finally, the disability assessment system itself —its rules, the rigor and strictness with
which they are applied, transparency, governance arrangements, and so on —plays a
significant role as well. For instance, as argued below, an assessment approach based on
impairments results in very different disability assessment outcomes than one that uses
a full profile of functioning based on the ICF. Impairment-based approach tends to more
quickly and automatically grants full, permanent disability, rather than, for example,
coming to the assessment that a blind person can work, if provided with workplace
accommodation. And in many low income countries, the informality of disability
assessment, where it exists at all, means that very little is known about the basis of the
determination.

Second, the decision to seek disability benefits depends on the availability and
generosity of many other public policies, notably old-age and early retirement pensions,
unemployment insurance and health insurance . Tightening early retirement provisions
and increasing retirement age has in the last 20 years increased the numbers of people
on disability rolls.xi In some countries, as high as 40 percent of the pre-retirement age
cohort (60-64) are unemployed and on disability pension. Similarly, universal health
insurance coverage can lessen the pressure on working age adults experiencing poor
health to seek illness-related disability pensions, especially if they are unemployed. Paid
sick-leave provisions that allow for absence from work because of acute episodes of ill -



                                                                                            xx
health are important as well. They allow the return to work after an episode of sickness
and for access to rehabilitative services during longer spells of poor health to increase the
chances of returning to work.xii Finally, the availability and duration of unemployment
insurance is crucial. The lack of, or overly restricted unemployment insurance provisions
push workers in poor health, nearing retirement or with low education in low paid jobs
to seek disability social insurance benefits. xiiii

Third, overall social and economic situation is an important determinant of how many
people seek disability benefits and require disability assessment. When the labor market
is good and prospects for finding and staying in a well-paid job reasonable, many people
with poor but manageable states of health, if provided with some reasonable adjustments
in the work place, will stay on the job. But with high unemployment and no jobs, the
demand for disability benefits will swell, and so will the numbers of beneficiaries. It has
been empirically shown that the employment and disability rates move in the opposite
direction, so that disability rates appear countercyclical to the levels of employment. xiv

Even when countries share similar basic features of disability policy, the fact of differences
in design and implementation mean that countries at similar level of development and
similar population health profiles may have very different rates of working age population
on disability benefits.xv Yet whenever a significant fraction of the working age population
is out of the labor force because of disability, policy makers have sought to reduce the
fiscal burden by looking for ways for people in less that optimal health to stay in
employment. Accordingly, “return to work” and “pathways to work” policies for people
disability benefits have become more prominent, although the evidence in high income
suggests that once adults are on disability benefits they rarely, if ever go back to work.xvi
Working age adults tend to stay on disability benefits until they either reach old -age
retirement or they die. With the improvements in the health status and better
management of chronic health conditions, an increasing number of working age disability
benefits recipients reaches the old age.

The failure of programs aimed at increasing the exit from disability benefits has shifted
the focus of policy makers to efforts to decrease the inflow of working age adults into
disability benefits. As the example of the Netherlands shows, xvii such a change requires
changes in disability policy, often across the board. But it also requires that the disability
assessment system make a paradigm shift in the way disability is conceptualized,
operationalized and assessed: what needs to be assessed is what working age adults can
do as well as what they cannot do and which services, accommodations and enhanced
accessibility at home and at the workplace is required in order to return to work, instead
of crossing the door into disability benefits.

It is, therefore, within this context —the need to maximize labor force participation of all
workers—that this study has been developed.
The Study




                                                                                           xxi
The study is presented in five chapters and five annexes. The first chapter, Disability and
Disability Assessment , introduces disability assessment, explaining the contemporary
understanding of disability, the credibility criteria of disability assessment, and the
relationship between disability assessment and disability policy in general. Chapter Two,
Models of Disability Assessment around the World , discusses the principles and strengths
and weaknesses of three models or strategies of disability assessment: the Impairment,
Functional Limitation, and Disability approach. Chapter Three, Introduction to ICF
discusses the interactive ICF disability model, its understanding of human functioning and
its two key aspects: Capacity and Performance. It also presents the structure and coding
scheme of the ICF classification, ICF qualifiers and discusses the relationship between the
ICF and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD). Chapter Four, Application of ICF
to Disability Assessment , makes a case for a paradigm shift in disability assessment.
Taking into account the benefits and limitations of using the ICF as a design framework
for disability assessment, this Chapter argues that ICF is a) an internationally accepted
data reporting structure; b) a good basis for process legitimacy; and c) on balance, a
suitable platform for assessment and measurement with application both in high and
middle and, through a gradual transition, in low income countries as well. The chapter
concludes with a sketch of such a design framework for disability assessment grounded
in the model and classifications of the ICF that offers anew orientation of disability p olicy,
one that can maximize labor market participation for working age adults experiencing
poor health. The final short chapter, The Way Forward, acknowledges some concerns
about reliance on the ICF for disability assessment and suggests a research agend a that
might meet these concerns.

The five annexes include Annex 1: ICF Minimum Generic Set and Disability Set; Annex 2:
A Summary of Disability Assessment Systems in Eight Countries from around the World;
Annex 3: A Practical Example of the ICF Implementation in Disability Assessment in
Cyprus; Annex 4: A Note on Disability Benefits and Assessment in UK (a background paper
for the study); and Annex 5: A Summary of the Background Paper on Disability Insurance.




                                                                                           xxii
                                       Chapter 1
                  Disability and Disability Assessment


Chapter 1: Summary
    Disability assessment is an authoritative administrative process of determining the
     kind and extent of disability as part of a larger state administrative procedure called
     disability evaluation or determination.
    Disability assessment is extensively used throughout disability policy as an essential
     part of the determination of eligibility for services, products or protections
     authorised by a state official disability policy.
    Disability assessment for determination of employment benefits, or assessment of
     work capacity is the most common form of disability evaluation.
    Historically, disability assessment has been closely tied to medical sciences and
     medical professions, both for perceived legitimacy and certainty.
    The concept of disability has proven difficult to define, with two theoretical models
     predominating: the social and the medical models.
    These days, the consensus view (sometimes called the ‘interactive model’) is tha t
     disability is a multidimensional phenomenon with biological, individual and social
     features, that is an outcome of a complex interactions between intrinsic biological
     or health features of the individual’s body and mind, and the overall physical,
     attitudinal, interpersonal, and social and political context or environment in which
     the person lives, acts and experiences life.
    The WHO International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health adopts
     this interactional model (the ‘bio-psycho-social model’).
    Disability assessment procedures can be judged in terms of validity, reliability,
     transparency and standardization; but they will also be judged as fit for the purposes
     of the policy for which eligibility is required.
    Disability assessment is significantly shaped by disability policy.
    Disability policy, like all forms of social policy, is determined by many factors and
     designed for many purposes and objectives.


What is disability assessment?

Disability assessment is the process of making an authoritative determination about the
kind and extent of disability a person has, as part of a larger administrative process usually



                                                                                            1
called disability evaluation or disability determination .xviii This larger process typically
involves officials other than disability assessors, such as case managers, vocational
experts, social workers and administrative staff, and takes into account other features of
the individual, such as age or financial situation, or general economic conditions such as
the unemployment rate.xix Disability determination may be a complex, multi-layered
process involving several steps and actors, as it is in most high income countries, or it may
be a one-step, informal process conducted by a single individual as it is in low income
countries.

Disability evaluation, which includes disability assessment as a component, determines
the eligibility of an individual claimant for some social benefit, service or protection. The
range of these benefits and services comprises a country’s disability policy. The kinds of
programs found in a national disability policy vary enormously, depending for the most
part on the country’s level of resources or development. In high resource countries,
disability policy may comprise some or all of the following:

   •   Health and rehabilitation services, including access to assistive technology;
   •   Social security;
   •   Disability pensions (normally provided as part of social insurance/ social security);
   •   Health and social insurance benefits, including short and long term sick leaves;
   •   General social benefits such as income support and access to transportation;
       social pension for individuals with disability; housing or education services; social
       care service, both at home or in an institution; personal assistant services;
       subsidized utilities and tickets to cultural events, etc.
   • Employment-related benefits; including unemployment benefits, workers’
     compensation, and access to vocational rehabilitation; and
   •   Protection against discrimination and human rights violations. xx

The disability policy of low and lower middle and middle income countries will not have
this range of benefits, services, and protections, but nearly every country has some of
them.xxi Moreover, since the adoption of the United Nations CRPD in 2006, many
developing countries have been looking for ways to mainstream disability into regular
social protection programs (as those programs may not adequately include disabled
people), or to adjust the design of such programs to better serve the needs of disabled
individuals and households (such as programs targeting poor households, conditional
cash transfer programs, social pensions, child and family allowance, cash for work
programs). For these programs to work, however, some way of determining eligibility by
means of disability evaluation is still required. Disability evaluation is also used in the
private sector to determine health and other insurance premiums and benefits.




                                                                                           2
In most high and many upper middle income countries, disability evaluation involves a
series of steps, governed by law or regulations, which establish eligibility criteria for a
benefit or service. One of these steps, and the most central, is disability assessment.
Other eligibility requirements and related assessment steps may be added in order to
make a decision on eligibility for a particular benefit: the claimant’s age and gender,
residency or citizenship qualification, the extent of his or her contrib ution to a
contributory insurance scheme, the length of time the claimant was employed, how, or
under which conditions an injury was sustained, the claimant’s previous employment and
future potential employment, whether rehabilitation or other health servi ces are
available to return the claimant to work, his or her current, or future potential income or
access to other financial resources. The variety of these requirements is a reflection of
the ad hoc and reactive nature with which disability evaluation has developed in most
countries, with new requirements being added, or removed, in response to the perceived
need to increase, or restrict, benefits.

Because of the diversity of information that may need to be assembled to make an overall
disability evaluation, physicians and other health professionals who act as disability
assessors will often be joined by social workers, employment counsels, and others. The
process might involve assessment committees, tribunals, and other legal bodies as well
as state officers/program administrators of various sorts to adjudicate appeals and
finalize claims. As a consequence, the overall disability evaluation process can become
extremely complex and take weeks or, if there are many steps involving appeals and
reconsideration, even years to complete.xxii Although the process of disability evaluation
varies enormously between countries, disability assessment of some variety always plays
a central role. The fact that the process involves both financial and personnel resources—
and can often be quite costly—is a factor in how a government will decide to structure its
disability determination procedures.

Although assessing the extent of a person’s disability is essential in order to determine
whether he or she needs financial assistance, specialized health services, assistive
technology, long term care or home support services, disability assessment for public
benefits and services is most frequently understood as an assessment of work capacity
(otherwise known as work disability or work ability).xxiii This makes sense since, both
socially and from the individual’s perspective, being able to work is key to economic self -
sufficiency and social standing. Historically, almost all social welfare benefits in the
Western world were initially linked to employment and the capacity to work. The very
first recognizable form of disability evaluation was established in England’s Poor Law of
1601 that distinguished between the true or ‘worthy poor’ who were legitimately
disabled and so legally allowed to beg in the streets, and the ‘unworthy poor’ who were
not disabled and could be imprisoned for begging or forced to work. xxiv

Historically, disability assessment, and especially work capacity assessment, has also been
closely linked to medicine, for the source of criteria of assessment, and the medical
profession for assessors and adjudicators of eligibility. Medical criteria, it is commonly
believed, are objective and clear and medical professionals are socially respectable and



                                                                                          3
reliable. Taken together, this meant that the medical professional made a good
‘gatekeeper’ to public benefits.xxv

Around the world the number of successful applications for disability benefits, services
and protections based on disability assessments varies enormously. This is not because
of different levels of health in a population, or any other demographic difference; nor is
it entirely a matter of differences in the wealth of countries, xxvi although natural disasters
or conflict will obviously make a profound, short term difference. More typically, the
different ‘uptake’ levels are the result of different eligibility criteria, different ‘threshold’
levels of severity of disability, and most importantly differences in how the term
‘disability’ is legally and administratively defined. Disability assessment process plays a
very important role too. To understand the processes and challenges of disability
assessment, in other words, we need first to understand what disability is and why there
are so many, often extremely different, legal definitions of disability.


What is disability?

The task of defining the concept of ‘disability’ has proven to be surprisingly difficult. For
many years, since ro ughly the 1970s on, it was common to speak about ‘models’ of
disability, and in particular to debate between two extreme alternatives: the Medical
Model of Disability and the Social Model of Disability. The Medical Model of Disability
purportedly claimed that disability was essentially a medical problem located in an
individual’s body that required a medical or rehabilitative response. This was contrasted
to the Social Model of Disability that denied that disability was fundamentally a matter of
the condition of a person’s body but was rather a social disadvantage experienced by an
individual, a disadvantage created entirely by social, cultural and economic conditions
and beliefs. While the Medical Model relied on presumptions about biological ‘normality’
and medical problems or abnormalities that people suffer from, the Social Model insisted
that although there are bodily ‘differences’ people experience, disability is created by the
negative and discriminatory way society responds to these differences. xxvii

These debates about models have now more or less slipped into history, leaving behind
the consensus view that disability is a complex phenomenon that involves both
biomedical features of a person’s body or mind and the impact of the overall, physical
and social, environmental context in which the person carries out his or her life. Although
it goes by various names, this view stresses that disability is the outcome of an interaction
between intrinsic biological features of the person (that is, the person’s state of health)
and all aspects of his or her physical, human-built, interpersonal, social, cultural, and
political world —the context in which he or she acts, works, and participates in all aspects
of personal and social life.



This interactional view of disability is the dominant one today; it is also the most
commonsensical. Surely, disability is not simply about how a person’s body functions,



                                                                                               4
since two people can have exactly the same problem of bodily functioning—or
impairment as it is typically termed—while one experiences a severe disability and the
other little or no disability because they live in very different contexts that make very
different demands on them: the fact that I have lost in an accident the first digit of my
index finger on my left hand may mean that I cannot do my job —because I am a concert
pianist—or it may not affect my employment at all. If my eyesight weakens as I age, I may
have little problem reading or seeing my friends across the street because I have access
to corrective glasses. But someone who has no access to glasses will be severely
hampered in his or her day to day life, with the precisely same level of limited vision.
Clearly, things in the world —the climate, products, buildings, and way cities are laid out,
our attitudes and values, and the way the world is organized personally and socially all
can make a difference in how we experience disability.

On the other hand, disability is not just about these environmentally or socially-created
disadvantages, because the body and how it functions makes a difference as well. Indeed,
some of the problems we have in our bodies make all the difference to our experience: If
I have chronic pain, a missing limb, or severe depression; it does not really matter much
how my community or society at large is organized since this will have little effect on my
pain levels, the fact that I don’t have a leg, or am depressed. Pain and depression
medication will help, of course, but medication, though initially part of my ‘environment’
becomes part of me when I ingest it and —either temporarily or permanently—the way
my body functions change. The body makes a difference in disability, and ignoring the
body, or downplaying the importance of the body distorts the concept of disability. xxviii

As we will see in Chapter 3 below, the interactional conceptualization of disability is at
the heart of the WHO’s ICF,xxix formally endorsed by the World Health Assembly in 2001.
The ICF formalizes and operationalizes disability as interactional (on the basis of wh at is
called in the ICF the ‘bio -psycho-social’ model). The ICF arose from a consensus that
formed in the late 1990s that an interactional approach was the most defensible way of
moving beyond the unhelpful deadlock between Medical and Social models. As an
international standard classification, the ICF also moved the debate from the theoretical
and political to the scientific and practical levels, transforming the interactional model
into a working framework for direct applications in epidemiology, clinical practice,
research, and other domains.

Although the underlying intuition of the interactional model of disability is generally
accepted, the old models, especially the Medical model, still has a powerful hold over
how disability is assessed for policy purposes. This has led to the peculiar situation in
which although no one would deny that disability depends both on the state of one’s body
and the state of one’s environment, the way disability is assessed in countries around the
world suggests that very different conceptions of disability are being presumed. In the
next chapter these disability assessment strategies, and their strengths and weaknesses,
will be categorized and described. For now, a general explanation for this state of affairs
is offered; that is, despite appearances, disability evaluation is not a purely scientific or
technical judgment but one that has been shaped by conflicting political, social, and



                                                                                           5
economic demands. The economic demands, for instance, include the need for higher
labor force participation and constraints related to fiscal resources, but are also related
to the levels of unemployment in a particular country.


                                           Box 1.1: Key Terms
  Disability assessment: A process of making a legally authoritative determination about the kind and
  extent of disability a policy or programme applicant (claimant) possesses as part of a larger
  administrative process to determine eligibility for specific benefits.
  Disability evaluation (determination): The overall administrative procedure for determining the
  eligibility of an applicant (claimant) for a service, product, protection or programme on the basis of
  disability and other criteria.
  Disability policy: All policies, services and programs provided by the state to individuals by virtue of
  disability, administrated by the state or private agencies, and authorized by law or regulation, including
  services and programmes regarding health and rehabilitation, social security, pensions, health and
  social insurance benefits, income support, care services, access to subsidized utility services and
  transport, employment-related benefits, and protections against discrimination or to implement
  human rights.
  Work capacity: the overall ability of an individual to perform the physical, mental and emotional tasks
  that are needed for the requirements of a particular job, or class of jobs.
  Models of disability: Alternative conceptualizations —usually based on theoretical or political
  presuppositions—about what disability is, how it is experienced, how it arises, how it is socially
  received, and many other dimensions of the phenomena. Essentially, a model of disability is a theory
  of what disability is and entails at the bodily, personal, interpersonal and social levels.



The credibility of disability assessment

The credibility and perceived legitimacy of a country’s disability assessment procedure
depends on a few fundamental considerations. First of all, the assessments must be valid
to minimize ‘false positives’ (people receiving benefits, but are not disabled) or ‘false
negatives’ (people who should be receiving benefits, but do not). Second, the procedure
must be reliable, in the sense that two assessors following the same rules and criteria
should be able come to the same assessment of the same person (often called ‘inter -rater
reliability’). And lastly, the decisions must be transparent and standardized, so that the
grounds for the decision-making are publically known and their application in particular
cases independently evaluated.xxx In short, the legitimacy of the disability assessment
process depends on it being, and be seen to be, impartial, fair and based on objective
evidence.

Needless to say, disability is complex and difficult to measure and these credibility criteria
are not easy to achieve in practice. Even in the most sophisticated and well -resourced
countries time and other limitations mean that mistakes can be made (see Box 1.2 below).
Assessors rely on the supporting evidence they are provided, which may contain errors,
and there are invariably differences between assessors in how the evidence is evaluated



                                                                                                               6
and weighed. Yet the overall accuracy of disability assessment is crucial for the political
sustainability, and perceived fairness, of social security and other policies that rely on
disability assessment. If expert disability assessors, following the rules they have been set
down, regularly came to different judgments about the same applicant, then the process
might be viewed as arbitrary and unjust. If assessors did not accurately match services or
products to the people who actually need them, then the program would be criticized for
being both wasteful and failing to meet legitimate needs. At the same time, however,
some of this kind of mismatch is not caused by errors in assessment, but by how the
program has been designed. For example, a health insurance scheme designed for
persons with disabilities might be accurate in its assessment of eligibility; yet, the
individual may not in the end receive the health care resources he or she requires because
it is a managed care or capitation system that rations services to keep the scheme
financially viable. In other cases, the determination of the benefit received depends on
factors other than the extent of disability. Evaluators in workers’ compensation programs,
for example, once they determine the level and kind of disability from a work-related
injury, will then base their determination of level compensation on the additional factor
of the level of economic lose that this injury has caused.

            Box 1.2. Disability Assessment in the United States and United Kingdom
 David Autor and Mark Duggan (2006) xxxi argue that the disability assessment system for Social Security
 Disability Insurance (SSDI) benefits is “effectively broken” (p. 20). Disability assessment in the United
 States is performed by the Disability Determination Services in about 1,400 branches across the country.
 Approximately 40 percent of applicants are awarded benefits at the first stage; in other words, the
 rejection rate is at about 60 percent. Over the years, the fraction of rejected claimants appealing the
 decision has been increasing steadily and currently most applicants challenge the initial decision. A
 majority of these request a hearing with an Administrative Law Judge. Eventually, about one half will
 end up being awarded the benefit through the appeal and adjudication process. As a consequence, in
 1997, the Social Security Administration paid nearly half a billion dollars to claimants’ attorneys:
 “Decisions about what constitutes a legitimate claim are gradually being taken from the Social Security
 Administration. … Accounting for al l levels of appeal, more than 38 percent of awards to individuals who
 applied for Disability Insurance between 1997 and 2000 were made after an initial denial. … The increase
 in the fraction of DI awards made on appeal raises the concerns that the Social Security Administration
 is gradually losing control of the decision making process on eligibility for disability benefits.” (pp. 22 -
 23).

 Based on the case study of the United Kingdom in Annex 4 below, a similar situation exists in the United
 Kingdom where the number of successful appeals against adverse decisions for Employment and
 Assistance Allowance and Work Capacity Assessment continues to raise. According to the Ministry of
 Justice, out of 327,961 appeals received for the period 2012-13, 225,236 were heard and about 43
 percent were decided in favor of the claimant.



Disability assessment and disability policy

Disability assessment critically depends on disability policy, which changes over time and,
like all social policy, answers to a range of demands and pressures, some of which are
contingent on background social, economic, and even demographic trends. xxxii A recent



                                                                                                             7
National Bureau of Economic Research study looking at the share of the population
receiving disability benefits at older ages (60-64) in 12 high income countries found that
the share varied by a factor of eight: from 17 percent in Belgium to 16 percent in the UK
to 14 percent in the US to 6 percent in Italy and France to 2 percent in Japan. xxxiii Taking
into account that the health status of the observed population cohort in the countries
under study is similar, and that disability assessment processes are not dramatically
different, although the strictness with which the criteria are applied may differ, these
differences are largely ascribed to disability and other social policies, such as
unemployment insurance, and old-age pension, specific to each country. Similarly, the
increase in the share of working age population on disability benefits observed in many
countries during the last decades, despite significant gains in the health status of the
population, is explained by the change in disability policy. xxxiv Countries that have
managed to reverse the trend, such as the Netherlands, have done so only by changing
their disability policy, and in particular by decreasing the inflow into disability benefits.xxxv

In recent years across Europe, the decision to use disability pensions and other income
maintenance policy as a final, social ‘safety net’ for people who are unemployed has come
under intense scrutiny because these policies are economically unsustainable. xxxvi There
has been a dramatic policy shift from providing short and long term sickness leaves,
pensions and other forms of income support towards increasing the prospects of
returning to work. These political decisions fundamentally alter the purposes for which
disability policy serves, while leaving intact the disability assessment process and the
need for accuracy.

Inasmuch as disability assessment is an important precondition for individual s with
disability to access publicly financed disability benefits, the credibility of the process — its
reliability, transparency and validity —are important. Credibility is crucial not only for the
fairness, equity, and overall well-being of disabled people, but also for the fiscal
sustainability of disability policy. However, there is one area of disability policy in which
disability assessment plays almost no role; namely, disability anti -discrimination
legislation. The purpose of these laws is to prohibit and compensate for unfair or unequal
treatment to a person on the basis of disability, often in the employment sector. Anti-
discrimination in particular, and human rights legislation in general, does not require in
all cases that the aggrieved individual actually have a disability, as long as the party who
discriminates treats the person unfairly, believing, even mistakenly, that the individual
has a disability. Conversely, some national anti-discrimination legislation expressly
prohibits people with certain health problems —alcohol and drug-addiction, pedophilia or
kleptomania —from using the law to address discrimination against them even though
these conditions as linked to disabilities. xxxvii

In summary, depending on the social purposes and political objectives a policy or program
is designed to serve, the criteria used for disability evaluation will be shaped, not only by
medical and disability-relevant considerations but also by non-medical social
considerations that may not be directly linked to the experience of disability. Sometimes
the purpose of the policy is viewed as being of such importance that it overrides reliance



                                                                                               8
on factual evidence. Laws to benefit people who are blind, for example, tend to ignore
the factual issue of whether the person could, with suitable accommodations, perform a
job that he or she has the educational background for, and so might not require the
financial support in lieu of employment. Similarly, the social decision to allow people to
retire with full pensions at age 65 is not based on any assessment of the actual work
capacity of people of that age, a fact that is often cited in support of abandoning
mandatory retirement age.

Social policy, in general, has been and will continue to be shaped by many factors and
designed for many purposes and objectives. Historically, disability policy has been the
most volatile and reactive to historical events (such as a dramatic increase in the number
of returning war veterans with injuries who insisted on returning to their old jobs),
demographic, economic and social factors. These forces have often dramatically changed
the objectives of the policy, but without altering the social importance of securing
accuracy in the assessment of disability.




                                                                                        9
                                    Chapter 2
     Models of Disability Assessment around the World

Chapter 2: Summary
    The best way to categorize approaches to disability assessment is not in terms of
     how disability is defined or the objectives of the policy, but the assessment
     methodology or strategy.
    One suggested categorization is in terms of the extent of reliance on medical
     information and the extent of discretion granted the assessor. The more reliance
     on medical information, the more reliable and costly the procedure; the more
     reliance on discretion, the more flexible but less reliable procedure.
    For many countries, the process is so discretionary and so little regulated that it is
     best to call it informal or extra-legal.
    Although the medical/discretionary approach has its value, a more sensitive
     categorization distinguishes methodologies in terms of the varieties of human
     experience linked to disability – thus the Impairment, Functional Limitation, and
     Disability Approaches.
    There is also a different general approach that is used, one based on assessment of
     economic loss. Although common, this strategy is restricted to workers’
     compensation programs and presupposes a prior, if implicit disability assessment,
     standardly in terms of the Impairment approach.
    Impairment approach : inferring the existence and extent of disability from
     information about health conditions and/or impairments. This is the oldest and still
     most commonly used strategy, and is represented either by simple Baremas scales
     or complex tools such as the American Medical Association Guidelines.
    Functional Limitation approach : as a response to criticism of the Impairment
     approach, this approach added information about basic simple actions – lifting,
     standing, handling, hearing, seeing, and concentrating – to an assessment of work
     capacity. The application of this approach has led to development of Functional
     Capacity Evaluation (FCE) instruments.
    Disability approach : a full, direct and non-inferential description of all relevant
     dimensions of, for example, work capacity, including health condition, impairments,
     functional limitations and personal and environmental factors. This approach is
     based on the WHO ICF model of disability.
     Each approach has its strengths and weaknesses: although simple and feasible, the
     Impairment approach is strongly criticized as inadequate and logically flawed; while
     the Functional Limitation approach has improved disability assessment, the tools



                                                                                        10
       used to measure capacities—the FCEs—has been unreliable and in some instances,
       invalid, and information about capacity to perform some basic actions does not
       predict work capacity; the Disability approach may not only have unintended
       consequences of limiting positive assessment, but in addition (because it attempts
       to provide a comprehensive environmental information, both proximate and distal),
       it may be difficult and costly to apply in practice.
      Despite practical limitations, a case can be made that the ICF is useful as a design
       framework for disability assessment as it provides the conceptual and practical
       basis for an operationalization of Disability approach to disability assessment.

Disability assessment: classifying methodologies

Given the variation in schemes of disability assessment around the world —designed for
radically different policy objectives, in different socio-economic and political settings, and
geographical areas—care must be taken when categorizing the basic approaches. It
would not be possible or useful to categorize these approaches to mirror all of the many
ways in which countries differ in resource levels and geographical and socio-political
environments. It is far more useful to isolate basic characteristics of all disability
assessment processes such as the following, which we can then look at one at a time:

      types of definitions or operationalization of the concept of ‘disability’;
      legally or customarily-defined criteria of assessment;
      objectives or aims of the policy for which assessment is required;
      assessment methodologies or strategies;
      assessment instruments used (if any);
      administrative arrangements in which assessment is conducted; and
      characteristics of disability assessors.

The definitions of ‘disability’ used for disability assessment are invariably legal definitions,
which makes them very different from the kind of definition one might find in a dictionary.
They are also different from conceptual or theory-based definitions since they do not
depend on the actual meaning of the word ‘disability’ so much as the purposes the
definition is designed to serve. A common sense definition of ‘work disability’, for
example, might look like this:

       Work disability is a condition that is experienced by a worker, because of an injury,
       disease or some other health problem that makes him or her unable to do the
       work required, to become employed or to return to work.

Compare this with the following two legal definitions currently in use in the United
States:xxxviii

       “[Work disability is the] inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by
       reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment which can be
       expected to result in death or which lasted or can be expected to last for a



                                                                                             11
       continuous peri od of no less than 12 months”… “[a]n individual shall be
       determined to be under a disability only if his physical or mental impairment or
       impairments are of such severity that he is not only unable to do his previous work
       but cannot, considering his age, education, and work experience, engage in any
       other kind of substantial gainful work which exists in the national economy....”

       “[A person’s work disability is] an incapacity that reduces his/her earning or
       working capacity by over 66 %, i.e., which makes him/her unable to earn a salary
       in any job of over one third of the wage that an individual would receive in the
       same area, in the same category of workers as (s)he belonged to before. The state
       of incapacity is determined, taking into account the working capacity, the general
       state of health, age, physical and mental faculties, and the aptness of the
       individual to follow a professional education.”

What stands out is that these legal definitions do not define ‘work disability’ but instead
present the criteria or considerations that a disability assessor is required to use -- namely
severity, duration, and background considerations (“substantial gainful work which exists
in the national economy” and “aptness of the individual to follow a professional
education”). All of these reflect the objectives of the policy rather than what the word
‘disability’ actually means. The point is that legally-defined criteria for assessment can in
principle include any requirement, restriction or constraint that policy-makers feel is
relevant (or politically required) for the policy’s purpose and aim s.

Since legal definitions and assessment criteria are in this way contextualized and
dependent on national priorities and political requirements, legal characteristics are too
various and unstable as way of categorizing basic approaches to disability assessment.
Nor would it be useful to look at different policy objectives, since these too are highly
contextualize to national situations and specific to the needs and requirements of the
country. The only real option is to focus on the assessment methodologies or strategies
since these will determine what assessment instruments are used, administrative
arrangements are required as well as the qualifications of disability assessors. The
challenge, then, is to classify assessment methodologies.

Medical information and discretion

One approach to classifying disability assessment methodologies (borrowed from a 2002
Brunel University study)xxxix involves two dimensions of decision-making that can be used
to distinguish the kind and quality of evidence and reasoning used to assess a person’s
disability.

Methods of disability assessment can be more or less reliant on medical information —
biological, physiological, pathological, psychopathological, symptomatic, or genetic data,
and clinical information about health conditions and impairments. Assessment
procedures rooted in medical information will tend to rely on medical experts, in
particular physicians, as assessors, often directly employed by the administering agency.
Indeed, physicians are relied on both as sources of medical information—from direct


                                                                                           12
medical examination, diagnosis, and treatment —and as expert judges or evaluators of
the quality of the available medical information. Medically-oriented assessment
processes incur high administrative costs because of the need for specialized medical
personnel or scientific instrumentation. When an assessment procedure is less oriented
to medical information, it will look to information about career plans, educational needs,
social status, income levels, and the like, all of which are more readily available from self-
report, and so cheaper to acquire.

Secondly, regimes for assessing disability vary considerably on the amount of discretion
assessors are given to reach their judgments. Generally, the less assessment is structured
by legislation or regulation, the more administratively informal it is and the more
discretion the assessor is granted. When a relatively rigorous framework or instrument
is used, such as a Baremas impairment guideline, then discretion is considerably
restricted. Limited discretion tends to produce more consistency and so inter-rater
reliability in assessment, but at the cost of ignoring individual differences or exceptional
circumstances that might be relevant to the determination.

On the other hand, a greater reliance on assessor discretion sacrifices consistency and
reliability for flexibility and more sensitivity to individual differences. Because they are
perceived to be trustworthy, physicians are more readily granted discretion. But even
with physicians as assessors, if short or medium-term outcomes of a particular
assessment scheme do not serve the purposes of the policy or program, policymakers
may choose to limit assessor discretion in order to more strictly control the assessment
outcomes. (It would be naïve to think that any assessment regime involving human
judgment could eliminate discretion entirely, or indeed that it would be beneficial to
attempt to do so since that would eliminate human judgment.)

Combining these two dimensions, four possible general strategies of disability assessment
can be identified: High reliance on medical information with high (or low) discretion and
low reliance on medical information with low (or high) discretion. Although it is possible
to find these combinations in practice, they are rarely found in pure form but tend to shift
over time as policy-makers fine-tune procedures either to respond to changing
circumstances or to shape outcome patterns. If it is perceived that too many people are
successful in claiming disability benefits, then regulations may change and less discretion
will be sanctioned, or more reliance on objective medical information or instrumentation
will be demanded. All social policy can be adjusted to changing circumstances in this
manner, without making fundamental administrative or institutional changes.

The matrix created by the interplay between a reliance on medical information and level
of discretion, and the subtle shifts in procedure and outcome that these can create, help
to explain the variation of disability assessment schemes around the globe. But there is
one more important variation; that is, in many low income countries, disability
assessment is carried out without any formal process or procedure at all, other than the
judgment of a health professional or state official. Often these judgments are based on a
paper record of medical diagnosis or an informal, face-to-face interview. This informal,



                                                                                           13
and to a considerable extent extra-legal approach is essentially pure discretion. Since in
low income settings there are typically few available disability services and benefits to
qualify for, this informality tends not to be perceived as a (particular) cause for concern.
The major problem with such an ‘approach’, however, is that it is extremely difficult to
get any reliable information about it and researchers have to rely on anecdotal evidence,
or often mere speculation. Not being able to characterize how disability assessment is
carried out for a substantial majority of the world’s population is of great concern, and
points to the new for wide-ranging research in this area.

Although there are many useful insights to be gained from categorizing disability
assessment methodologies in terms of the health information/discretion matrix, at the
end of the day it is a very general, anodyne picture of policy administration applicable
across the social system and as such does not help us isolate what is fundamentally
different about assessing disability. What is missing in the matrix is any linkage between
the evidence and decision procedure used and the conception of disability implied or
defined by legislation. A more useful approach, more sensitive to the nuances of disability
policy, and certainly more valuable as a basis for policy recommendations, is one that
highlights the varieties of human experience associated with disability. This experience
is, so to speak, the center of gravity of disability assessment, and is what links together all
other characteristics mentioned: legal definitions, criteria of assessment, methodologies
of assessment, instrumentation, administrative arrangements, and characteristics of
assessors.

Impairment, functional limitation and disability

Surveys of approaches to disability assessment in use around the world, especially for the
assessment of employment or work disability, reveals that there are basic approaches to
assessment whose features and consequences are relatively stable.xl This makes it
possible to map them onto different dimensions of the experience of disability, using the
‘interactional’ view of disability presented above.

Disability assessment may, therefore, have as its center of gravity either (i) health
conditions and the impairments associated with them; (ii) functional limitations in basic
or simple activities, understood independently of environmental or contextual
differences; or (iii) disabilities fully understood as outcomes of interactions between
features intrinsic to the person (health conditions, impairments, and functional
limitations) and the full range of environmental factors that, possibly uniquely,
characterize the overall lived-context of the individual. This three-part categorization of
assessment strategies, or something very close to it, has been suggested before in the
literature,xli but here for simplicity they can be labelled the Impairment, Functional
limitation, and Disability approaches.

Some legal analysts argue that there is yet another and very different approach to the
assessment of disability that falls completely outside of this three-part distinction. This is
the so-called Economic Loss approach for calculating the decrease in earning capacity in



                                                                                            14
an individual who has suffered an injury. This strategy may arise in the determination of
damages for an injury caused by another individual’s negligence, or as in the case of
workers’ compensation programming, a determination of benefit from a work-related
injury.xlii In either case, the two-step procedure first looks at medical evidence for a
threshold verification of the existence of an injury or occupational disease and this is
followed by a calculation—based on the claimant’s previous income or an estimate of
what the claimant could now earn based on wage trends —as to the income-earning
capacity difference pre- and post- injury. This calculation is the basis for legal damages
or the benefit the claimant will received for workers’ compensation.

Although the economic loss approach is widely used, it is not in fact an assessment of
disability at all but rather a method for quantifying the amount of benefits that presumes
a prior determination of disability, often using an Impairment strategy. The link between
the extent of work disability and amount of benefit is completely determined by
economic decisions having to do with cost of living, wage trends, estimates of the costs
of health and rehabilitation needs, and so on. One could argue that there is logical
correlation between work disability and this calculation—since, for example, 0 percent
work disability would correlate with 0 percent benefit; 10 percent work disability with 10
percent benefit, and so on —but the actual amount of the benefit is not itself a function
of extent of work disability, nor is it strictly speaking an assessment of disability.

By the same token, although the purposes are very different, an estimate of the amount
of care needs incurred from the onset of an injury or chronic health condition is often
calculated without any explicit determination of the extent of a person’s disability. These
costs are highly dependent on a country’s level of development, the availability of
relevant resources and the market value (or other economic estimate) of the goods and
services required for the needs assessments, presumed population norms concerning
expected levels of employment, cost-of-living, poverty levels, and so on. The actual
economic calculations are independent of, and typically rely on very different assessment
methodologies, than disability assessment.

These tangential examples to one side, the three general strategies of disability
assessment mentioned can be conveniently distinguished, first in terms of the
operationalization of ‘disability’ each presupposes, and then, for concreteness, in terms
of standardized instruments or guidelines characteristically relied on and the assessment
criteria used to determine the presence and extent or severity of disability. For
concreteness as well, the example of work capacity or work disability will continue to be
the case-in-point to highlight these differences.

It is important to emphasize that as a general taxonomy, these are essentially ideal types
rather than descriptions of existing national disability assessment regimes. In practice,
the three strategies are not found in pure form but are merged, sometimes revealing
inconsistencies in how the assessment procedures are applied for different policies at
different times, different regions of the country or different sub-populations (for
example, veterans are often assessed with different approaches than the general



                                                                                        15
population). Especially in high income countries with sophisticated, highly dynamic,
complex and politically-contentious disability policy, even when a relatively pure form of
an assessment strategy was originally put into place, over time political and economic
pressures may produce hybrid ad hoc procedures that cannot easily be categorized.

       (a) Impairment approach

The Impairment approach understands the process of assessing a person’s work capacity
as one of assessing, or if possible measuring, the severity of an underlying health
condition —acute or chronic disease, injury or psychological disorder, ageing—and in
particular identifying, and if possible measuring, medically describable physical and
mental impairments.

An impairment is understood as anatomical, physiological, or psychological abnormality
or problem in functioning identified through self-report and verified by medically or bio-
medically recognized clinical and laboratory diagnostic techniques and tests. Since body
functioning is measureable on a continuum from (theoretically) perfect functioning to
total lack or absence of functioning, in order to identify the range on that continuum that
constitutes a ‘problem’ or ‘abnormality’—and so an impairment—will depend on where
a ‘threshold’ on the continuum is placed. That can be done bio-statistically in terms of
population norms of normal levels of functioning or in some other manner.

Given the large number of biological functions (and bodily structures like bones and
joints) at work in the human body, a determination of ‘normal functioning’ is not a trivial
matter. Depending on the underlying health condition, determination of impairments
can be made on the basis of diagnosis alone, especially when there is a straightforward
and uncontroversial link between the disease or injury and the resulting impairments. In
other cases, involving purely subjective symptoms such as pain or anxiety, self-report may
be the only available source of information (especially if time is limited), although clinical
collaboration is often sought. There are, of course, a vast array of clinical or self-report
instruments in use for assessing physical and mental functioning, linked to specific
diseases, or generic.xliii

As a strategy for disability assessment, the Impairment approach assumes that even for
complex and environmentally-influenced phenomena such as the capacity to work, it is
sufficient for assessment to verify the existence in the individual of an underlying health
problem and the associated impairments and then to assess the severity of these
impairments. The Impairment approach does not claim that disabilities are nothing more
than impairments, or that disabilities are not complex products of intrinsic impairments
and environmental conditions.xliv The strategy merely insists that all that is required in
order to validly and reliably assess disability is sufficiently robust information about health
conditions and impairments. Disability assessment can be validly and reliably inferred
from impairment assessment.

The Impairment approach is both the oldest, and the most commonly used strategy of
disability assessment around the world. This remains true despite decades of unrelenting


                                                                                            16
criticism from many quarters that the impairment approach distorts disability
assessment.xlv

The Impairment approach is closely linked to what is often called Baremas assessment, a
term that comes from the 17th century French mathematician Francois Barrème who
devised a table of ordered percentage values for different kinds and severities of bodily
damage. Scales of compensation for war-related injuries date back much further: to
mediaeval Europe (the so-called Knochentaxe, bone-rate or Glidertax, limb-rate). When
Otto von Bismarck built up the German social insurance system, introducing for the first
time benefits for children, workers’ compensation, invalidity and old age retirement
benefit, the Bareme approach was adopted. The approach then spread as the
Bismarckian model for social insurance spread across Europe and the world. xlvi


                   Figure 2.1: Bareme Table and Chart for the Hand

             Hand
Amputation                  Percentage
Thumb, including metacarpal 20.
Thumb, both phalanges       15.
Thumb, one phalanx          10.
Finger, index               5.
Finger, index at P.I.P.     4.
Finger, index at distal     2.
Finger, middle              4.
Finger, middle at P.I.P.    3.2
Finger, middle at distal    1.6
Finger, ring                3.
Finger, ring at P.I.P.      2.4
Finger, ring at distal      1.2
Finger, little              2.
Finger, little at P.I.P.    1.6
Finger, little at distal    .8


Technically, a Baremas method of assessment is any arbitrary ordinal scale that attaches
percentage values to levels of disability based on impairment of some body part. Bareme
scales are very commonly used around the world —primarily for workers’ compensation
assessment—and map particular impairments to ‘whole body’ disability percentages.
Nearly every country of the world that has a formal procedure for disability assessment
has at one time used, or continues to use, some form of the Baremas system. The
example shown in Figure 2.1 is part of a Baremas chart and table in use in the Canadian
province of Ontario to assess disability associated with specific impairments (amputation)
of parts of the hand.




                                                                                       17
The most complex and sophisticated form of the Bareme system is the American Medical
Association (AMA) Guidelines to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (more
commonly called the AMA Guidelines), first published in 1958 and now in its 6th edition.xlvii
The AMA Guidelines are used as the primary disability assessment instrument across the
United States and in many English-speaking countries, and are informally relied on in
many other countries. When the AMA Guidelines were first proposed in 1958, it was
argued that the determination of impairments was a medical expertise, which led to the
heavy reliance on physicians as disability assessors. Yet, the editors of the AMA Guidelines
have always insisted that impairments are not the same as disabilities and impairment
assessment is just the first step in a longer process of disability evaluation, whether for
determination of workers’ compensation or eligibility for social insurance or pension
benefits: “Failure to recognize the differences between a medical construct, impairment,
and a contextual construct, disability, results in significant confusion and controversy.” xlviii
The ratings in the AMA Guidelines, it is argued, do no more than provide a best medical
guess, in terms of percentage ranges, of how much a person’s life, and in particular his or
her working life, would be affected by the impairments he or she has.

Given the practical difficulty of getting sufficiently detailed medical diagnostic
information, the AMA Guidelines is viewed as the only solution for a workable national
assessment procedure that is cost-effective. If one restricts one’s focus to the costs and
benefits directly linked to the assessment procedure itself, this is undoubtedly true. This
is because a true disability assessment would have to take into account each individual’s
full environmental context, but doing so is expensive and time-consuming, and in some
instances impractical. Although there is some debate on this point, the view is that the
AMA Guidelines have a moderate degree of inter-rater reliability and construct validity.xlix
But be that as it may, from purely legal or administrative perspective, however, the AMA
Guidelines are viewed with favor as an authoritative standard, and because of this will
continue to be an attractive option. l

        (b) Functional Limitation approach

The Functional Limitation approach arose in the 1970’s in response to criticism of the
Impairment strategy, fueled by rehabilitation professionals who argued that physical
examination and medical history-taking provided an insufficient evidentiary basis for
assessing work disability.li This was especially true when assessors were asked to make a
judgment about employability – the extent to which, with suitable rehabilitative services,
residual functional ability could be augmented so that the person could return to work.
It was argued that a person’s work capacity depended on the extent to which he or she
could perform very basic, and easily assessed, actions such as lifting, standing, walking,
sitting, carrying, pushing, pulling, climbing, balancing, stooping, kneeling, crouching,
crawling, reaching, handling, fingering, talking, feeling, hearing, and seeing. These
‘functional capacities’—or ‘basic activities’ as they are often called—were thought to be
essential predictors of work capacity. They were especially useful when more nuanced
employment decisions needed to be made, such as whether the individual could find jobs
that required the same skills as the old one, but did not make the same kinds of demands



                                                                                              18
on functional capacities that had been affected by the disease or injury. In the United
States in particular, reliance on these indicators became a central feature of the work
disability assessment for social security programing.lii

The attraction of the Functional Limitation approach was that impairment assessment
alone, even in the sophisticated form of the AMA Guidelines, ignored the essential
predictive features of work capacity, namely the ability to perform basic actions. To take
a simple example, the AMA Guidelines assesses the disability associated with an
impairment of the index finger as 20 percent. But this same impairment would make far
more difference to the employability of a dentist than of a hotel manager as the two
professions make very different demands on the basic action of fine hand movements.
What is a trivial impairment for one job might be a serious employment impediment for
another job. Functional information was required for practical work capacity assessment,
and information about impairments was not sufficient.

In standard rehabilitation language, the Functional Limitation approach characterizes
disability as an individual’s capacity to perform a set of simple actions, and combinations
of simple actions—the ‘Activities of Daily Living’ (ADLs)—as well as more complex actions,
often requiring the use of simple tools—‘Instrumental Activities of Daily Living’ (IADLs).
The focus on basic actions aligned well with the clinical life of the rehabilitation therapist
in the assessment of patients for whom it is essential to know whether they have the
capacities required for ‘independent living’ such as self-care, housework, taking care of
children, shopping, managing medication, and so on. The clinical judgment that a patient
could manage day to day life on his or her own was a clinical milestone of great
importance. A wide range of clinical instruments were commonly used for just this
purpose: the Functional Independence Measure (FIM) being the most popular.liii Since it
would not be clinically feasible to assess work capacity directly – given the wide range of
different capacities required by different jobs and job expectations – at least a direct
assessment of those basic activities (presumptively required for any job) would give a
much more accurate picture of work capacity and employability. On the basis of
functional capacity information, in short, the disability assessor would be on firmer
ground when he or she inferred work capacity.

Responding to the need for instrument more focused on work capacity, a new range of
Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE) tools were developed and recommended for
disability assessment. FCEs are standardized batteries of tests of basic capacities,
designed for clinical use, that offer a summary evaluation of capacity to work. Worldwide
there are many FCEs, some designed for generic application across health conditions (e.g.
the Working Capacity Assessment used in the UK)liv and a range of others linked directly
to specific diseases or conditions (e.g. Disability of the Shoulder, Arm and Hand
Questionnaire (DASH) and the Pain Disability Index), or more general, such as the
Blankenship, Ergo Work Simulator and Ergo-Kit variation, the Isernhagen Work System,
Hanoun Medical, Physical Work Performance Evaluation (Ergoscience), WEST-EPIC, and
AssessAbility.lv




                                                                                           19
Even in the context of disability assessment for social security and income replacement
programs, where employability is not always the primary focus, the Functional Limitation
approach offered the prospect of better disability assessments than resulted from
Baremas tables that mapped disability-percentages onto impairments or disease
symptoms. Moreover, the Functional Limitation approach could easily incorporate
Baremas generalizations about the impact of impairments on work disability and, when
available, augment or adjust these assessments accordingly by using a FCE instrument.

Since these instruments were introduced, most high resource countries have adopted a
mixed assessment regime in which both impairment-based and functional capacity
assessments are used in combination. Often the Impairment approach is used as a
screening tool to distinguish between applicants with very severe impairments—
blindness, deafness, tetraplegia, and severe intellectual impairment —who are assessed
as immediately qualifying for benefits, leaving those with less severe or more complex
impairment profiles to undergo a second more subtle assessment process using
functional capacity assessment. This two-stage step has the additional advantage that, in
light of general economic or demographic changes, the policymakers can adjust the rate
of successful applications by manipulating the criteria at either stage.

       (c) Disability approach

The principle difference between the Disability approach and the previous two is that
here work capacity is directly assessed rather than indirectly inferred from a proxy
impairment or functional capacity assessment. Direct assessment, in principle, gives
equal consideration to all determinants of disability—medical, functional, environmental
and personal. The disability approach, in its purest form, would be fully individualized
and based on direct evidence. It would strive to provide valid assessment directly on
evidence, rather than an approximation by inference.

The Disability strategy assumes that the object of the assessment is a person-
environment, interactive outcome rather than an intrinsic feature of the person
(impairment or functional capacity). Disability assessments make the most sense when
they are context-dependent rather than global; that is, an assessment of work disability
or education disability rather than disability sans phrase . In this way, the environmental
context is delimited by the focus of the life area, although with the recognition that with
the relevant environmental determinants of work, disability may well extend far beyond
the workplace itself to include, for example, features of public transportation and
communication environmental factors. Finally, in principle, the Disability approach
assembles information about the non-health aspects of the individual person: education
level, skills, ambitions, temperament, life goals, and so on.

Recently, in high income countries such as the Netherlands, Germany, France, Sweden,
Canada, and the United States, at some stage in the full disability evaluation process,
steps are being taken to move beyond the Impairment and Functional Limitation
approaches to the full Disability approach. This is also happening in less resource-rich



                                                                                        20
countries as well. Cyprus, for example, has fully applied the disability approach to its
disability assessment. Argentina and Brazil have also introduced disability approach to a
certain degree. The best evidence that a country’s disability evaluation procedure is
turning toward the Disability approach is when assessors are legally obliged or otherwise
required to take into consideration the extent to which the claimant, if provided with
rehabilitative or other services, could return to a previous job, or alternatively whether
changes to the workplace could be effected to facilitate return to work. Conceptually,
these issues can only be approached systematically if disability is understood as an
outcome of an interaction between features of the individual (impairments, functional
capacities) and the person’s environmental context. Arguably, the notion of work
disability, if taken seriously would force assessors in this direction since the determinants
of successful employment are both personal (skills and capacities) and environmental
(workplace and working conditions).

It should be noted, however, that despite the recognition that the Impairment and
Functional Limitation approaches are inadequate for the kind of robust and information-
rich disability assessment required for employment policy, these two approaches—singly
or in combination—continue to be relied on. Part of the reason for this is entrenched
traditions and the understandable tendency to avoid what might be perceived as a radical
shift in policy and practice, especially since most disability policies are already highly
contentious.

Another factor is that the interactional or disability approach challenges our common
assumptions about the impact of even severe impairments on work disability. Although
in most countries a person who is blind would be assessed at 100 percent disability, on
the Disability approach that individual might not be assessed as having a work disability.
This would be the appropriate assessment on condition that the person who is blind had
full and adequate accommodation making it possible for him or her to work up the level
of any non-blind peer. This shift in assessment outcome would involve a tremendous
change in the perception of what disability is, and what people with disabilities are
capable of – a shift that might simply be impossible for policy-makers to comprehend and
accept.

Yet another contributing factor to the deeply rooted entrenchment of the Impairment
and Functional Limitation approaches is that they have been the dominant strategies of
disability assessment around the globe for quite some time and hence related
instrumentation—such as the AMA Guidelines and FCE—are readily available.
Furthermore, disability assessment professionals have been educated and trained to
apply these approaches and related instrumentation. In contrast, it has only been in the
last decade or so, with the development of ICF-based assessment instruments and other
applications, that the full Disability approach to assessment has become more popular.
However, while there is a long and scientifically respectable tradition of health and
functioning assessment instrumentation in the rehabilitation professions, except in the
special case of assistive technology, it is fair to say that the science of environmental
assessment is still in its infancy lvi .



                                                                                          21
Table 2.1. Impairment, Functional and Disability Approach to Disability Assessment: A
                            Summary of Characteristics

    Approach      Conception of ‘disability’       Standardize tool or               Criteria
                                                       guideline
 IMPAIRMENT       Medical                       Impairment guidelines:     ‘Baremas’ criteria:

                  Health state (injury,         AMA Guidelines for the     Presence of problem at
                  disease or syndrome),         Evaluation of Permanent    the body level as indirect
                  Plus problems with body       Impairments (6th ed.)      indicator of ‘whole
                  functions and structures                                 person’ or disability rating

 FUNCTIONAL       Functional                    Functional Capacity        ADL/IADL criteria:
                                                Evaluations (FCE):
                  Problems or limitations in                               Presence of a problem or
                  basic activities              Functional Status          limitation in basic activity
                                                   Questionnaire           as indirect indicator of
                                                Disability Assessment      disability rating
                                                   Structured Interview
                                                Work Ability Index, etc.
 DISABILTY        Disability                    Disability Assessment:     Bio-psycho-social criteria:

                  Disability is the outcome     WHODAS2lvii                Description of kind and
                  of an interaction of health   ICF Checklist lviii        severity of disability as an
                  condition and                 ICF Core Sets lix          outcome of interaction
                  environmental factors at                                 between an individual’s
                  the body, person and                                     health and functional
                  societal levels                                          capacity and
                                                                           environmental factors
 INFORMAL         Determined by assessor        Determined by assessor     Determined by assessor




Strengths and weaknesses of the disability assessment approaches

Especially in middle and higher income countries, the evolution of disability evaluation
for policy and insurance purposes since the late 19 th century shows a gradual progression
from simple Bareme or impairment-based approaches to complex and mixed medico-
social evaluations involving multi-professional experts as assessors aiming at more direct,
disability assessments. As these are neither purely clinical nor abstractly academic
exercises—but rather official evaluations carried out in the context of an explicit legal,
institutional and administrative framework—disability assessments must always seek a
balance between considerations of quality (validity, reliability, transparency and
standardization) and practical feasibility. It is against this complex background that the
unique strengths and weaknesses of each of the disability assessment methodologies
need to be evaluated.




                                                                                                   22
       (a) Impairment approach: strengths and weaknesses

The Impairment approach to disability assessment, and especially the assessment of work
capacity, has been and remains the most common approach used around the world,
although increasingly in middle and high income countries the trend is to augment the
Impairment approach with functional capacity information, and in some regimes,
environmental information as well. Nonetheless, the Impairment approach is popular
because it is intuitive and simple, relies on medical information perceived to be objective
and reliable, and calls upon the expertise of medical professionals who are highly
regarded as reliable and trustworthy. When some version of Baremas instrumentation is
used—such as in the United States the AMA Guidelines or the Social Security Impairment
Listings—the Impairment approach can claim a measure of both scientific legitimacy and
administrative feasibility.

At the same time, it has been argued repeatedly that the Impairment approach is
inadequate as a strategy for work disability assessment. Even on its own terms, a
Baremas system that allocates percentage disability ratings on the basis of impairments
confronts four technical problems:

      Comparability: how is it possible to quantitatively compare the rating for a
       fractured leg with that for schizophrenia in terms of disability?
      The Paired Organs Problem: why should losing one eye have a single disability
       rating when in some instances the lost eye was the person ’s remaining eye?
      The Whole Body Problem: if a person has lost a finger (rated, say, as 10 percent
       disability), has back pain (20 percent) and depression (40 percent), does it make
       sense simply to add these ratings together for a whole person disability rating?
      The Threshold Problem: if a disability pension policy requires an 80 percent
       disability rating, is it conceivable that an assessor could distinguish between a
       person who rates 79 percent and one that rates 80 percent?lx

These and related puzzles are addressed in the AMA Guidelines (primarily by providing a
discretionary range of percentage values rather than single values), but they are
symptomatic of the larger problem of transforming a clinical judgment about an
impairment into a precise percentage rating about whole person disability. Existing
Baremas ratings show substantial variations between countries: an amputation below the
knee is valued at 70 percent disability in Belgium, 50 percent in the UK, and 35 percent in
Iceland.lxi Lack of comparability is compounded by the common sense observation that
the same impairment may have very different impacts on different people depending on
the other health conditions or impairments they have, not to mention the very different
physical or mental demands that their jobs may require.

As already pointed out, the two most sophisticated Baremas schemes in the world —the
AMA Guidelines and the Impairment Listings used by the US Social Security Administration
for Social Security Insurance (SSI) and Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) —
represent the state of the art of impairment tools for disability assessment. Yet even these



                                                                                         23
have been criticized on purely scientific grounds for inconsistency and ambiguity in
disability rating, lack of consistency across organ systems, the failure of the ratings to
reflect, functionally, what it means to live with an impairment, poor reliability and
predictive capability arising from the absence of a sound medical evidence base and a
total reliance on expert consensus. lxii They have also been criticised on grounds of
fairness: there is a lack of parity in assessment between physical impairments and mental
impairments;lxiii a tendency to rate impairments that affect only males as more serious
than those that affect only females;lxiv and assumptions of ‘normal’ living conditions that
are prejudicial between races and economic classes. lxv

In the face of these and many other criticisms, the defensive response has been three-
fold: (i) there is no ‘gold standard’ for linking impairments to disabilities, so an expert -
consensus methodology is the best there is; (ii) though impairments are very different
from disabilities, still Baremas systems are useful guides for a first step in a more complex
disability assessment; and (iii) whatever its faults, the Impairment approach is
administratively feasible and sufficiently authoritative to satisfy the policy requirements
of work disability assessment. On this last response, it is noteworthy that after a ten year,
multi-million dollar effort to ‘redesign ’ the disability evaluation process used by the US
Social Security Administration, in order to more validly capture the contextual notion of
work disability, the result was the decision to retain the Impairment approach:

       “…disability is complex, and it has medical, functional, and vocational
       components. A complete and comprehensive assessment of all aspects of the
       definition would require a detailed clinical evaluation of the underlying medical
       cause(s) for the impairment; analysis of the expected duration of the impairment
       (prognosis); a comprehensive assessment of the work-related functional
       limitations attributable to the impairment as well as the indiv idual’s remaining
       functional capacity; a detailed vocational analysis of the individual’s work history
       and acquired work skills, educational background, and age; and a thorough
       analysis of the individual’s current vocational prospects. However, SSA does no t
       have the resources to perform such an extensive assessment for every one of the
       2.6 million disability applicants who will come through its doors in 2007 .”lxvi

       (b) Functional Limitation approach: strengths and weaknesses

The Impairment approach is inconsistent with the clinical experience of medical and
rehabilitation professionals for whom work capacity depends, not merely on the diseases,
injuries and impairments a person has, but on the impact these medical problems have
on basic and everyday actions that people need to perform. Sitting, standing, reaching,
grasping, remembering, and concentrating do not, even in combination, fully capture
what is required to perform all work requirements. But without these basic capacities, it
would be extremely unlikely that a person would be able to perform most any job.

Over time, authors of both the AMA Guidelines and SSA Impairment Listings have
transformed these tools to include some functional capacities. In the last, 6th edition of



                                                                                          24
the Guidelines a list of ‘adjustment factors’ have been added so assessors can use the
claimant’s functional capacity status to modify the impact of an impairment on ‘normal
activities’ such as walking and standing. In the Listings, since 2007, items such as ‘Inability
to ambulate effectively’ and other versions of functional capacity have been included.
These days, because of the strength of the argument in favor of the Functional Limitation
approach, in high income countries it is rare to find an example of a purely Impairment
based method of disability assessment.lxvii

Because of its origins in the rehabilitation literature, the Functional Limitation approach
has been closely associated with rehabilitation questionnaires and other clinical
instruments used for Functional Capacity Evaluation in work injury prevention and
rehabilitation. These instruments are easily transferable to work capacity determination,
especially for assessments of return-to-work potential. Although they differ in many
respects, depending on their primary area of use, at the core of any FCE is a battery of
clinical tests and self-report questions that identify the essential work-related functional
capacities, with measurement algorithms to produce summary scores.

Despite concentrated clinical and research efforts to develop an international standard
FCE for work capacity evaluation —one that has both scientific and clinical authority and
is feasible to use—the results have been disappointing. Construct validity and inter-rater
reliability are notoriously poor in all FCEs, and there has been much criticism of their
failure to take into account either general mental capacities relevant for work, or more
specific ones that are characteristics of specific kinds of employment. lxviii It also remains
an open question whether the appropriate mode of assessment for FCEs is self-report,
clinical performance testing or clinical observation, or some combination of these. In use,
even the most popular FCEs tend to focus on a person’s deficits—the capacities that,
because of injury or disease, the individual has lost. Yet, there is a consensus that a
person’s physical and mental assets and strengths are extremely important information
for a work disability assessment.

In the end, the fundamental weakness of FCE is that it is difficult to come up with the
domains or areas of functional capacity that are highly and consistently correlated with a
standardized ‘capacity to work’, given the enormous variety of work requirements and
kinds of employment situations. As noted, the usual approach is to assume that certain
ADL ‘basic activities’ are required for any job ; yet even if we could agree on what these
basic activities are, the list would never be complete enough to accommodate shifting
patterns of work skills and requirements as the overall labor market alters to respond to
economic or other national or global influences. lxix Traditional FCEs also ignore important
individual differences in personality, motivation, and vocational interests. lxx

Most importantly, functional capacities in basic activities do not accurately predict
employability since o ne’s capacity to work always depends on environmental or
contextual factors. These factors include assistive devices that directly aid the individual
at the work place, as well as facilitating environmental modifications and other
accommodations that can positively restructure the workplace and the requirements of



                                                                                            25
the job. Together these factors can make it possible for a person with impairments to
return to work, or to enter the workforce for the first time. Yet, these factors are ignored
in functional capacity assessment.

In the end, the fundamental weakness of the Functional Limitation approach is essentially
the same as the Impairment approach: it relies on a proxy assessment—and a weakly
correlated proxy at that—of work disability. Medical evidence including information
about impairments, although certainly important information for a determination of work
disability, ignores the impact of functional limitations in the performance of basic
activities. But when this additional information is considered —even assuming that
unsolved issues mentioned above can be resolved—the results ignore the often
determinative impact of the working environment on work disability.

       (c) Disability approach: strengths and weaknesses

The Disability approach to disability assessment addresses the weaknesses and
limitations of both the Impairment and Functional Limitation approaches. First, it is a
direct assessment rather than some indirect or proxy which, as in the case of the
Impairment approach, is two steps removed from the reality under assessment. And
second, at the core of this approach is a complete conceptualization of disability as an
“interactional” phenomenon , providing a framework for its operationalization.

The critics of the Disability approach insist that it is not a viable option because the
concept of disability is either too politically contentious for any direct standardized
conceptualization or else, if some robust conception of disability is accepted, an
assessment based on it is not feasible given the enormous amount of information about
the person, the person’s work environment and all other contextual factors , that would
need to be collected and analyzed.lxxi This very practical consideration can be easily
transformed into a substantial theoretical obstacle given the realization that there may
be no knowable ‘saturation’ point where we can be confident that we kn ew enough about
the individual’s environmental context to make an evidence -based judgment about what
in the person’s environment matters and what does not. Since in principle ever y feature
of the physical, human-built, interpersonal, attitudinal, social, political, economic and
cultural context is a potential determinant of the individual’s experience of disability, at
what point could we be confident that we knew enough to sufficiently understand that
experience for disability assessment?

The first of these assertions that the concept of disability is too contentious cannot be
easily dismissed, even with the increased worldwide uptake of the ICF and the adoption
by the United Nations of the CRPD that embodies an interactional conception of disability.
Even if there are good reasons to be optimistic that the conceptual power of the
interactional approach to disability is such that it will become the standard view, it
remains to be seen whether the ICF provides countries with the knowledge resources and
practical instruments needed for them to make the shift to the Disability Approach. This
issue will be taken up in the next two chapters.



                                                                                         26
The more general concern about the feasibility of the Disability approach is another
matter. It is true that in some countries, especially in Europe, the Disability approach has
been consciously adopted, if only partially, as the basis for work disability assessment.
The Netherlands is a notable example. Operationally, the Disability approach presumes
that a substantial amount of information is in principle available: information about
health conditions and impairments, about functional capacities related to the claimant’s
actual or potential employment options, and about features of the environment that
define the workplace and the employee’s position within it. Since health condition and
impairment information tends to be more readily available, it is environmental or
contextual information that counts as ‘value added’ of the Disability approach.

Given the sheer range and volume of environmental information, it is useful to distinguish
between information that is proximate and directly descriptive of work disability and
information that is more distal and indirect. The first set of data includes a description of
work requirements or physical and mental demands (including the level of stress and
other work pressures a worker will experience). It will also include broader descriptions
of the work environment; including the physical environment —buildings, equipment,
furniture, air, and sound quality; the interpersonal environment —co-workers and
employers, customers and clients; and other work parameters—time and scheduling
demands.

The second set of contextual data is about the more abstract and less well defined
environmental factors that indirectly shape the work environment. Here we might include
features of the labor market, in general or by sector, the overall level of political and
economic development of the country, social attitudes towards the type of employment,
relevant employment legislation, including health and safety requirements, anti-
discrimination provisions, and so on.

All of these factors, proximate and distal, shape the work situation in ways that are
relevant to a determinati on of an individual’s claimant’s work situation , and so to a
claimant’s level of work disability.lxxii What is most needed, however, is information both
about, in the terminology of the ICF, environmental facilitators (e.g. the availability of
work-related assistive technology, or work scheduling flexibility to accommodate health
or impairment needs) and barriers (e.g. prejudicial or stigmatizing attitudes of co-workers,
customers or employers, the absence of health insurance, or lack of availability of suitable
employment in the labor market). Knowing both what helps and what hinders work
performance allows the assessor to truly capture work disability.

Yet, in the face of this potentially enormous amount of relevant information about the
work situation – even if we ignored the theoretical issue of defining the level of
evidentiary ‘saturation’ – it is understandable why there is general skepticism about the
Disability approach. It is the weakness of the approach. Although there is a substantial
literature in vocational rehabilitation and related employment-related disciplines about
the impact of work environmental factors on work disability —indeed no employment




                                                                                          27
counselor or therapists would ever doubt this—as yet there are no standardized
instruments for assessing work environment for determination of work disability.

The challenge of the Disability approach, therefore, is to address this very practical issue
of the feasibility of putting into effect an assessment process that is reasonably full and
complete—one that does not rely on screening criteria or proxies for disability, but
assesses, in a manner adequate to the purposes of the policy or program that requires
assessment for eligibility, the phenomenon of disability itself. This is the challenge of the
Disability approach. And this is the challenge that ICF needs to address as well. But to
see this, we need to describe the ICF in some detail.




                                                                                          28
                                    Chapter 3
Introduction to International Classification of Functioning,
                   Disability and Health


Chapter 3: Summary
  The ICF provides a comprehensive and standardized framework and language for
   the description of functioning and disability.
  The ICF model is a clear expression of the interactive model of disability about which
   there is worldwide consensus.
  Simple and complex human actions are conceptualized in the ICF both in terms of
   the intrinsic capacities of the person to perform these actions (Capacity perspective)
   and in terms of the performance in the individual’s actual environment (Performance
   perspective).
  All aspects of human Functioning are represented by the ICF component concepts of
   Body Functions, Body Structures, and Activities & Participation.
  ICF has a classification of Environmental Factors: the complete physical, human-
   built, interpersonal, and social universe in which people live and act.
  The ICF is only concerned with objective description, not the subjective assessment
   or evaluation of health-related states of Functioning.
  In the ICF, conceptually, both a person’s health state and environmental factors are
   determinants of disability.
  The classification of the ICF is arranged hierarchically in a standard ‘genus -species’
   or ‘parent-child’ arrangement.
  To be meaningful, an ICF code requires at least one qualifier. Qualifiers provide the
   full description of a person’s level of Functioning or Disability.
  The distinction between the perspectives of Performance and Capacity is essential to
   the interactive model in the ICF.
  The ICF and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) are best used together
   for most epidemiological, health systems, and health and disability policy purposes.
  The conceptual and practical linkages between these two international standards
   are in the process of being optimized with the development of the 11 th Revision of
   ICD, due by 2017.




                                                                                       29
In May 2001, the ICF of the WHO was unanimously endorsed by the World Health
Assembly. The ICF provides a comprehensive and standardized framework and language
for the description of Functioning and Disability.lxxiii To better understand the meaning of
‘Functioning’ as this term is used in the ICF, a multidimensional model is presented of the
interaction between health features of the person and features of the person’s complete
physical, human-built, attitudinal, and socio-political environment. The ICF model is thus
an expression of the interactive model of disability about which there is worldwide
consensus. The ICF was explicitly developed to express the person-environment,
interactive model. As an international standard, the ICF provides separate classifications
of the components of Functioning and Environmental Factors, each of which is composed
of domains (chapters and blocks) and categories. Qualifiers are provided to describe the
extent of the individual’s problems in Functioning; that is, the extent of Disability denoted
by each domain and category variable. This chapter provides an introduction to the basic
concepts of the ICF in order to set the stage for the next chapter in which both the added
value, and the potential limitations, of the ICF as a design framework for disability
assessment, within the context of disability evaluation procedures, will be discussed in
detail.

The interactive model of the ICF

‘Functioning’ is the technical term used in the ICF as an umbrella, or overarching, term to
include all aspects and dimensions of how humans function, behave and act, from the
essentially biological functions (and structures) of the human body and mind to the vast
variety of simple and complex actions that a person engages in. These simple and
complex actions are conceptualized from two perspectives: firstly in terms of the intrinsic
capacities of the person to perform these actions, and secondly in terms of the actual
performance of these actions, simple and complex, in interaction with the complete
context in which the person lives (as characterized by environmental factors). The first
perspective is called Capacity and the second Performance.

All aspects of human Functioning are represented by the ICF component concepts of Body
Functions, Body Structures, and Activities & Participation. These concepts in turn are
classified into mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive sets of domains and categories
(or classification variables) by the classifications of the same names. In addition, there is
a classification of Environmental Factors that define the complete context in which
human functioning takes place; that is, the complete physical, human-built, interpersonal,
and social universe in which people live and act.

(To avoid confusion, all ICF-specific terms will continue to be capitalized even though some
of them—most notably ‘disability’—are not technical terms but are commonly used to
denote the phenomena that ICF is conceptualizing.)

Functioning is the positive notion comprising of domains of human bodily functions and
individual simple and complex actions, understood on a continuum from complete or
optimal Functioning to no or total lack of Functioning. Disability is a derivative notion,



                                                                                          30
namely that range of the continuum of Functioning, for a specific domain, that we have
reason to identify as being problematic. In the ICF, there is no suggestion, or any
intention, to identify disabilities normatively as abnormalities or inferiorities; they are
understood simply as levels of Functioning that, for various reasons, it is thought
important to identify as sub-optimal or problematic for the individual. Disability, for a
specific domain, thus presumes a given threshold or level of Functioning, below which is
sub-optimal or problematic, for some reason. Significantly, the ICF itself does not set or
specify these thresholds or anchor points . The ICF is an international classification, not a
normative standard that set international thresholds for when, for a particular domain, a
reported level of Functioning is sub-optimal or problematic – that is, a disability. Those
thresholds will be set and justified by the user of the ICF, to serve the user’s specific needs.

While the ICF is a classification of dimensions of Functioning and Disability as experiences
of the individual, it is not a description of the individual’s own perception, assessment, or
evaluation of these experiences. The ICF provides the ‘vocabulary’ for an objective
description of a state of affairs associated with an individual’s health state, and this is
independent on the individual’s subjective judgment about this state of affairs. If, for
example, an individual experiences a level of visual acuity that is below a threshold
established in terms of population norms for this Body Function, the ICF can be used to
describe this as an ‘impairment of visual acuity’. The individual him or herself may not
care about this impairment, may assess it negatively or not, or may simply ignore it as
irrelevant to his or her life. These reactions constitute an extremely significant, subjective
perspective that is linked to quality of life or subjective well-being; but they have no effect
on the objective fact of visual impairment. The ICF is only concerned with objective
description, not subjective assessment of health-related states of Functioning.

Depending on the dimension of Functioning of interest, Disability is denoted as a matter
of Impairments of Body Functions and Body Structures, Limitations in Activities and
Restrictions in Participation. Functioning and Disability are thus overarching terms that
identify these parallel dimensions (the dimensions and definitions of all these
components are presented in Table 3.1).




 Table 3.1. Definitions of the Components of the Model of Functioning and Disability




                                                                                             31
 Positive                                              Negative
 Body Functions are the physiological functions of
 body systems (including psychological functions)      Impairments are problems in body functions or
 Body Structures are anatomical parts of the body      structures such as significant deviation or loss
 such as organs, limbs and their components
 Activity is the execution of a task or action by an   Activity limitations are difficulties an individual
 individual                                            may have in executing activities
 Participation is involvement in a life situation      Participation restrictions are problems an
                                                       individual may experience in involvement in life
                                                       situations
 Facilitators                                          Barriers
 Environmental Factors make up the physical, social and attitudinal environment in which people live
 and conduct their lives and can act as facilitator or barrier
 Personal Factors are the particular background of an individual’s life and living and comprises features
 of the individual that are not part of a health condition or health state.


Although Functioning is conceptually linked to a health condition (a disease, disorder,
injury or a natural process such as aging), it is not conceptualized as the direct causal
consequence of a health condition but rather as the experience of living with a health
condition. While it is often possible to accurately describe a level of Functioning
independent of the environment, our actual experience of Functioning takes into account
our world, so that are experiences are always the outcome of the interaction between
health condition and Environmental Factors. The ICF also recognizes the possibility of
interaction with non-health Personal Factors such as age, gender, educational and other
life experience, coping style, and so on. This dimension has been left for future
classification.lxxiv In principle, all domains of Functioning—Body Functions, Structures,
and Activities & Participation—are therefore experienced as outcomes of interactions
with environmental and personal Contextual Factors.

It is crucial for the application of ICF in the context of disability assessment to stress the
fact that the dimensions of Health Conditions, Body Functions and Structures and as well
Activities & Participation viewed from the Capacity perspective are all phenomena that
are intrinsic to the human body and are, so to speak ‘under the skin’. These intrinsic
states can then be contrasted with the individual’s lived experience of these states
(‘health states’ for short) which is the Performance perspective on Activities &
Participation. The Performance perspective captures what a person actually does in his
or her world, and so is the outcome of the interaction between intrinsic health aspects of
the person and Environmental Factors. This interaction is potentially very complicated,
dynamic and multi-directional, since changes in any of the Functioning components may
influence one or more of the other components, and in various co mplex ways people’s
actions and behaviours will have an impact on the environment as well. Given the
complexity and dynamic nature of these interactions, any graphic representation is bound
to oversimplify it. That said, the overall interactive model of the ICF is represented in




                                                                                                             32
Figure 3.1 (and is labelled in the ICF, the ‘Bio -psycho-social Model of Functioning and
Disability’).lxxv

  Figure 3.1: The Integrative Bio-Psycho-Social Model of Functioning, Disability and
                                        Health

                                         Health condition
                                       (Disorder or disease)




     Body Functions and                      Activities                       Participation
         Structures                        (Limitations)
       (Impairments)                                                          (Restrictions)




                     Environmental                                 Personal
                        Factors                                    Factors



Contextual Factors, and especially Environmental Factors, on the ICF model as depicted
in Figure 3.1 play an essential role in the underlying interactional conception of
Functioning and Disability that is at the core of the ICF. As already mentioned, features
of a person’s environment may act either as a barrier that increases the severity or extent
of a Disability or as a facilitator that decreases the severity or extent of a Disability. When
the environment is a barrier, the level of a person’s performance in Activities &
Participation will be lower or more of a problem than it would otherwise be; when the
environment is a facilitator, the performance level is better or less of a problem than it
would otherwise be. Personal Factors operate in a similar fashion.

The key issue is that Disability is created both by the underlying Health Conditions and
associated Impairments and by the lowered or raised levels of Capacity to perform
Activities & Participation that result from Environmental Factors. Health state and
Environmental Factors are therefore both determinants of Disability. As this is the
essential feature of the interactive model of disability, ICF can be said to constitute the
interactive approach to Functioning and Disability.

By operationalizing the interactive model, the ICF contributes to a better understanding
of Functioning and Disability and so offers a more scientifically and conceptually
justifiable approach to describe the lived experience of health. This model is also the
basis for, and represented by the structure of the ICF classifications. Accordingly, all
components of the model —except personal factors and health conditions —are classified
in the ICF. Health conditions (diseases, disorders, injuries or traumas) are already
completely classified by another of the WHO’s international health classifications, namely




                                                                                               33
the International Classification of Diseases (ICD). lxxvi The ICD and the ICF are
complementary classifications and users are encouraged to use them together.

The structure and coding scheme of the ICF classification

The classification of the ICF is arranged hierarchically in a standard ‘genus -species’ or
‘parent-child’ arrangement. Overall, the classification consists of two parts: (1)
‘Functioning and Disability’ and (2) ‘Contextual factors’, each with two components: Part
1 consists of ‘Body Functions and Body Structures’ and ‘Activities & Participation’, and
Part 2 consists of ‘Environmental Factors’ and ‘Personal Factors’. (As mentioned before,
although Personal Factors are included in the model they are not classified in the ICF.)

In each of the four individual ICF classifications, chapters represent the first level of the
classification. For coding purposes, each chapter is subdivided into the basic elements of
the classification, called categories, which are organized in hierarchically arranged 2 nd, 3rd
and 4th levels. See Figure 3.2.

                          Figure 3.2: The Hierarchical Structure of the ICF


                                                 ICF                                          Classification
                                                                                                  Classification


             Functioning and Disability                       Contextual factors                      Parts
                                                                                                  Parts


     Body Functions             Activities and         Environmental           Personal         Components
     and Structures             Participation             Factors              Factors            Components
                                                                             Not classified

                                                                                                   Categories

   b1-b8         s1-s8              d1-d9                 e1-e5                                   1st level
                                                                                                    Chapters/ -     Chapters
                                                                                                     1st level


   b110-         s110-              d110-                 e110-
                                                                                                  2nd level
                                                                                                    2nd level
   b899          s899               d999                  e599



   b1100-       s1100-             d1550-                 e1100-                                      level
                                                                                                  3rd3rd level      Categories
   b7809        s8309              d9309                  e5959


                                                                                                       level
                                                                                                  4th 4th level
  b11420-       s11000-
  b54509        s76009



 Source: WHO, 2001

The codes for each chapter and category constitute a standard classificatory language
that can be applied unequivocally across countries, languages, cultures and professions
for data collection and comparison. ICF codes are composed of a prefix ( b for Body
Functions, s for Body Structure, d for Activity & Participation, and e for Environmental



                                                                                                                   34
Factors) followed by a numeric code that consists of one digit for the first or chapter level,
three digits for the second, four for the third, and five for the fourth level, as represented
in Figure 3.3 below.

                   Figure 3.3: ICF Hierarchical Structure – An Example




The hierarchical organization of the ICF classifications allows users to choose either a
broader description (by using a 1st level chapter or a 2nd level category) or a more detailed
description (by using a 3rd or 4th level category) of an area of Functioning. The level of
specificity increases with each lower level. The hierarchical organization allows users to
choose the level of specificity required for their needs. In principle, to further increase
granularity the category levels could be continued indefinitely by the user for more and
more detailed sub-species. For consistency in data collection, the only requirement is
that all lower levels can be ‘summed up’ to the next highest level so that all species and
iteratively sub-species of a single genus can be denoted by the same genus category and
corresponding code.

For all categories, except those in Body Structures, definitions and inclusions and
exclusions are provided as shown in the following example:




                                                                                           35
d510. Washing Oneself

Washing and drying one's whole body, or body parts, using water and appropriate
cleaning and drying materials or methods, such as bathing, showering, washing hands and
feet, face and hair, and drying with a towel.

Inclusions: washing body parts, the whole body; and drying oneself

Exclusions: caring for body parts (d520); toileting (d530)


These definitions and inclusions provide a detailed description of the meaning of the
category and assist in the use of the ICF as a standard classification tool. Definitions and
inclusions constitute the concrete operationalization of classification variables. Exclusions
(where they exist) help to differentiate between related or easily confused ICF categories.

For convenience of use, chapters are often subdivided into blocks of categories. Blocks
organize categories into common themes, as for example the block ‘Muscle functions
(b730-b749) comprising ‘b730 Muscle power functions’, ‘b735 Muscle tone functions’,
‘b740 Muscle endurance functions, and ‘b749 Muscle functions, other specified and
unspecified’; or the block ‘household tasks (d630 -d649)’ comprising ‘d630 Preparing
meals’, ‘d640 Doing housework’ and ‘d649 Household tasks, other specified and
unspecified’. Technically, blocks are not part of the structure of the classification and
usually are not used for coding purposes.

The categories of Functioning found in Body Functions and Body Structures, Activities &
Participation are content categories or data points for collecting consistent and
internationally comparable data. These constitute domains of the experience of
Functioning and Disability—the experience of bodily functions, including mental
functions, and the experience of performing simple and complex actions. All of these are
experiences of Functioning—the experience of living with a health condition, or for short
‘the lived experience of health ’. The categories are not themselves categories of Disability
or Non-disability, they are simply categories of Functioning.

To identify a point (or range) on the continuum of Functioning for a specific domain, it is
necessary to use ICF qualifiers. By so doing, and in particular by identifying a level of
Functioning for some domain that is below a specified threshold, the user identifies some
dimension (and extent) of Disability. Once again, the ICF does not specify the thresholds,
and so in a sense does not identify Disabilities as such. It was thought not to be the WHO’s
role as an international agency to dictate where on the continuum of, e.g. b515 Digestive
Functions, an Impairment of Digestive Functions exists; that is a task for medical science
and clinical practice. It is expected that scientific consensus has, or will, establish on the
basis of good evidence where this cut-off should exist. It is even more obvious that it is
not the WHO’s role to specify where on the continuum of d850 Remunerative
Employment a problematic level of remunerative employment exists; that is a matter for
a designated authority to make a judgment on the basis of tradition, commonsense,



                                                                                           36
employment policy or political decision. Unlike Body Functions which are biological
universal phenomena, it is more likely for complex Activities & Participation domains that
thresholds will differ in different parts of the world, because of salient cultural, economic
and political differences. Moreover, it is always the prerogative of users to set thresholds
wherever they wish; it is also incumbent on the user to justify that important decision.

ICF qualifiers

A ‘qualifier’ is a variable, attached to a domain in an ICF classification, that expresses a
degree of severity (usually on a 5-point scale) or some qualitative dimension of that
domain. For all of the components of Functioning (Body Functions, Body Structures,
Activities & Participation), the first qualifier expresses the extent or severity of a problem
in some domain of Functioning. Here a 5-point generic scale is expressed qualitatively as
No (problem or difficulty), or Mild, Moderate, Severe and Complete (coded with the
numbers 0 to 4). ‘No problem’ is understood to denote full or optimal Functioning, and
‘Complete problem’ the total absence of Functioning. In some situations, the description
of Functioning or levels of Disability is not possible due to a lack of information or the
inapplicability of an ICF category. In these situations, the codes .8 and .9 are used. (See
Box 3.1). In the case of Body Structures, given the variety of dimensions in which
structures can be problematic, a second qualifier presents a range of structural
differences (such as total or partial absence, aberrant dimensions, discontinuity, and
deviating position). (Given that the ICF does not established thresholds, it is not strictly
speaking accurate to say that a ‘mild problem’ in Body Functions is an impairment, or that
a ‘moderate problem’ in Activities & Participation’ a Activity Limitation or Participation
Restriction: in each case a threshold value needs to be provided to make this
determination.)

In the case of Environmental Factors, the first qualifier denotes the extent to which a
feature of the environment, broadly construed, acts as a facilitator or as a barrier for a
specific domain of Functioning. An environmental barrier is understood as a factor whose
presence has a negative impact on the extent of Functioning (e.g. the impact of bad air
quality on respiration) or whose absence has a negative impact (e.g. the impact of lack of
support when performing housework). To denote this difference, a facilitator is marked
with a plus sign instead of the dot (+X) and a barrier follows the dot (.X) – hence e310+2
means moderate facilitator ‘Immediate family’ and e310 .2 means moderate barrier
‘Immediate family’.

To be meaningful, an ICF code requires at least one qualifier. Hence, an ICF code
(composed of the letter and numeric code) is completed by at least the first qualifier
placed after a dot following the numeric code, e.g. b28016 .3. In case of an environmental
facilitator, the dot alone denotes a barrier, and the plus (+) sign denotes a facilitator, e.g.
e310+4.

                                    Box 3.1. ICF Qualifiers




                                                                                            37
         Qualifiers for Body Functions, Body Structures and Activities & Participation

 xxx.0 NO problem                          (none, absent, negligible,…)              0-4%
 xxx.1 MILD problem                        (slight, low,…)                           5-24%
 xxx.2 MODERATE problem                    (medium, fair,…)                          25-49%
 xxx.3 SEVERE problem                      (high, extreme,…)                         50-95%
 xxx.4 COMPLETE problem                    (total,…)                                 96-100%
 xxx.8 not specified (used when there is insufficient information for the description of the extent
        of the problem)
 xxx.9 not applicable (used when the category is applica ble, e.g. in ‘b650 Menstruation
        functions’ for men)

                                Qualifiers for Environmental Factors

 xxx.0 NO barrier                                          xxx+0 NO facilitator
 xxx.1 MILD barrier                                        xxx+1 MILD facilitator
 xxx.2 MODERATE barrier                                    xxx+2 MODERATE facilitator
 xxx.3 SEVERE barrier                                      xxx+3 SUBSTANTIAL facilitator
 xxx.4 COMPLETE barrier                                    xxx+4 COMPLETE facilitator
 xxx.8 barrier, not specified                              xxx+8 facilitator, not specified
 xxx.9 not applicable                                      xxx.9 not applicable




Qualifiers complete an ICF code and provide the full description of a person’s level of
Functioning or Disability. It is important to emphasize that the qualifier coding system is
not intended to be, and certainly not to replace, standardized assessment a nd
measurement instruments for domains of Functioning. The assumption is that ICF can,
with this very simple qualitative scaling, be mapped onto clinical tools that are used in
practice so that the tool’s calibration and scaling is retained (since, typica lly, the tool has
been validated for use). Most of these existing tools measure Body Functions and
Structures, but there are also instruments in clinical for measuring Walking and other
basic Activities & Participation. The qualifiers and classifications are the components of
the ICF viewed as an international common language of Functioning. Although ICF is a
standard for collating data collected from a wide variety of sources, ICF itself does not
create, collect or analyse that data; that is for the ICF user to do.

Performance and capacity

For Activities & Participation an important difference in perspective, already mentioned,
is technically encoded by the two qualifiers, both of which denote the extent of difficulty
or problem. The Performance perspective is represented by the first qualifier, and the
Capacity perspective by the second qualifier. Because the distinction between
Performance and Capacity is fundamental to the interactive model that ICF represents,
and of special significance for the potential use of ICF as a design framework for disability




                                                                                                 38
assessment, it is important to be clear about the difference between these perspectives
on human Functioning.

Performance describes what an individual actually does in his or her current environment
in light of all positive and negative impacts of Environmental Factors. Environmental
Factors include all features of the physical environment, the built environment, products
and technology, attitudes, and systems, services and policies across all aspects of the
social, political and economic context —everything and anything that alter, worsen or
improve, the experience of disability. Performance, in other words, is understood as the
direct, non-inferential description of what the person actually does in his or her actual
environment or context.

Capacity, by contrast, is a description of something that rarely can be directly observed
but is usually inferred from evidence; namely, the individual’s inherent or intrinsic ability
to perform a task or an action, without the impact, positive or negative, of his or her
environment. Since human beings are always in an environment of some sort, Capacity
is an abstract notion, unlike Performance which is simply a description of actual states of
affairs or events. As an abstraction, Capacity requires some form of operationalization for
it to be accurately assessed or measured. In principle, an environmentally ‘neutralized’
setting—for example, a test setting—is the optimal environment for obtaining
information about Capacity. Of course, no setting is completely environmentally
neutral—gravity, air quality and pressure, light, and other environmental factors will
always remain (although in the future, conceivably, we may find it useful to create
standardized settings in space stations to neutralize the effects of gravity). But the notion
of Capacity remains coherent despite this technical, measurement issue. A health
problem, by definition, always creates some decrement in some set of Body Functions or
Structures and this decrement will impact on a person’s ability to perform actions:
Capacity is the resulting, intrinsic state of health, measured along a continuum from
optimal to ‘less than optimal’ or non-existent capacity to perform specific actions.

The distinction between Performance and Capacity, or something very much like it, is an
essential conceptual aspect of the interactive model of disability. In the ICF, the
interactive model presumes that it is possible, at least in theory, to distinguish between
the impact of a health condition on a person’s Performance and the impact of
Environmental Factors and Personal Factors on that Performance. The difference
between Performance and Capacity is implicitly, in other words, the description of the
positive and negative impact of Environmental Factors and Personal Factors on
Functioning.

The coding system for Activities & Participation using the two qualifiers captures this
important difference, at least for Environmental Factors. For example, the ICF code
d450.13 describes a person’s C apacity to walk as severely limited ( 3 = severe problem in
Capacity) but the 1 (= mild problem with Performance) indicates that that limitation in
Capacity is compensated for or positively impacted by some environmental factor, for
example a walking assistive device. (More detailed information can be added with two



                                                                                          39
additional, optional qualifiers: a third qualifier to describe Capacity with assistance and a
fourth for Performance without assistance.)

ICF and ICD

The ICF is an international classification standard and scientific tool for the description of
Functioning and Disability. The application of the ICF contributes to the standardization
of health and health-related data and facilitates data collection and international
comparison. From the outset, the WHO’s aim in developing the ICF was to augment its
institutional capacity to standardize health information by building on its existing
classification of diseases and other health conditions; namely, The International
Classification of Diseases (ICD). ICD is the world’s standard diagnostic tool for
epidemiology, health management and clinical purposes. It is widely used for collecting
mortality or ‘cause of death’ information, for monitoring the incidence and prevalence of
diseases and other health problems and creating a picture of the general health situation
of countries and populations. Although the ICF has many independent applications, as a
member of the ‘family of international classifications’ t he ICF completes the
epidemiological picture by standardizing the collection of information about non-fatal
health outcomes and associated experiences —the overall lived experience of health.
Thus, ICD and ICF are best used together for most epidemiological, health systems, and
health and disability policy purposes.

The conceptual and practical linkages between these two international standards are in
the process of being optimized with the development of the 11th Revision of ICD, due by
2017. Unlike its predecessors, ICD 11 will be structured by a ‘content model’ that not only
standardizes the representation of ICD entities for computerization, but presents
information from 13 different dimensions of parameters o r ‘value sets’, such as temporal
properties, manifestation and causal properties. Significantly, one of these parameters is
Functioning Properties that will provide information on how an individual with or
experiencing the ICD entity may be limited in Functioning. The parameter of Functioning
Properties is composed of (i) a selection of Activities & Participation domains
(understanding, communication, mobility, self-care, interpersonal relations, life activities,
and social participation); (ii) a linkage between ICD and ICF Contextual Factors; and (iii) a
linkage between ICD signs and symptoms with ICF Body Functions.

With the publication of ICD 11, it will be possible to fully integrate ICF and ICD, in the
sense that the application of an ICD term to identify a health condition experienced by an
individual—say a claimant for disability benefits —will be automatically linked to a
standardized set of Activities & Participation items found in the ICD item’s Functioning
Properties field. Since ICD is standardly used, worldwide, for a wide range of health and
social policy purposes that include, and interact with the various components of disability
policy, this linkage will greatly enhance the usability of ICF for disability assessment
purposes.




                                                                                           40
                                     Chapter 4
           Application of ICF to Disability Assessment


Chapter 4: Summary
     Evidence from rehabilitation practice and research supports the view that the
      causes or etiology of an impairment should not be used to determine the impact on
      a person’s life, and that in the case of work capacity, the work environment is as
      much a determinant as the underlying health problem.
     Ignoring the potential impact of a facilitating work environment distorts work
      capacity assessment.
     ICF is one of the best expressions of a fundamental shift in understanding of
      disability. It offers the possibility of creating complete functioning profiles,
      identifying both assets as well as deficiencies for disability assessment.
     Complete functioning profiles make it possible to longitudinally track disability
      trajectories of time, for more flexible and cost-effective disability programming.
     The ICF distinction between capacity and performance alters the disability
      assessment process by requiring information about the individual’s environment—
      work environment in the case of work capacity —in order to properly assess
      disability, both at a point in time, and longitudinally.
     Despite its potential, there are limitations to the usefulness of the ICF, given the
      inherent problems of operationalizing, and measuring, the relationship between
      Environmental Factors and a person’s Capacity to perform complex tasks such as
      those required for employment, coupled with the highly undeveloped character of
      the Environmental Factor classification and potential unintended consequences of
      using Personal Factors for disability evaluation.
     The ICF underwrites a normative standard for equitable disability assessment by
      showing that while striving to equalize work capacity is not humanly possible, it is
      both possible, and desirable, to strive to equalize work performance.
     A design framework for disability assessment grounded in the model and
      classifications of the ICF has the potential for realizing the Disability approach to
      disability assessment.


Disability assessment and the lived experience of health

The trend in middle and high income countries over the last two decades in disability
assessment for social insurance, disability pensions and employment policy has been to



                                                                                        41
augment a purely impairment-based or Baremas scheme—based on medical diagnosis or
a standardized list of impairments —with more individualized information about the
claimant’s functional capacity, derived from self-report questionnaires, clinical interviews
or performance tests. Yet, it is also commonly agreed that a more complete, valid and
reliable disability assessment, especially for determining work capacity, requires, in
addition, information about environmental barriers and facilitators, and in particular,
features of the work environment that, if altered, could dramatically increase the
likelihood that a person with impairments and functional limitations could go to, or return
to the work that they are qualified to perform. The scientific and practical evidence
supporting the perceived need for more environmental information comes from
rehabilitation clinical practice and research.

Rehabilitation professionals have recognized that the manner in which a health problem
or impairment plays out in a person’s life is far more relevant in the determination of the
person’s capacity to work than the medical cause or etiology of the problem or
impairment. This is a view called ‘etiological neutrality’.lxxvii A good example is chronic
pain. Work capacity assessment protocols are regularly criticized for highlighting a
distinction between pain that is directly linked to structural impairments —such as an
intervertebral disc disorder or other injury—and pain that has no identifiable structural
origins, usually called ‘somatoform pain’.lxxviii Because of a concern for malingering or
faking pain, work capacity assessment protocols have put undue emphasis on the causes
or etiology of pain. Yet, clinically, it is apparent that the impact of somatoform pain on a
person’s capacity to work can be as severe as for any other kind of pain.lxxix From a
rehabilitation perspective, in other words, the cause of pain is not particularly relevant;
but the impact of pain is very important. This suggests that work capacity determinations
should pain etiology as well (and deal with deception in a different way), since what is
relevant to assessment is the lived experience of pain.

Because our understanding of mental disorders lags behind that of physical health
problems, there is also a tendency in disability assessment to be sceptical about claims
based on mental health diagnoses alone. Like pain-based disability claims, the traditional
medicalization of assessment for mental health problems was in part a response to the
perceived problem of malingering or fraud. But again, like chronic pain, the impact of
mental health problems such as depression or anxiety on work capacity is both obvious
and considerable. Indeed, both pain associated with musculoskeletal disorders and
depression have been identified as among the top ten contributors to global disability,
according to the Global Burden of Disease 2010 study.lxxx

Rehabilitation practice has also made it increasingly clear that the work environment—
both the physical workplace and how a job is administratively structured —is as much a
determinant of work capacity as the person’s health condition, impairments and
functional limitations. Several studies of the determinants of successful return to work
programs, for a wide range and severity of injuries and diseases, have shown that
removing environmental barriers to work can be the most effective way of returning to
work, and therefore of addressing work disability. lxxxi



                                                                                         42
Even when work capacity assessment is augmented with information about functional
capacity, the significance of the work environment is not always taken into account. Most
Functional Capacity Evaluations assess work capacity, not in light of the existing work
environment, but in terms of some standardized clinical environment. The result is that
assessments can be dramatically wrong: if because of a workplace injury a worker cannot
stand or sit for long periods of time—as would be indicated by a FCE performance test —
this does not mean the worker cannot return to his or her original job since a modest job
alteration providing frequent rest breaks and periodic body position changes may make
return to work a feasible option. Functional capacity assessment also merges the impact
on work disability from health conditions with impact of the environment (family
difficulties or co-worker attitudes) or even personal factors (lack of motivation). lxxxii

It is common ground among vocational rehabilitation experts that work disability is a
function both of the individual’s underlying health condition and impairments and
features of the work environment. When no medical or rehabilitative health intervention
can significantly alter the effects of a chronic health problem, which is true for many non-
communicable diseases, age-related conditions, and serious injuries, then the only
prospect for return to work will depend on changes that can be made to the work
environment. Although there are no guarantees that making changes to the work
environment will enhance work capacity in all cases, ignoring this possibility undermines
the validity of work capacity assessment.

There is, in short, a growing recognition that disability assessment should be based on the
full, contextualised lived experience of health rather than merely on diagnosis,
impairments or functional capacity evaluation. Given that the ICF incorporates, and
operationalizes, a model of disability that is fully consistent with this evidence from
rehabilitation practice, it is reasonable to be cautiously optimistic that the ICF might be
good vehicle for reforming disability assessment practice.

The general case for ICF as a design framework for disability assessment

The fact that ICF is a globally accepted, international standard classification means that
there are general considerations in favour of turning to the ICF as a design framework for
disability assessment:

              ICF is an optimal data reporting structure;
              ICF is the basis for process legitimacy; and
              ICF is an international platform for assessment and measurement.

ICF as optimal data reporting structure: From the outset WHO’s interest in developing
and implementing the ICF was to create an information structure for collecting and
analysing internationally comparable data about health and disability that would
augment the standardization in causes of death traditionally provided by the ICD. In this
sense, ICF completes the picture of health information by adding the essential domain of
the lived experience of non-fatal health states and their health and contextual
determinants.


                                                                                         43
The ICF was explicitly designed as a ‘Rosetta stone’ for functioning and disability
information, making it possible to harmonize data collected from various tools and
methodologies—from self-report functional questionnaires, FCEs, standardised
rehabilitation assessment tools, administrative records and, at the population level,
health and disability surveys. Connecting information in this manner improves
accessibility to comparable data across data users and contexts, which has a positive
impact on administrative processes such as disability assessment. As ICF is an information
collection framework, with an exhaustive and mutually exclusive list of domains in the
three component classifications, it offers the prospect of providing the full range and
detail of information required for a complete disability assessment. Moreover, ICF not
only helps coordinate existing data, it helps identify informational gaps, in particular
information about the work environment that, as has been shown, greatly enhances the
validity and reliability of work disability determination.lxxxiii

ICF as the basis for process legitimacy: Around the globe, disability assessment is the core
component of an administrative process whose outcome is a determination of eligibility
for a service, benefit or protection. The procedure for disability evaluation —whether
formal or informal, simple or complex and involving one or multiple stages —remains
essentially a creation of law and policy. As such, administratively and legally, it must be,
and be seen to be impartial, fair and based on objective evidence. As we saw in Chapter
1, the level and extent of evidence required for a disability assessment depends in part
on the aims of policy or program: a program providing assistive devices or vocational
rehabilitation demands clinically-accurate descriptions of need, whereas a social
assistance transfer may require merely a rough determination of ‘inability to work or take
care of oneself’. But in each case, the determinations of eligibility must be perceived to
be politically and legally legitimate. lxxxiv

Legal and administrative legitimacy is a matter of procedural fairness, commonly
operationalized in terms of procedural transparency, impartiality and comparability
(which together are often termed ‘procedural equity’). What research there is on
disability determinations suggest that even the procedures used in high income countries
of Europe and North America are open to charges of inconsistency (not treating similar
cases in a similar way), bias (favouring or disfavouring claimants on irrelevant grounds),
and unaccountability (not disclosing the procedures followed or the evidence used). lxxxv
When disability determination lacks transparency or seems to be a procedural ‘black box’,
it is impossible to know whether determinations are fair or arbitrary, based on
information or the product of whim or prejudice. When evidence is not documented, or
when it is not possible to compare the evidence used in one case with that used in
another, then the process comes under disrepute and soon loses legitimacy.

Standardization of process, procedure and evidence is the administrative solution to
challenges to legitimacy, and this is what the ICF can provide. Documentation of
information in the language of ICF not only provides comparability, it also secures
accountability. Transparent documentation of reasons for an assessment provides
claimants with the grounds for objecting to eligibility decisions they deemed unjustified;



                                                                                         44
it also provides the common grounds for adjudicating such complaints. As the ICF
constitutes the internationally accepted, scientific basis for describing the determinants
and outcomes of functioning, disability and health, independently of how that
information is used and by whom, its application to disability assessment can strengthen
the legitimacy of a disability assessment procedure.

ICF as a platform for assessment and measurement: Because it is an international
standard, the ICF is a solid basis for Functioning and Disability assessment
instrumentation. However, although the exhaustiveness of its classifications argues in
favour of the ICF as an international standard, it also makes it difficult to use in practice.
Fortunately, we know statistically that 20 percent of the codes in the ICF will explain 80
percent of the variance observed in practice. lxxxvi And this has led to the development of
the first generation of ICF-based tools – namely, the ICF Core Sets.lxxxvii Core sets are lists
of ICF categories relevant to a specific health condition or health assessment setting or
process that have been selected by a multi-method expert consensus strategy.
Comprehensive Core Sets are designed to be sufficient to describe a meaningfully wide
spectrum of typical problems a person with a particular health condition may experience,
while Brief Core Sets are designed to capture the minimally sufficient number of
categories to describe that experience.

To date, 34 ICF Core Sets have been developed using a standardized methodology,
including a context-specific ICF Core Set for vocational rehabilitation.lxxxviii In addition, a
Minimal Generic Set and a Disability Set have been psychometrically developed, in part
based on these Core Sets (See Annex 1).lxxxix The Minimal Generic Set includes seven ICF
categories relevant in both the clinical and general population, and is a subset of the
Disability Set with 32 categories relevant solely for clinical populations. These core sets
have been the basis for clinical documentation tools, and questionnaires specific to work
rehabilitation.xc A parallel process is being used by WHO and World Bank in the
development of their World Survey on Functioning and Disability (Model Disability
Survey, intended as a basic tool for collecting comprehensive data on Functioning,
Disability and Health across populations.xci Finally, the European Union of Medicine in
Assurance and Social Security (EUMASS) developed a generic ICF-CS of 20 categories for
social security evaluation developed from a formal voting procedure. xcii As a result, a
number of OECD and European Union Countries; including Sweden, Denmark, France,
Germany, the Netherlands, and others, have been moving towards adopting ICF into their
disability assessment systems.

It is important to mention these developments since they address some of the perceived
limitations of using ICF as a basic design structure for reforming disability assessment.

The experience of developed countries mentioned above shows that using the ICF is
feasible in high income countries where, in some instances, substantial steps have already
been made to include information about the environment for a more complete, Disability-
style, assessment. But for many countries of the world the gap between this reform and
current practice is simply too wide and it would be wholly unrealistic to expect the



                                                                                            45
country to take the risk of such a radical reform. What is needed to start the transition
are simple tools that can be easily implemented, even in low resource settings such as
Community Based Rehabilitation, for improved ICF-based disability assessment. This is
the potential role for the Core Sets and especially the Minimal Generic and Disability Sets.
These seven- and 32-item lists can be transformed into culturally and linguistically-
appropriate questionnaires that provid e an enhanced ‘snap shot’ for disability
assessment. Their use can be combined and or compliment the assessment of the health
status that is already in place for disability assessment. Although research has yet to be
done to demonstrate the validity and feasibility of using these transitional tools to reform,
what may well be highly unstructured and informal, disability assessment procedures in
low income countries, their use signals the beginning of the paradigm shift, giving the
opportunity to all parties concerned to see the value of the change and to get used to it.
At the same time their use helps address important obstacles to the employment of ICF
in disability assessment such as perceived complexity and intense human resources
demands.

ICF and the paradigm shift in disability assessment

The three general considerations just mentioned, important as they are for the legitimacy
and credibility, are fundamentally procedural and merely restate the obvious that the ICF
is an international standard produced by the United Nations specialty agency for health.
It is unlikely that a country debating whether to take substantial steps to reform their
disability assessment process would make the investment on these grounds alone. The
stronger argument is that the ICF, despite its limitations, represents the best available
expression of a shift in our understanding of disability that should be translated into
disability assessment procedures. The added-value of this reform can be expressed in
terms of the completeness of functioning profiling, the need for longitudinal profiling, and
the importance of taking into account the environmental determinants of disability.
Ultimately and in terms of work capacity assessment, it can be expressed as an effective
tool to maximize labor force participation of persons experiencing ill health.

Complete functioning profiling: Because of the social and economic demands made on
disability policy, disability assessment tends to be fundamentally negative: it is an attempt
to identify what the claimant cannot do, the problems in functioning that he or she has,
because of an underlying health condition. Similarly, work capacity determination has
historically focused on the job requirements an individual cannot be expected to perform,
because of an underlying health condition. Employment-relevant inabilities (as well as
their severity and the prospects for improvement) constitute the policy basis for eligibility
for benefits and services provided (in effect) as compensation for the unavailability of
employment.

Yet it is clinically obvious that work capacity as a matter of fact depends as much on a
person’s capacities or function ing assets as it does on his or her deficits. A more relevant
and valid assessment, and certainly one that has a wider range of policy applications,




                                                                                          46
would therefore be an assessment of both deficits and assets; that is, a complete
functioning profile.

The ICF is a classification of domains of Functioning and only derivatively a description of
problems of Functioning or Disabilities. Programmatically, in other words, ICF is a
standardized tool for describing a complete functioning profile—assets as well as deficits.
In the current state of the art, this potential has yet to be practically realized since the
tools for ICF-profiling are still being developed and it will likely be many years before the
rehabilitation professions will reach a consensus on which ICF-based tool is authoritative.
Realistically, however, given the variation in disability evaluation regimes worldwide, it is
unlikely that a single ICF-tool would be universally affirmed, or indeed would work
satisfactorily for all regimes.

This being the case, the ICF is an international standard classification, which entails that
it has a vital function as a linking tool that can harmonize data from different instruments
and documentation protocols.xciii Disability assessment in the context of disability
evaluation involves procedures shaped by a wide variety of cultural and social, economic
and political forces that, although comparable across countries, need not be compatible
between countries. Each country will need to craft its own instrumentation and
documentation tools and procedures. The ICF offers conceptual guidance, and its
classifications and coding structure make it possible to compare data across countries. As
yet, however, there are no ICF-based profiling tools to which a country can use to produce
more complete and appropriate functioning profiles.

Longitudinal profiling: Because of aging populations, unpredictable economic trends and
the need for policy flexibility, on the one hand, and technological advances and planning
strategies, such as universal design on the other, it is becoming clear that despite the
increased direct administrative costs of periodic review and reassessment, it makes more
sense to flexibly tailor pensions and income support mechanisms to changing
circumstances.xciv Especially for return to work policies and programs designed to fund
and provide vocational rehabilitation or related services, it makes more economic sense
to predict disability trajectories over time in order to flexibly respond to changing social
circumstances. There are two reasons why longitudinal profiling is advantageous:

   i) It is already commonplace in disability policy to distinguish between temporary
      and permanent health problems for benefit eligibility. Yet even with ‘permanent’
      or chronic health conditions —high blood pressure, arthritis, asthma, and heart
      disease—it is now possible to track different life course trajectories that will affect
      the individual’s future health and disabilit y status. Lifestyle changes—for good or
      ill—comorbidities, environmental changes, and other determinants may increase
      or decrease the slope of a chronic or progressively worsening health condition.
      Other chronic conditions may be episodic—as are some mental health problems—
      and it is important to be able to predict, and if possible prevent, these periods of
      worsening health. But, to have any prospect of predicting the trajectory of a
      person’s health, let alone changing the trajectory, it is essential to have a



                                                                                          47
       complete description of the individual’s Functioning status, and that means
       knowing both about a person’s deficits and his or her assets. With demographic
       ageing, moreover, it is becoming increasingly important to identify, and if possible,
       modify, ageing trajectories as individuals age into, or age with, chronic health
       conditions.xcv

   ii) In middle and high income countries, employment policy relies on the provision
       of vocational rehabilitation interventions to improve work capacity for return to
       work to avoid moving the individual into permanent disability pensioner status.
       But rehabilitation is not merely ‘fixing’ functional deficits , it is building on and
       enhancing functional assets. The prospects of a person returning to work after a
       spinal cord injury, for example, are greatly improved if we know that the individual
       has upper arm strength and flexibility, since these assets can be enhanced for
       wheelchair use to counteract the immobility caused by lower body paralysis. This
       underscores the importance of collecting information about both deficits and
       assets, but it points to the value of periodic assessment to more flexibly predict
       the fit between individual and employment requirements. xcvi

Role of environmental factors: The fundamental ICF distinction between capacity and
performance is helpful for conceptualizing the underlying difference between
Impairment and Functional Limitation strategies, on the one hand, and the Disability
strategy on the other. Essentially, Impairment and Functional Limitation approaches
make the assumption that information about a person’s capacity (for example, capacity
to work) tells us enough to predict his or her actual and future level of work performance.
Inferring work performance from work capacity is risky, since it assumes what is self-
evidently not true, that all aspects of the person’s work place environment, or changes to
that environment, have no impact on work performance.

In contrast, the ICF as the model for disability assessment not only lends itself to a
complete functioning profile that takes both deficits and assets into account, but also an
assessment of the positive and negative impact of environmental factors. To understand
the impact of the environment on work performance presumes both baseline
information —a current description of the workplace environment —and a description of
the impact of workplace alternations (structural, attitudinal or organizational) to the
workplace environment. This comparison is essentially an assessment of enhanced work
capacity in light of environmental modification.

Although the science is still in its infancy, and there are no reliable or generally acceptable
tools available, in principle environmental assessment is not a mysterious or impossible
activity. In the employment area, it is indeed standard procedure for vocational
rehabilitation therapists, assistive technologists, occupational therapists and vocational
counsellors. Part of their job is to find ways to match the environment to the individual’s
current or projected work capacity so that, together, the outcome is work performance.
Often this is a matter of finding and fitting assistive technology (AT)—either general AT
such as wheelchairs, brail readers, TTD communications, or workplace specific AT, such



                                                                                            48
as flexible tables and desks or enhanced lighting. Often too it is a matter of workplace
alterations, either physical or organizational.

How might the ICF affect the practice of disability assessment?

If we bring together these three contributions of using ICF to design disability
assessment—complete and longitudinal profiling and utilization of environmental
information —how might this affect the practice of assessment? Here are two examples:

Example One: A person who is blind would on most existing Impairment and Functional
Limitation assessment schemes be deemed 100-percent disabled, and in many regimes,
fully work incapable as well, so as to qualify for the full sum of income maintenance
and/or other benefits. Using the ICF approach, the outcome might be very different since
the ICF requires, and makes feasible, a complete longitudinal profile, augmented with
environmental assessment to take into account positive workplace assistive technology
and environmental modification to enhance work performance. This might result,
especially for a blind individual with a substantial marketable skill set, of an assessment
of complete, or near-complete work capacity—one structured with an employment plans
featuring the provision of appropriate AT or other environmental facilitators for support.

Arguably this result is not only more valid—since blindness, although a substantial deficit,
can be offset by countervailing assets —but also more equitable; it is unfair to deny the
blind individual the right to employment when with support employment is a genuine
possibility. For severe impairments such as blindness, the Impairment and Functional
Limitation strategies exaggerate the resulting work disability, denying society the valuable
employment contribution the person could make, and denying the individual his or her
human right to work.

This example should not be taken to imply that an ICF design will be more likely to or
more readily deny eligibility for disability benefits. It is possible that the number of
recipients might decrease, but only as a result of the creation of a broader range of
innovative and more effective work-related AT and more creative and effective workplace
environmental modifications, responding to the social need to develop a more productive
workforce and shift social resources from disability pensions to workplace
accommodations. These social shifts would naturally result when the disability
assessment procedure validly profiled the individual’s assets and functional decrements.
The objective of the Disability approach is not to deny benefits but to rationally allocate
them to those whose work disability cannot truly be enhanced through vocational
rehabilitation or environmental modification.

Example two: As we age we accumulate impairments, which taken one by one may only
be mild or moderate in severity: A person may need glasses to read, a hearing aid to follow
conversations in a crowded room, some sort of mobility aid such as a cane or walker for
developing arthritis (and medication for the joint pain) and he or she may be experiencing
minor memory loss. None of these impairments might be severe enough on its own to
substantially affect the outcome of a disability assessment. This would certainly be true


                                                                                         49
for a Baremas-like disability assessment system. To be sure, the experience of living with
a collection of mild or moderate impairments might well be inconsistent with keeping a
job. On the other hand, with adequate support, this set of health conditions may also be
fully manageable and consistent with keeping a job or acquiring a new job. The ICF based
disability assessment can capture the actual impact of the aggregate impairment severity,
in light of the full environmental context.

Recent developments in the analysis of ICF-based health and Functioning data have in fact
demonstrated the possibility of creating, statistically, metrics for functioning continua
that would turn this insight into hard science. Eventually it might be possible to develop
disability assessment tools that could aggregate impairment impacts on capacity in a
scientifically rigorous manner.xcvii Using this approach, it would be feasible, by means of a
complete Functioning profile, to accurately assess the impact of multiple, mild or
moderate, impairments, so as to yield a composite score that —taking into account the
current environment as well as what modifications or supports could be put into place —
more validly, and therefore more equitable, assesses work disability. Given the enormous
impact that aging demographics will have, especially in low income parts of the world,
strategies for more successful accommodating mild or moderate impairments will
become inevitable since the social cost of not doing so will be unimaginably high.

Current limitations in the usefulness of the ICF for reform

It is important not to paint an overly optimistic picture of the added value of using ICF as
a design structure for a reformed disability assessment – one that captures the Disability
approach described in Chapter 2. It first must be acknowledged that there has been a
fairly consistent opposition, especially among American researchers, to the ICF model,
including especially the presumed distinction between Activities and Participation
domains, the absence of a quality of life, and the undeveloped nature of the Contextual
Factors component.xcviii Some of this criticism reflects a basic objection to the move away
from the disability conceptualization, very influential in the United States, set out nearly
fifty years ago by Saad Z. Nagi.xcix But other criticism has, quite correctly, been levelled at
the crucial relationship between Environmental Factors and complex domains of Activity
& Participation such as employment. Much of the power of the interactive model
depends on this relationship, both its conceptual coherence and the ability to
operationalize it for measurement purposes.

The ICF model depends on this linkage, but does not provide enough theoretical power
to live up to the demands that, in use, a disability assessment procedure would require of
it. It is clear that both the performance construct and the conceptualization o f
Environmental Factors are intrinsically difficult to measure. c Although some early
attempts have been made to develop Environmental Factor instruments to measure the
impact of the built environment on mobility, ci this work is very preliminary and at this
point there are simply no tested and useable tools for identifying the key environmental
determinants of work performance, let along measuring this impact. The ICF itself may
partly be responsible for this since the Environmental Factors classification is, by any



                                                                                            50
standard, a wholly inadequate classification. Its organization is unintuitive, its
classification of the human built environment does not correlate with any classification
scheme found in architecture or city planning, it characterizes the entire social, political
and economic universe in terms of an unhelpful distinction between services, systems
and policies, and it so lacking in detail or granularity as to be of little use in concrete
applications, such as disability assessment.

As for Personal Factors, the ICF is problematic for a very different reason. As noted there
is no classification of Personal Factors in the ICF. One reason for this is that the ICF is
vague about what these factors are. All that is said is that they are features of the person,
other than health state, that include “gender, race, age, other health conditions, fitness,
lifestyle, habits, upbringing, coping styles, social background, education, profession, past
and current experience (past life events and concurrent events), overall behaviour
pattern and character style, individual psychological assets and other characteristics.” cii
This general collection of factors – some inherently social, like gender, others very close
to Body Functions – makes the application of Personal Factors for assessment of disability
dubious. More worrisome however, in part because of the vagueness of the notion, using
Personal Factors opens the door to the possibility of ascribing problems in work
performance, not to the lack of workplace accommodation or the need for environmental
modification, but to a personal failure of one sort or another. It is conceivable—although
certainly an unintended consequence of the application of the ICF to disability
assessment—that important employment policies designed to get people back to work
will be defeated on the moralistic ground that people lack the positive Personal Factors
required to successfully work. As an example of what is sometimes called ‘blaming the
victim’, this would be a very troubling and unintended result of relying on the ICF model.

All of these problems and limitations with the ICF are real enough, although at this
relatively early point in ICF implementation, it is not clear how much these issues should
offset the clear added-value of the ICF already described. Certainly, other than the ICF,
there is currently no alternative approach that has both international recognition and
widespread application, and combines the interactional model of disability with
international standardized classifications. The ICF is the ‘only game in town’. The most
reasonable option is undoubtedly to recognize both the strengths and weaknesses of the
ICF and set out a clear research agenda to respond to its current limitations, while moving
ahead with the implementation of the ICF aspects that are implementable and move
disability assessment towards the full functioning profile. While environment as a
facilitator and a barrier currently cannot be measured perfectly, it can be assessed
accurately enough, as has been done in the area of rehabilitation. Therefore, before
turning to this task in the next chapter, it is important to conclude with a final
consideration that strengthens the case for using the ICF for disability assessment.

ICF disability assessment and human rights

An ICF-based design framework for disability assessment is not only the best available
tool a country can use in order to design a procedure capturing the Disability approach to



                                                                                          51
assessment the ICF framework also has social and ethical significance that reaches far
beyond procedural and scientific adequacy.

The need for a complete—asset as well as deficit —profile and the requirement that
information about the potential impact of environmental adjustment on improved
performance be included in disability assessment, are considerations that are consistent
with the expression of human rights found in the United Nations’ CRPD.ciii The Convention
describes the importance of environmental modification and adjustment in a variety of
passages:

Article 2 specifies that states have general obligations,

       f.     To undertake or promote research and development of universally
       designed goods, services, equipment and facilities … which should require the
       minimum possible adaptation and the least cost to meet the specific needs of a
       person with disabilities, to promote their availability and use, and to promote
       universal design in the development of standards and guidelines;

       g.      To undertake or promote research and development of, and to promote
       the availability and use of new technologies, including information and
       communications technologies, mobility aids, devices and assistive technologies,
       suitable for persons with disabilities, giving priority to technologies at an
       affordable cost;

       h.      To provide accessible information to persons with disabilities about
       mobility aids, devices and assistive technologies, including new technologies, as
       well as other forms of assistance, support services and facilities;

       i.      To promote the training of professionals and staff working with persons
       with disabilities in the rights recognized in this Convention so as to better provide
       the assistance and services guaranteed by those rights.

Article 9 sets out the general state obligation of accessibility,

       1. To enable persons with disabilities to live independently and participate fully
          in all aspects of life, States Parties shall take appropriate measures to ensure
          to persons with disabilities access, on an equal basis with others, to the
          physical environment, to transportation, to information and communications,
          including information and communications technologies and systems, and to
          other facilities and services open or provided to the public, both in urban and
          in rural areas. These measures, which shall include the identification and
          elimination of obstacles and barriers to accessibility, shall apply to, inter alia:

       a. Buildings, roads, transportation and other indoor and outdoor facilities,
          including schools, housing, medical facilities and workplaces;




                                                                                          52
       b. Information, communications and other services, including electronic services
          and emergency services.

And Article 27 on work and employment states that

       1. States Parties recognize the right of persons with disabilities to work, on an
          equal basis with others; this includes the right to the opportunity to gain a
          living by work freely chosen or accepted in a labour market and work
          environment that is open, inclusive and accessible to persons with disabilities.
          States Parties shall safeguard and promote the realization of the right to work,
          including for those who acquire a disability during the course of employment,
          by taking appropriate steps…

These provisions underscore the importance that the international community has placed
on workplace accessibility as a precondition for ensuring that people with disabilities
enjoy the right to employment on an equal basis with others. The ICF model mirrors this
human rights perspective on state responsibilities with respect to disability policy. The
ICF in effect reinforces the message that a state’s disability policy must not only make
provision for the availability of health and social resources to improve capacity, i t must
also turn to the environment for supports and modifications for effective and equitable
ways to improve performance.

The ICF reinforces another important normative message, namely that a fair and
equitable disability assessment process would have as its outcome the equalization of
performance, to the extent feasible for a country, given its economic, political and social
context. Ensuring equality of capacity is not an option; that is, beyond human knowledge
and ingenuity, people will always be intrinsically different in the health conditions they
experience, their impairments and functional deficits and assets. People have different
Functioning profiles, in short, and there is only so much we can do medically and
therapeutically to ‘equalize’ human capacity in general or work capacity in particular.

Performance is a different matter. Although there are many practical reasons why
achieving equalized work performance is also beyond our grasp even in high income
countries, and can only be progressively realized in low income countries, nonetheless it
is not impossible anywhere in the world. All countries, whatever the level of resources,
can benefit from the removing of unnecessary obstacles to full participation by persons
with impairments. All countries can benefit from measures to ensure accessibility and
available of family and community life, health care, and education and employment. If
these goals are out of reach, then human rights set out in the Convention are also out of
reach. And that is not a conclusion that any country can be content with.

Conclusion

A design framework for disability assessment grounded in the model and classifications
of the ICF provides the basis for realizing the Disability approach to disability assessment.
There are strong procedural, conceptual and normative arguments for moving toward the



                                                                                          53
Disability strategy. The question remains whether the ICF can assist countries in achieving
this kind of policy reform. Does the ICF provide the conceptual and practical tools for
implementing the Disability strategy? It is of course granted that there can be no simple,
one-size-fits-all ICF template that a country could use ‘off the shel f’ to transform its
disability assessment and evaluation procedures into those that achieved, or were
transitional to the eventual achievement of the Disability approach. But there are good
reasons for being optimistic that, with increased research and enhancement of the ICF,
progress can indeed be made toward that end.




                                                                                        54
                                           Chapter 5
                                    The Way Forward

In Chapter 2, three model approaches to disability assessment were described— Impairment,
Functional Limitation and Disability. There is a general consensus in the academic literature that
the Disability approach is theoretically optimal: it seeks to directly assess disability status rather
than indirectly inferring disability from proxy assessment of impairments or functional capacity;
it is fully individualized and based on direct evidence both about the person and his or her
environment; and it captures the best model of disability about which, again, there is universal
consensus, in which disability is understood as a person-environment interactive outcome, rather
than an intrinsic feature of the person. Because of the strength and validity of the Disability
approach, several high income countries in North America and Europe have taken steps to
transition their disability assessment procedures beyond the Impairment and Functional
Limitation approaches towards the Disability approach. This is also happening in less resource-
rich countries as well; such as in Cyprus, Argentina, and Brazil.

Despite the academic consensus, there is considerable country-level resistance to transitioning to
the Disability approach. Some of this resistance is undoubtedly fuelled by vested interests of the
central stakeholders in disability evaluation procedures, including very powerful and influential
professional groups, such as physicians and other health professionals. Understandably as well,
responsible bureaucrats are unwilling to suggest radical reforms in a process that often has a high
political profile, especially when the advantages to the reform are not obvious and both the
transitional costs, and the cost of running a new process, are either difficult to predict or are likely
higher because of incremental investment cost than the status quo. However, in light of the
economic and political drivers for change described in the Introduction to this study, the
unsustainability of traditional disability programming and the need to maximize labor force
participation in many countries around the world, creates an opportunity for countries to take
political economy risks that reforming disability assessment processes may create.

As was discussed in Chapter 2, despite its substantial advantages, the Disability approach has an
undeniable disadvantage, and one that in its ideal form might raise the specter of increased
national costs of running the disability assessment regime. The Disability approach depends on
access to a body of environmental information—in the standard example of work capacity
assessment, this is primarily information about the workplace. In its ideal form, this is an
enormous body of information, ranging from description of work requirements and physical and
mental demands, to features of the physical environment—buildings, equipment, furniture, air
and sound quality—to co-workers, employers and clients. Further afield, there is environmental
information about general features of the labor market, the level of economic development of
the country, social attitudes, and employment legislation and so on. Taken in its ideal form, the
depth and breadth of this information poses a significant obstacle to the feasibility of the Disability
approach. However, as the experience of rehabilitation medicine shows, while ideal quantity and
quality of environmental information might be an ever expanding horizon, difficult to reach, there
is a reasonable amount of information that is needed and can be collected to enable sufficiently
accurate assessment of one’s environment.




                                                                                                     55
In Chapters 3 and 4, the case was made for using the World Health Organization’s International
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) as a guide for reforming disability
assessment, and in particular a design structure for an assessment process implementing the
Disability approach. The case for the added-value of using ICF in this fashion is complex and has
been discussed and need not be rehearsed here. But as that discussion made clear, the ICF itself
is not without its limitations, many of which bear directly on its usefulness for disability
assessment.

There are essential two major challenges that need to be address. First, it has been argued that
the advantages of the Disability approach are not restricted to middle and high income countries
but are reforms that any country, whatever its level of development, can benefit from. If so, then
certainly for low income countries, and possible for any country, transitional processes need to
be put into place to make the shift from an Impairment or Functional Limitation approach to a full
Disability approach. To borrow a notion from the human rights arena, in many settings, the
reform of disability assessment is only plausible if it is progressively realizable . Countries need to
be assured that there are stable, transitional reforms that can be put into place in a sequence and
at a pace that is practically feasible, given the country’s resources, political system, and social and
cultural context.

The second challenge is, as mentioned, addressing the potential burden of integrating information
about environmental factors for disability assessment. In the first instance, this is primarily a
technical concern of data collection and analysis. On the ICF model, environmental information is
relevant only with respect to the role of environmental factors as determinants of the kind and
extent of disability. This presumes the availability of information collection instruments—survey ,
questionnaires, and clinical reports—that frame this data appropriately with respect to a factor
role as facilitator or barrier. A companion concern is more theoretical, but nonetheless serious:
at what point can an assessor be assured that environmental data has been assembled that fully
accounts for the role of the environment as determinant of disability. Since there is, in theory, an
infinite body of environmental information to draw on, when do we know we have, not only what
is relevant, but what is sufficient for an informed judgment? This is the question of data
‘saturation’.

Both challenges stand in the way of reforming existing disability assessment procedures towards
the Disability approach. Although there are good reasons to turn to the ICF, both conceptually
and practically, as the basis for designing this reform, the ICF does not address, let alone solve
either challenge. This is not a criticism of the ICF—It was not designed, or intended, to address
these issues. But the existing limitations of the ICF that were reviewed in the previous chapter
further underscore the need for further substantial research to improve the applicability of the
ICF to important policy domains, such as disability assessment.

This Report contributes to a broad research agenda on opportunities for reforming disability
assessment, in the larger context of procedures of disability determination for social benefits,
services or protections that comprise a country’s disability policy. Specifically it set outs the
general case, first for transitioning from Impairment and Functional Limitation approaches to
assessment to the Disability approach and secondly for turning to the ICF as an overall design
structure for this transition. In short, this Report presents the case for an important paradigm
shift in how disability assessment should be performed. This shift reflects four fundamental ways
of rethinking of the nature of disability and therefore how disability assessment should be
accomplished:



                                                                                                    56
        ‘Etiological neutrality’ – this is a technical label for the fundamental difference between
        a standard medical; impairment or functional limitation approach to disability, in which
        specific diagnostic or etiological features of a health conditions are used to infer how that
        health state will be experienced in a person’s life ; and the disability approach that focuses,
        not merely on what can be learned from etiology, but most importantly on how best to
        describe the experiment fully in light both the underlying health state and the impact of
        the person’s environment.

        Environmental determinants of disability – the key to the interactive approach that ICF
        represents is that a full and accurate description of disability must take into account the
        environment determinants of disability, and how, in particular, these determinants effect
        the kind and severity of disability a person’s experiences.

        Disability as a continuous phenomenon – the interactive model presents the phenomena
        of disability as continuous rather than dichotomous. This means that disability is also a
        matter of ‘more or less’, rather than ‘presence or absence’. The policy consequences of
        this logical feature of the ICF are twofold: disability needs to be determined, not a priori
        in terms of some fixed scale but in terms of the needs and objectives of a specific policy;
        secondly, disability is a dynamic situation that will change over time, both as the individual
        health state and level of impairments change, and as the person’s environment changes.

        The complete disability profile – the most valid and intuitive profile of a person’s
        disability must take into account both decrements in functioning and functional assets.
        Both are required in order to determine the current disability state as well as its potential
        trajectory over time.

In light of these salient features of the Disability approach, and given the challenges to
implementation just reviewed, it is clear that there is much left to be done in order to make the
paradigm shift not only attractive to countries, but self-evidently feasible and cost-effective. We
end this Report, therefore, with more specific research suggestions to address these challenges.
This research agenda is the way forward.

Understanding the costs and benefits of disability assessment

The most powerful argument for changing policy is that the costs of the current approach do not
balance the benefits that are achieved. In the case of disability assessment there is an enormous
gap in our understanding of the costs of using the Impairment or Functional Limitation approaches
to determining eligibility for benefits, especially those benefits that are provided in lieu of
employment or return to work. How much does it cost a country to provide a disability pension
rather than invest in a person’s employability? What is the relationship between the costs of
changing the workplace environment rather than sidelining the potential worker with a disability
pension? What, in general, are personal and social costs of ignoring the potential of an individual
to work, given suitable supports? These research questions are not only fundamental to a
country’s decision to reform disability assessment, they are almost completely unexplored. More
specifically:



       Research needs to develop a suitable metric for measuring the components of the
        disability experience—the underlying health condition, the level of functioning in various



                                                                                                    57
        domains, a summary or aggregate level of functioning across all domains, and the range
        of environmental determinants: physical, human-built, attitudinal, interpersonal, social,
        cultural, and economic.

       Research is needed to calculate the full costs of existing disability assessment, taking in
        account not merely the direct costs of administration, but the long term indirect costs of
        removing individuals from the labor force, rather than investing in ways to retain them,
        as well as the full, short- and long-term benefits of reframing disability assessment
        towards the Disability approach.

       We need a more accurate and sensitive model of the notion of ‘interaction’ so that better
        predictions can be made about the impact of environmental change—linked to the
        radically different kinds of environmental factors (assistive technology, buildings,
        attitudes, cultural views, policies and laws) that can impact, positively or negatively, on
        the lived experience of disability.

       Research on the concept of human productivity, and its determinants, could help to
        determine how, with targeted individual or social interventions – either in public health
        or some other impactful sector, such as transportation or communications – the most
        effective use of human recourses can be achieved, in light of anticipated epidemiological
        and demographic trends.

       We need basic research to understand the ‘trajectories’ of different impairments across
        a lifespan and under different environmental conditions. This research would open the
        door to better preventative interventions both at the body level (pinpointing the best
        point in the development of a health condition or functional limitations at which
        interventions produce, over time, the best consequences in functioning) and
        environmentally (when should potential environmental barriers be addressed, across the
        employment sector, cost-effectively and with the best results in productively.

       Given the long tradition in vocational rehabilitation and related fields of analyzing the
        impact of functional limitations on, for example, work capacity, it would be equally useful
        to understand, with similar levels of precision, the impact of functional assets, over time,
        on work capacity. Research also needs to be done to methodologically aggregate
        information both about functioning deficits and assets to yield an overall profile of an
        individual’s functioning trajectory over time. Further research might allow us to disclose
        clear patterns that are common across health conditions.

Environmental Information

It is clear from the description of the Disability approach above that its feasibility depends on the
availability of information that is not typically collected as an input to disability assessment,
namely, information about the full environmental context in which the individual being assessed
lives and acts. Although there is a well-developed science and practice of collecting health
information—often about causes of death—only in recent years have the tools been developed
to collect information about functioning and the lived experience of health. But the science and
practice of collecting disability-relevant environmental information is not developed. The way
forward, therefore, depends on research such as the following:




                                                                                                  58
       Development of setting-specific classifications of environmental factors relevant to
        disability assessment.

       Development and validation of environmental assessment tools for workplace, home and
        community settings.

       Development and testing of ‘accessibility scales’ that can be used to rate workplace, home
        and communities environment with respect to representative disability classes, e.g.
        mobility, sensory, cognitive and mental health.

       Developing new methodologies for measuring the impact of specific environmental
        factors on work capacity.

Transition Framework

The point has been made several times that the Disability approach is not, nor should be thought
of, as a high income country luxury, a state of the art reform that are only achievable with very
high levels of resource. In many respects, the opposite is true, since low and middle income
countries may benefit more directly from the cost savings of avoiding high income country
disability assessment regimes (based primarily on Impairment or Functional Limitation
approaches) and moving directly from very informal assessment to some version of the Disability
approach. Merely putting into place a questionnaire based on the Minimum Generic Set of ICF
domains (see Annex 1) would be a relatively inexpensive way of moving beyond a purely medical
determination of disability. This said, for the transition to be feasible, low and medium income
countries need support to transition from the current disability assessment approach to one that
takes into account the full range of relevant information. Toward this end, the following research
will be important:

       Developing a complete comparative review of the legislative, administrative and
        procedural dimensions of disability assessment across the world and in particular low and
        middle income countries, including a review of country-level disability policies and
        programs that rely on disability determination, to supplement existing comparative
        analyses.

       Economic analysis of the costs of existing, informal disability assessment procedures —
        including assessor compensation, training, and documentation—from representative low
        and middle income countries.

       Case studies of successful reforms in disability assessment in low- and middle-income
        countries.

       Demonstration projects using questionnaires based on ICF minimal data sets—Core sets,
        Generic set, and Disability set—for information collection for disability assessment in low-
        and middle-income countries.




                                                                                                 59
Annexes




          60
      Annex 1: ICF Minimum Generic Set and Disability Set


Minimum Generic Set




                                                            61
Disability Setciv




                    62
63
64
         Annex 2: Examples of Disability Evaluation around the World

    To get a sense of the variety of different approaches to disability assessment and, more
    widely, disability evaluation, we provide these summaries of processes from a
    representative sample of high, medium and low resource countries. (Since disability
    policy is highly dynamic, and disability assessment particularly so, what follows should not
    be viewed as an accurate representation of the current situation in the country
    represented.)
     Country                                                        Disability assessment
                               Definition of disability                                            Assessors
 disability policy                                                        approach
USA                    “Inability to engage in any substantial     Mixed:                   SSA physicans and other
Social Security        gainful activity by reason of any           Impairment               health professionals
Disability Insurance   medically determinable physical or
                                                                   Functional Capacity
(SSDI)                 mental impairment which can be
                       expected to result in death or which        Disability (partial)
                       lasted or can be expected to last for a
                       continuous period of no less than 12
                       months”
                       “Inability to engage in substantial
                       fainful activity related to the inability
                       of the person to engage in his/her
                       own work activitiy or any other work
                       activity which exists in the national
                       economy and which the claimant is
                       capable of performing by virtue of
                       his/her work experience, age,
                       education and the residual capacity
                       (s)he retains to function physically
                       and mentally”
Disability Evaluation Procedure
   Evaluation of an applicant's substantial gainful activity.
   Documentation of the severity and duration of the disability.
   Evaluation of medical listings.
   Determination of whether the applicant can perform past work, based on assessment of his or her residual
    functional capacity, which is the maximum work-related abilities the applicant retains in spite of their physical
    and mental problems.
   Determination of whether the applicant can perform other work that is within his or her remaining physical
    and mental capacities.
   Evaluation of an applicant's substantial gainful activity.
   Has Medical Improvement occurred and is related to the ability to work.
   Determination of exceptions that occurred that demonstrate the client should no longer be considered
    disabled or never should have been considered disabled.
   Are the client’s impairment(s) severe? Does the applicant's disability cause work -related functional
    restrictions?
   Determination of whether the applicant can perform past work, based on assessment of their residual functional
    capacity.
   Determination of whether the applicant can perform other work that is within his or her remaining physical and
    mental health capacities.




                                                                                                             65
      Country                                                     Disability assessment
                               Definition of disability                                             Assessors
  Disability policy                                                     approach

INDIA                   "…’person with disability’ means a       Pure Impairment             Medical authority
Disability Status       person suffering from not less than      (modified Baremas)          (… any hospital or
Certification for all   forty per cent of any disability as                                  institution specified for
services and            certified by a medical authority.                                    the purposes
benefits                                                                                     certification by
                                                                                             notification by the
Persons with                                                                                 appropriate
Disabilities (Equal                                                                          Government”)
Opportunities,
Protection of Rights
and Full
Participation)
Rules, 1996


Disability Evaluation Procedure
   The minimum degree of disability should be 40% in order to be eligible for any concessions/benefits.
   … Authorities to give disability Certificate will be a Medical Board duly constituted by the Central and the State
    Government. The State government may constitute a Medical Board consisting of at least three members out
    of which at least one shall be a specialist in the particular field for assessing loco-motor and visual including
    low vision/hearing and speech disability, mental retardation and leprosy cured, as the case may be.
   Specified test as indicated in Annexure should be conducted by the medical board and recorded before a
    certificate is given.
   The certificate would be valid for a period of five years for those whose disability is temporary. For those who
    acquire permanent disability, the validity can be shown as 'Permanent'.
   The State Governments/UT Administrations may constitute the medical boards indicated in para 4 above
    immediately, if not done so far.
   The Director General of Health Services Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will be the final authority,
    should there arise any controversy/doubt regarding the interpretation of the
    definitions/classifications/evaluations tests etc.

Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment Guidelines No. 16-18/97-NI (“Guidelines for evaluation of various
disabilities and procedure for certification”)




                                                                                                              66
     Country                                                             Disability assessment
                                 Definition of disability                                              Assessors
 Disability policy                                                             approach
SWITZERLAND           “Work inability refers to a total or partial       Biomedical,             Physicians (including
Swiss Disability      inability to perform “appropriate” work in         impairment-oriented     neuropsychologists)
Insurance (IV)        the former field of occupation due to an           approach
                      impairment of the physical, mental or
                      psychological health. In case of long-term
                      inability to work the appropriateness of
                      employment in other fields of occupations is
                      being taken into consideration as well.”
                      ”Reduced earning incapacity is required for
                      disability [invalidity] and for being entitled
                      to disability benefits and reflects the total or
                      partial loss of the possibility of being
                      gainfully employed in the labor market due
                      to an impairment of the physical, mental or
                      psychological health and after the
                      completion of reasonable medical
                      treatments and work reintegration
                      measures. For the evaluation of earning
                      incapacity only the influences of
                      impairments [not of contextual factors]
                      should be considered. In addition, earning
                      incapacity should only be attested if it
                      cannot be overcome from an objective point
                      of view [i.e. treatment-resistance].”
                      “Disability [invalidity] refers to the
                      presumably permanent or long-lasting total
                      or partial earning incapacity.”
Disability Evaluation Procedure
  1. Claimant’s application for disability benefits at the Swiss Disability Insurance
  2. Evaluation of the applicant’s medical history based on available medical records
  3. Invitation of the applicant for the disability assessment performed by the (specialist) physician
  4. Documentation of the applicant’s socio -medical history based on self-reported data, i.e. occupational
      background (e.g. previous jobs), educational background, biographical background, medical history (e.g.
      duration of disability [is it long-term disability?], past interventions [were they unsuccessful?], severity of
      complaints), and current functioning in activities of the daily life
  5. Medical examination aiming at an objective assessment of the applicant’s physical or mental impairments,
      leading to the final medical diagnoses, and his or her functional capacity
  6. Determination of potentially influencing contextual (i.e. environmental and personal) factors
  7. Synthesis of socio-medical history and medical examination
  8. Determination of work (in)capacity in the former job as well as in a hypothetical job on the labor market adapted
      to the applicant’s disability; based on the applicant’s diagnoses and functional capacity and without taking into
      account potentially influencing environmental and personal factors
  9. Suggestion of a long-term prognosis with regard to the applicant’s disabilit y and proposal of vocational and
      medical measures to improve the applicant’s work capacity
  10. Decision on the applicant’s earning capacity by Swiss Disability Insurance, relying on the work capacity appraisal
       of the (specialist) physician
  11. Determination of the final degree of disability based on the degree of the applicant’s earning capacity
  12. Decision on type and amount of disability benefits based on the degree of the applicant’s disability and
      whether functional limitations are caused by the health condition or contextual factors.




                                                                                                              67
     Country                                                           Disability assessment
                                  Definition of disability                                            Assessors
 Disability policy                                                           approach

KENYA                   "A physical, sensory, mental or other          Informal with            Medical assessors from
                        impairment, including any visual, hearing,     impairment basis         government hospitals
Persons with            learning or physical incapability, whether
Disabilities Act        arising from natural or artificial causes,
(2003, amended          which is irreversible and long term and
2007)                   which impacts adversely on a person’s
                        capacity to participate in social, economic,
                        cultural or political activities”

Disability Evaluation Procedure
Based on questionnaire results:

    1) What is the nature of the disability?
         Albino
         Physical
         Mental
         Visual
         Hearing
         Epilepsy
         Blind
         deaf/using sign language
         deaf/able to talk normally
         other (specify)

    2) What is the major cause of the disability?
         By birth
         Accident
         Illness

    3) At what age?

    4) What is the severity of the disability?
         Severe
         Moderate

    5) What is the individual's disability condition when not using any type of assistive device?

    6) Which devices, if any, is the individual currently using?




                                                                                                            68
     Country                                                               Disability assessment
                                   Definition of disability                                               Assessors
 Disability policy                                                               approach
AFGHANISTAN             No official definition                             No explicit assessment   Unidentified
Comprehensive           “There is no standard terminology to               method is used           personnel at the
National Disability     describe different types of disabilities, levels                            MoLSAMD
Policy (2003)           of need and related terms in Afghanistan.
                        Different names are being
Afghanistan             used for persons with disabilities that are
National Disability     sometimes discriminatory or demeaning.”
Action Plan (2008)      Afghanistan National Disability Action Plan
                        2008-2011
                        Adoption of ICF by Ministry of Labour, Social
                        Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled -- MoLSAMD)
Disability Evaluation Procedure
     Persons with disabilities, registered with the MoLSAMD, receive welfare payments of 300 -500 Afghanis per
         month (about 6-10 USD) based on the degree of disability. People registering for pensions are referred to the
         MoPH for an assessment of the degree of disability.
     Persons with less than 60 percent disability receive 300 Afghanis per month.
     No payment is made to people with less than 35 percent disability. It is acknowledged that the allowance is
         too low to provide a basic standard of living
     Country                                                               Disability assessment
                                   Definition of disability                                               Assessors
 Disability policy                                                               approach
SOUTH AFRICA          "…those who cannot support or maintain               Informal, no method      Medical officer
Disability Grant      themselves financially or by some other              described                Social Assistance Act
                      means due to their daily functioning being                                    13 of 2004
(social assistance)
                      severely compromised as the result of a
                      health condition, causing limitations in their
Temporary incapacity ability to provide for their daily needs.”
and permanent (total “A person is … eligible for a disability grant, if
and Partial)          he or she:
incapacity
                      (a) has attained the prescribed age; and
(compensation of
                      (b) is, owing to a physical or mental
occupational Injuries
                      disability, unfit to obtain by virtue of any
and diseases)
                      service, employment or profession the
                      means needed to enable him or her to
                      provide for his or her maintenance.
Disability Evaluation Procedure
(a) he or she is a South African citizen, permanent resident or a refugee;
(b) the disability is confirmed by an assessment which indicates whether the disability is -
      (i) permanent, in that the disability will continue for a period of more than 12 months; or
      (ii) temporary, in that the disability will continue for a continuous period of not less than 6 months or for a
      continuous period of not more than 12 months as the case may be:
      Provided that the assessment must, at the date of the application, not be older than three months;
(c) he or she is unable to enter the open labor market or to support himself or herself in light of his or her skills and
ability to work;
(d) he or she does not unreasonably refuse to accept employment which is within his or her capabilities and from
which he or she can generate income to provide fully or partially for his or her maintenance; and
(e) he or she does not, without good reason, refuse to undergo the necessary medical or other treatment
recommended by a medical officer.




                                                                                                                69
      Country                                                          Disability assessment
                                  Definition of disability                                               Assessors
  Disability policy                                                          approach


NETHERLANDS            Vocationally handicapped (economic              Mixed: general              Specialised social
                       criteria)                                       medical condition,          insurance physicians
Disability Insurance
                                                                       plus ‘residual              and vocational experts
Scheme (WIA) 2006      “If an employee has lost at least 80% of
                                                                       functional capacities’      employed by Social
                       his/her salary and there is scarcely if any
                                                                                                   Insurance Institute
                       chance of recovery, the employee is then        “Disability is assessed
                       considered fully and permanently                by comparing the
                       occupationally incapacitated and will           wage the person
                       receive IVA benefits.”                          earned before the
                                                                       onset of disability to
                       “If an employee can earn more than 65% of
                                                                       the value of the labor
                       his/her former salary with generally
                                                                       he can still perform
                       accepted work (this includes work duties
                                                                       with his disability. This
                       other than his/her former work duties),
                                                                       means that there is no
                       he/she is then considered to be less than
                                                                       direct link between
                       35% occupationally incapacitated and is not
                                                                       the severity of disease
                       entitled to receive WIA benefits”
                                                                       or impairment and the
                                                                       level of disability. The
                                                                       disability assessment,
                                                                       therefore, is not a
                                                                       mere medical affair,
                                                                       but the result of a
                                                                       combined assessment
                                                                       by a medical doctor
                                                                       and a labor expert.”
                                                                       Ad Bockting, Inclusion
                                                                       in working Life ISSA
                                                                       European meeting,
                                                                       Oslo


Disability Evaluation Procedure
     Initial determination based on medical determination by Social Insurance Institute physicians.
     Two year period begins, paid by employer who develops work reintegration plan.
     If plan fails, social insurance doctor judges general medical condition; if medical status allows (the
         complainant is not bedridden or under treatment), an inventory of such capacities is made, to determine
         whether claimant has residual capacity to function in paid employment.
     For those with residual capacities, the vocational expert uses an algorithm representing Dutch labor market
         (based on a catalogue of jobs and their physical and mental requirements) to determine if claimants residual
         functional capacities fits with a list of jobs that are commensurat e with the claimant’s capacities, and their
         wage rates.
     The vocational expert uses this list to assess one’s residual earning capacity. Whether there are any vacancies
         among those commensurate jobs is irrelevant.




                                                                                                              70
      Country                                                             Disability assessment
                                   Definition of disability                                             Assessors
  Disability policy                                                             approach

CHINA
All policy under the    "A restriction or lack, resulting from an         No specific approach    Physicians and other
Law of the People’s     impairment, of ability to perform an              or methodology          experts appointed by
Republic of China on    activity in the manner or within the range        officially described    State Council (China’s
the Protection of       considered normal for a human being                                       cabinet of the central
Persons with            within his or her social context."                                        government)
Disabilities (adopted
1990, revised in        "A physical, mental, or sensory impairment,
2008)                   whether permanent or temporary, that
                        limits the capacity to perform one or more
                        essential activities"

                        A disabled person refers to a person who
                        suffers from the loss or abnormity of a
                        certain organ or function, psychologically,
                        physiologically or in human structure, and
                        has lost all or in part the ability to normally
                        carry out certain activities. Disabled
                        persons include persons with visual, aural,
                        speech and physical disabilities, mental
                        retardation, mental disorder, multiple
                        disabilities, etc.


Disability Evaluation Procedure
No explicit procedure officially described




                                                                                                              71
Annex 3: Case Example: Applying the ICF to Disability Assessment:
  A Practical Case Study Based on the Experience of Greece and
                             Cyprus
                                 Stathis Triantafillou, Psychologist

 Coordinator of the ICF Hellenic Team, Advisor to the Ministry of Labor, Welfare and Insurance,
                       Cyprus Republic and External Collaborator of WHO

 ICF Hellenic Team: Venos Mavreas, Psychiatrist; Marianna Papadopoulou, Neurologist; Yannis
 Michopoulos, Psychiatrist; Kostas Francis, Child psychiatrist; Artemis Drosou, Physiotherapist;
     Andreas Karystinos, Psychologist; Sophia Koukouvinou, Psychologist; George Filippou,
                                    Occupational Therapist

 In Collaboration with the Department for Social Inclusion of Persons with disabilities in Cyprus:
                 Christina Flourentzou, Director and Maria Ioannou, Psychologist

    A note of caution: This is a practical example of the application of the ICF to disability
assessment based on the experience of Cyprus. It is not meant as and it cannot be a blueprint,
               because the application has to be customized for each country.



Introduction

The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) was approved
unanimously by the WHO World Health Assembly in 2001. Since 2004, the Greek and Cypriot
editions of the ICF have been developed, as well as a number of implementation tools to facilitate
the adoption of the ICF into the design and implementation of disability policies in both Greece
and Cyprus.

The ICF provides a consensus on the modern understanding of disability. It sees disability as
interactional: the result of interaction between a person with a health condition and her or his
environment. This is the definition embraced as well by the UN CRPD (2006). Operationalization
of the ICF approach and its adoption as a guiding principle in the design and implementation of
disability policies entails its application in the assessment and evaluation of disability.

This practical example of using the ICF in disability assessment is based on experience gathered in
Cyprus. The experience teaches us that the reform of the disability assessment system (DAS) is:
(i)institutional, because it reforms a public institution that performs an important public function;
(ii) administrative, because it requires an appropriate administrative body with rules, roles and
controls and human resources; (iii) technical, because it requires the development of technical
criteria; and (v) political, because it involves diverse stakeholders, whose interests might not be
in favor of reforming the existing system. This combination makes reform of disability assessment
both complex and complicated, yet feasible, as the case of Cyprus shows.

Since 2004, the work of the Hellenic ICF team in Cyprus has involved the dissemination and
implementation of ICF. One of the aims of the engagement has been to reform disability
assessment system and to develop a mechanism for utilizing its results in order to assign state
provisions. The initial situation regarding disability assessment in Cyprus was characterized by the



                                                                                                  72
absence of clinical and functional assessment, absence of assessment protocols, a dominant “file
assessment” based approach, short duration contact with the individuals to be assessed,
quantitative results based on percentage system or based exclusively on medical criteria and
assessment, absence of assessment tools and infrastructure and above all lack of objectivity and
fraud. Furthermore, the implementation of the proposed ICF approach has encountered obstacles
from state officials, health professionals and organizations of people with disabilities who have
little information and understanding of the ICF. The team was confronted with many tasks in
order to implement ICF and quite few times had to convince stakeholders of the value of the
“wheel” or to propose “new wheels”.

The experiences from the countries reveal the great effort involved in disseminating and
implementing ICF into the process of disability assessment. The ultimate goal of this effort was
the establishment of a clinical and functional assessment for disability, an assessment based on
ICF principles and tools and a continuous initiation of health professionals, state officials and
disabled into the system.

This document incorporates our experiences with the nuts and bolts of the reform of the DAS,
and should be read keeping in mind that each country is different, with different institutional
set ups and morbidity patterns and that, therefore, the nuts and bolts need to be customized.
The basic ingredients are, however, the same: an administrative house that is well equipped
and staffed, well-established clinical and functional assessment process, assessment protocols
and tools, and transparent procedures, quality control and appropriate grievance redress
mechanisms.


The Case of Cyprus

The project was planned in 2007 and launched in 2009 and its main target was the reformation
of the disability assessment system that governs the distribution of state provisions. The project
was financed by the European Social Fund and was managed by the Hellenic ICF Team under the
umbrella of the Ministry of Labor, Welfare and Social Insurance.

The objective of the project was to identify and assess, based on a systematic and scientifically
justified methodology, the disability of an individual and, optionally, his or her functioning. Also,
it aimed to document suggestions for appropriate interventions that could support and enhance
the person’s social inclusion. By applying the scientific basis of the WHO’s ICF, and by using
specially designed assessment protocols, the certification of disability came to be based on a more
scientific, reliable and objective basis, treating people with disabilities with respect and dignity,
serving the public services with professionalism and upgrading the knowledge for all types of
disability: motor, sensory, intellectual and mental.

According to Article 26 of the United Nations CRPD, programs and services for the integration and
rehabilitation of persons with disabilities in all areas of life must be based on a multidisciplinary
assessment.

The Disability Assessment Center is a new point of reference for disability in Cyprus. It provides
the infrastructure where assessments take place and is located in the Department for Social
Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Latsia, Nicosia. The Center’s operatio n began in December
2013 offering modern and accessible facilities and equipment, a reputable scientific background
with the assessment protocols and the implementation guidebooks for the assessment



                                                                                                  73
mechanism and with a network of medical doctors and rehabilitation professionals trained
specifically on the use of the ICF as assessors and cooperating with the Department on a purchase
of services basis. Persons with disabilities are referred to the Assessment Centre from different
services of the Ministry of Labor, Welfare and Social Insurance, where they submit applications
for social benefits and services.

These individuals have the opportunity to choose whether they wish to be assessed only on their
disability or to be assessed in terms of their disability and functioning.

Assessment of the health status and impairment (in local language “the assessment of
disability”). This is carried out by a team of two or three doctors with specialties directly related
to the disability the person may be facing. Its aim is to identify, describe and certify the existence,
type and degree of disability and to advise whether the person meets the criteria and conditions
of the law and schemes for social benefits and services offered by the state, according to their
disability status.

Assessment of functioning. If the person chooses to have functioning assessed as well, the
second phase of assessment is carried out immediately after the disability assessment by a group
of two or three rehabilitation professionals (physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech
therapist, psychologist), depending on the type of disability of the individual. The objective of the
assessment of functioning is to identify, describe and certify the constraints the individuals may
be facing in everyday life and the necessary interventions needed to reduce these constraints.

These interventions do not necessarily match the economic benefits, but involve the types of
treatment or services needed by the individual or the need for specialized assistive devices such
as wheelchairs or other aids. The interventions may also relate to education, training and
employment, so that the individual can enjoy an increased quality of life and a more active
participation in social inclusion.

Complete assessment report of disability. Individuals receive a Complete Assessment Report of
Disability and a Disability Card after the assessment, which authorizes them to receive social
benefits and services that they are entitled to as offered in the public sector.

The following is an institutional description of some of the agencies, procedures and tools that
were used to develop an ICF-based disability assessment system in Cyprus.


The Evaluation Centre for Disability Assessment

Required procedures and tools

For the fulfillment of users’ needs the Evaluation Center for Disability Assessment (ECDA) was created
to develop procedures for

       conducting assessments;
       submitting qualitative reports for the support of the assessment procedures for information
        and dissemination to users; and
       transferring the assessment results, in the form of a holistic report to the Institutional
        coordinating Structure (ICS).




                                                                                                    74
The ICS should undertake the management and retrieval of the results and the distribution of state’s
provisions. The ICS is the appropriate legal entity and can coordinate the operation of the numerous
Evaluation centers.

                                 Services and Procedures of ECDA


                 Services
                                                                   Procedures


            Running and completing                             Operation of assessment
                assessments                                          mechanism



           Following up indicators                            Assigning results to ICS



         Proposals for improvement of                          Submission of qualitative
            Assessment mechanism                                      reports




Analytically, for the execution of the above procedures, the following are required:

       completing the stages of holistic assessment;
       completing the final reporting;
       sending and assigning the final reporting to ICS;
       continuous application and study of the assessment mechanism in order to submit correctional
        interventions on its procedures;
       following up on the attitudes about and participation in the procedures;
       preparing a proposal for the improvement of assessment mechanism; and
       participating and supporting initiatives to secure benefits to the user.




                                                                                            75
                                 Analysis of ECDA Procedures

                                         ANALYSIS OF ECDA
                                           PROCEDURES

                                                               Completing the stages of assessment
                                                                           mechanism


          Operation of assessment                                Completing the final reporting
                mechanism
                                                                  Assigning the final report to ICS



                                                            Following up and receiving contribution from
                                                                             the users
           Assigning results to ICS
                                                                 Proposals for the improvement of
                                                                     assessment mechanism




                                                            Disseminating and improving the operation
             Qualitative reporting                                          of ECDA




Principles of the operational structure of the ECDA

The operational planning of the ECDA, which will be an integral structure of the ICS, should take into
consideration the following:

       Facts and findings (reports and discussions) which emerge from the period of project’s
        development and guide the operation of assessment centers and the implementation of
        assessment mechanism of ICF.
       Their role and obligations to ICS.
       Their everyday work with the vulnerable groups and their level of satisfaction to the new
        system.
       Restrictions which set objective parameters in the operation of the center.

Analytically, the most important milestones of the operational structure that should be accurately
designed are the following:

       Basic group operations - activities
       Suggested operational structure
       Staffing
       Needs of Training
       Work flow and related documentation



                                                                                                      76
       Description of work areas
       Areas of specification
       Description of work places
       Infrastructure and Equipment
       Conjunction mechanism with IT

Specifically, the involved staff should

       Be qualified in order to execute qualitatively the mission of ECDA, i.e. the application of
        harmonized assessment mechanism that addresses the stages of file preparation, actual
        assessment and completion of the file;
       Use the computer system in order to store data to be transferred to ICS.

The basic criteria used to design the ECDA operational structure are specific and general:

The specific criteria include

       Harmonization with the strategic goals of ICS
       Execution of the planned procedures
       Operation of assessment mechanism
       Flexibility and attainment of cost reduction

The general criteria include

       Minimum number of administrative levels
       Optimal control through immediate reporting
       Greater clarity on the roles and responsibilities
       Collaboration of staff (assessment’s interdisciplinary team and administrative staff) in order to
        minimize delays in the execution of procedures
       Grouping of homogeneous activities
       Focusing on the level of satisfaction for staff and users

Additionally, the restrictions that should be taking into consideration include

       The number of the persons involved who are affected by the changes
       The minimum possible cost of the whole effort
       How to assess and mitigate the reactions to the coming changes

On the basis of the operational principle for staffing, there is a need to correlate the group operation
with the required skills.




                                                                                                77
Basic Group Operations

                                        Operational groups
  Group                                           Basic Skills (Grade *)
  Technical                                       Communication with users (2)
                                                  Dealing with users (4)
                                                  Disability policies (3)
                                                  Knowledge of disability (4)
                                                  Knowledge and use of IT (3)
                                                  Languages (2)
                                                  Overall behavior (4)
  Administrative                                  Disability policies (4)
                                                  Dealing with users (4)
                                                  Knowledge and use of IT (4)
                                                  Over all behavior (4)
  Supportive                                      Disability policies (3)
  Network of external evaluators                  Knowledge of the new assessment (4)
                                                  Disability policies (4)
                                                  Knowledge and use of IT (3)
                                                  Overall behavior (4)

Suggested Operational Structure

The organization of the above-mentioned staff, on the basis of the operational principles for staffing,
leads to the determination of the most suitable structure of the ECDA.

The ECDA centers are affiliated administratively to the responsible ICS. Each ECDA incorporates three
organic units.

Α) Technical

This unit consists of medical staff and rehabilitators and is responsible for:

       The assessment process
       Collaboration of the interdisciplinary team
       The final reporting
       The communication with the assessed
       The research and the needs of training
       The submission of proposals for improvement

Β) Administrative

This unit is responsible for the administrative and the managerial operation of the center:

       The management
       The operation
       The follow up
       The communication




                                                                                               78
C) Supportive

This unit is responsible to support further the operation of the center.

D) Network of external evaluators

This Unit supports the technical staff of the center and is called upon request.

With the above described operational structure we believe that ICS will operate efficiently providing
the necessary work and focusing on:

       The essential evaluation of disability
       The sufficient allocation of roles for the best results and direct decision making
       The clear differentiation of roles and responsibilities
       The best provision of services

The needs for technical, administrative and supportive staff are related to the support needed for every
day operation. An analytic description is provided in order to record the real needs in relation to the
nature of their work due to their

       Basic personal work
       Internal common work (interdisciplinary team)
       Supportive work outside of the center



Staff requirements

                                           ECDA STAFF

                                  WORK PLACES                   STAFF Number

 Technical              Social Worker                                 1
                        Medical Doctors                               3
                        Rehabilitators                                3
 ADMINISTRATIVE         Executive                                     1
                        Secretary                                     1
 SUPPORTIVE             Nurse                                         1
                        Driver                                        1
                        Janitor                                       1
                        Total                                         12


Assessment mechanisms

Stages of the assessment mechanism

Analytically, the work flow of the assessment mechanism is based on and executed in three
stages, where professional staff and related documents are involved at each stage. These three
stages are:




                                                                                               79
      Preparation of the Evaluation File
      The evaluation of Medical and Functional Assessment
      The completion of the evaluation procedure

STAGE 1: Preparation of the Evaluation File

      The process begins with the reception of the individual’s application in the evaluation
       center where the file receives a unique number or a code from the National Registry Base
       and the file is referred to the director of the disability assessment center.
      The director of the evaluation center assigns the file to a specific social worker who acts
       as the case manager during the preparation and evaluation procedures.
      The assigned social worker is responsible for the flow of the file and the communication
       with the individual. The social worker contacts the individual and informs him or her that
       the social worker is responsible for the application and case in general. Furthermore the
       social worker informs the applicant that they should meet (at the center or at the
       applicant’s home or by phone) to complete the general information questionnaire.
      The social worker informs the applicant by phone or letter that in order for the file to be
       complete for the evaluation, the applicant must submit to the center information and
       documentation of any past exams or evaluations from the applicant’s physicians,
       therapists, or hospitals. Even though it is the applicant’s responsibility to collect and
       provide all the evaluation and medical reports to the center, the social worker should
       assist the applicant during this process.
      The social worker checks the file for completeness writes the report and proposes to the
       director of the evaluation center an advocate physician and rehabilitation therapist.
      The director of the evaluation center assembles the files for evaluation based on the
       nature of the health condition, assigns an advocate physician and advocate rehabilitation
       therapist for every file and a meeting date is set to discuss each file and the assignment
       of the appropriate evaluating physician and rehabilitation therapist. During this task the
       weekly and monthly program of evaluations is set in order to have the most optimal
       management of time.
      The social worker informs the advocate physician and advocate therapist about the
       content of the file, asks for any further information or documentation if missing,
       composes the ICF vignette and chooses the appropriate protocol.

      The social worker reviews the completeness of the file and informs the applicant and
       the evaluators (physicians and therapists) of the date and time of the evaluation.

STAGE 2: Medical and Functional Assessment

      During this task and specifically at the evaluation date the social worker assigns the file to
       the advocate physician and the other two assigned physicians and they review the file,
       the ICF based vignette and the focused protocol (if needed they add any necessary codes
       in the protocol). The social worker welcomes the individual and informs him or her about
       the procedures and actions that will take place during the day and that the social worker
       will assist during the whole evaluation.
      The social worker escorts the individual into the physicians’ evaluating room and the
       evaluation of disability begins. All three assigned physicians perform the appropriate
       clinical examination with the appropriate tools and methods. The advocate physician with




                                                                                                  80
       the consensus of the other two physicians fills out the protocol with the appropriate
       qualifiers and completes conclusive report results (the section that is predetermined for
       the physicians). Afterwards the social worker confirms that all actions and results of the
       evaluation are suitably and correctly filled.
      The social worker forwards the file to the rehabilitation evaluation room where the
       advocate therapist and the other therapists review the file, the ICF based vignette, the
       results of the physicians protocol and the rehabilitation focused protocol (if needed they
       add any necessary codes in the protocol).
      The social worker escorts the individual and the file to the rehabilitation evaluating room
       and the evaluation of functionality begins. The rehabilitation therapists perform the
       clinical examination with the appropriate tools and methods. During the evaluation the
       advocate therapist, with the consensus of the others, fills out the protocol with the
       appropriate qualifiers and the complete conclusive report results (the section that is
       predetermined for the therapists). Again, the social worker confirms that all actions and
       results of the evaluation are suitably and correctly filled.
      The social worker informs the individual that the evaluation process is complete. The copy
       of the complete conclusive evaluation report is given to the individual and is explained to
       the individual. If required, reevaluation dates are set and the individual is given the option
       to submit an objection within the period of 30 working days.

STAGE 3: Completion and Validation of the Evaluation

      The completed file is forwarded to the director of the ICS (Institutional Coordinating
       Structure) by the social worker. There the relevant committee inspects the file, the
       process of the evaluation as well as the results, and assigns the degree of disability and
       determines the state provisions.
      The secretary of the ICS sends an electronic copy of the individual’s results to the IT data
       base and a letter to the assessed person that provide him or her a sufficient time to appeal
       the outcome. In the case of no appeal the ICS itself or the relevant units then proceed to
       provide the determined benefits.




                                                                                                  81
                             ASSESSMENT MECHANISM


                             Application for assessment with the required
                                            documentation

PREPARATORY STAGE
                               Receiving the application and number for
                                        National Registration


    Secretary                Completing holistic           Typical control of
                               questionnaire                file’s readiness


                             Searching for additional information from
                           Medical institutions, doctors and rehabilitators


  Social worker
                                            Reading the File

                            Searching for additional information if needed

Responsible MD & Rehab      Writing vignette and selecting focused Protocol

ASSESSMENT STAGE


                           Clinical assessment, completion of protocol and
                                         writing of final report
Disability Assessment
   MD Committee

                            Functional assessment, completion of protocol
                                     and writing of final report
Functionality Assessment
   REHAB Committee
COMPLETION STAGE

                           Electronic registration of the Results and sending
                                        to ICS national registry
   Social Worker
 APPEAL REASSESSMENT

                             Specific appeal to the ICS not accepting final
                                                 result



                                                                                82
Work document and flow

The staff requirements correspond to the basic structure of ECDA. The work to be done determines the
quality and quantity of the provided services and the expertise of the administrative, scientific and
supportive personal.

Methodology of the assessment mechanism of ECDA:

The assessment mechanism determines the quality and quantity of the work to be done, specifically
the tasks of the Assessment mechanism (Preparation stage, Organization of file, Assessment stage,
Execution of assessment and Completion stage, Decision making).

The three stages determine with precision the work flow of every day and provide data for the duration
of the administrative, scientific and supportive work as well as the amount and flow of the
documentation required, as well as any other work that is needed.

Mechanism for correlating determination with degree of disability

Establishing a channel between ECDA and ICS

The ICF assessment involves the clinical and functional assessments with the completion of
protocols and leads to a holistic report that provides valuable and precise scores using the ICF
qualifiers. The ICF protocol is divided into four sections: body structures, body functions, activity
and participation, and environmental factors, and qualifiers are provided for each section. Every
person assessed is scored for the extent of the difficulties on body functions and structures and
restrictions in functioning in daily activities, school, and work and in life in general. In relation to
his or her disability, assessors focus on components and codes of the protocol that are related to
the health condition of the person.

After merging the qualifier scores for body structures and body functions, the assessors produce
a Final Qualifier for the Medical condition. Similarly, after merging the scores for activity and
participation and the environmental factors, the assessors produce a Final Qualifier for Functional
work restriction.

A Final Qualifier is assigned for each part of the protocol and utilizes vignette knowledge and the
actual assessment’s scoring on codes relevant to the disability assessed.

The final qualifiers, one for the medical assessment (medical qualifier) the other the functional
status (social restrictions) are the prerequisites for defining the Dominant Qualifier (DQ).

The Dominant Qualifier is the overall scoring of all the components of the protocol and so the
final assessment of disability.

The decision regarding the dominant qualifier is made by the assessment committee within the
Assessment Unit, since it requires complete knowledge of the assessed person and its decision is
based on the clinical and functional profiles.

The dominant qualifier is transferred to the ICS which checks the assessment criteria in
conjunction with the Dominant Qualifiers and Degrees to be assigned according to Final qualifiers
provided for the Medical condition and Functional work restriction.



                                                                                                     83
The Dominant Qualifier received by the ICS is correlated with the appropriate degree of disability.
At present, most systems for disability assessment using a complete assessment of functioning
based on the ICF use the following terminology for degree of Disability (appropriate to both adults
and children):

        1. Mild degree of disability for cases where impairments are minimal and there is a slight
        limitation of activity that requires no special protection measures and social participation
        is reasonable.
        2. Moderate degree of disability for cases of reduced physical or low intellectual capacity
        leading to activity limitations, relative to age-appropriate expectations. These limitations
        result in a relatively significant restriction of social participation.
        3. High degree of disability for cases of the inability to function according to social roles
        appropriate to development and age, due to important functional limitations (motor,
        sensory, neuropsychiatric or metabolic), resulting from severe health conditions, in
        advanced stages with organ system complications. In this situation social participation is
        substantially restricted.
        4. Severe degree of disability for cases of those who, relative to age and stage of
        development, have no ability for self-care and a high degree of physical and psychological
        dependence. In this case the autonomy of the individual is very low due to severe
        limitation in activity, which leads to multiple restrictions in social participation. As a result,
        a person requires special care and constant supervision from another person.

On the other hand, many countries use three categories of work related disability based on the
assessment of medical condition/ impairment:

        1. Degree III: characterized by loss of at least half working capacity and so being able
        to carry out a professional activity (corresponding to the capacity to work more than
        half of the regular work time).
        2. Degree II: characterized by total loss of working capacity, but presence of self-
        care capacity.
        3. Degree I: characterized by total loss of working capacity and self-care capacity.

It is possible to link these two groups of designations to the ICF scale used for the severity
qualifiers for Body Functions and Structures and Activities and Participation:

ICF Medical Assessment
0 NO PROBLEM                         (none , absent, not significant,…)                 0-4%
1 MILD PROBLEM                       (light,…)                                          5-24%
2 MODERATE PROBLEM                   (medium, enough…)                                  25-49%
3 PRONOUNCED PROBLEM                 (high, extreme,…)                                  50-95%
4 SEVERE PROBLEM                     (total,…)                                          96-100%

ICF Functional Assessment

0 NO RESTRICTIONS                    (none , absent, not significant,…)                 0-4%
1 MILD RESTRICTIONS                  (light,…)                                          5-24%
2 MODERATE RESTRICTIONS              (medium, enough…)                                  25-49%
3 PRONOUNCED RESTRICTION             (high, extreme,…)                                  50-95%
4 SEVERE RESTRICTIONS                (total,…)                                          96-100%


                                                                                                       84
The role of the ICS, therefore, once it receives the Dominant Qualifier from the ECDA, is to inspect
the status of the file and correlate the result with the relative degree. In case of the Medical
Assessment the correlation of ICF and the two sectors are as follows:

          ICF DQ       DISABILITY                   INVALIDITY
          1            MILD
          2            MODERATE                     III
          3            PRONOUNCED                   II
          4            SEVERE                       I

Tools of Implementation

The full implementation of ICF into Cyprus’ disability determination process required the
development of a collection of tools: administrative, systems, and training. The administrative
tool includes the medical documentation and system and scientific reports; the system’s tools are
those based on the ICF classification; and the training tools include the training packages and
guides. In detail:

     Administrative Documentation
        Referral Application form for assessment
        General Information Questionnaire
        Social worker’s Report
        Report of Treating Physician
        Report of Rehabilitation Therapist
        Usual Documentation
           ID Certification
           Required recent medical examinations
           Notification Letter for the assessed

     System’s Tools
         Vignette
         Focused protocols for disability in adults and children
         Social History-Vignette
         Open medical and functional protocol
         Medical and Functional reports
         Final (Holistic) Report
        Training Tools
         ICF Assessors Guide
         ICF Trainers Guide
         ICF Assessor’s Training Package
         ICF Training of Trainers Package
         Supplementary training Material



The Focused Protocol was the primary tool to integrate I CF into the assessment system. The
protocol was used to compile the individual’s complete functional profile. The term “focused
protocols” was used to describe the set of codes relevant to certain type of disability. In the case

                                                                                                 85
 of a psychiatric health condition, for example, the corresponding protocol contains all the codes
 of Chapter 1 of body functions (B1. Mental functions), while the rest of the chapters were included
 only as headings. Obviously, a psychiatric patient may also have another health problem, diabetes
 mellitus for example. In that case, more codes that are not contained in the specific protocol are
 added as there is space provided for additional codes at the end of each protocol section.

 The development of focused protocols was based on the type of disability and not on the type of
 disease in order to keep a safe distance from medically assessment. The rationale for definition
 of the type of disability was based on the usual groups of people with disability who claim social
 benefits and social care from the state following the assessment of their needs. So, five types of
 disability were used and corresponding protocols were developed: the physical disability
 protocol, the psychiatric disability, the mental disability, the hearing disability, the visual
 disability and the global protocol for cases that cannot be assigned to any of the previous
 categories. These five disability areas are the most common internationally.

 In the case of medical assessment, twenty more focused protocols were structured for the work
 capacity assessment related to the following diseases: hearing problems, amputation, dementia,
 autism, spinal lesions (paraplegia, tetraplegia), cerebrum lesions (stroke, tumors, injury), epilepsy,
 neurological conditions (polyneuropathy, myopathy), orthopedic conditions, mental retardation,
 hematological diseases, vascular diseases – peripheral arteriopathy, Parkinson disease,
 ophthalmological problems, rheumatoid Arthritis, multiple sclerosis, coronary diseases,
 obstructive pulmonary disease, renal disease (failure) and psychiatric disorders.

 The training tools were essential for the process of changing the disability assessment system.
 Two guides were required. The first was the ICF Assessor’s Guide with two parts: one with the
 basics of the ICF and a second part presenting the main tools used to implement ICF in Cyprus,
 namely the focused protocols and guidelines for medical and rehabilitative professionals for
 evaluating disability, both medically and functionally. The second was the ICF Train-the-Trainer
 Guide which was used with medical and rehabilitative professionals as a study guide for them to
 use to make their own presentations for training sessions they would themselves conduct. This
 Guide contains sections on the philosophy of ICF, international practice, basic concepts, coding
 instructions, assessment mechanism and work flow, focused protocols, vignette and holistic
 report, designing and applying practical exercises and also guidelines of behavior during
 assessment for children, adolescents and adults.

 Finally, the basic training package was based on a five day program that combined theoretical
 discussions and practical exercises (see below). The goal was to get health professionals
 (physicians and rehabilitators), many of whom are assessors in the current system, to
 understand the ICF, the disability assessment system and ICF’s role in reforming the system.




Training Program

                                                                                                    86
DAY 1
Getting to know the trainees: ICF Philosophy.
General principles of the Classification, its difference from other medical models, its scope, principles,
aims and applications
International Practice in the use of ICF
Description of the disability classification systems, other countries’ experience of the Classification
 DAY 2
Linking – coding instructions
Theoretical and methodological background of evaluating strategies, coding, qualifiers
Assessment mechanism : Application for assessment, preparation stage, vignette formation,
assessment stage, completion of assessment , holistic report
Focused protocols: Development of focused protocols, rationale, aims and utility
Practice in coding
 DAY 3
Linking – coding instructions
Theoretical and methodological background of evaluating strategies, coding, qualifiers
Catch up with basic principles and coding
DAY 4
Case study: tutorial
Presentation of completed vignettes
Case study: interactive
Presentation of incomplete vignettes
Case study
Group practical exercise
DAY 5
Coding: test
Assignment of evaluation test
A significant final trial for the evaluation of the understanding and assimilation of the unified system.




                                                                                                     87
    Annex 4: A Note on Disability Policy and Disability Assessment in
                          the United Kingdom

                               Ola abu Alghaib and Tom Shakespeare 1


Abstract

This paper first discusses the background to and political context for disability benefits payments
in the UK, and then outlines the main disability benefits currently available. Next, it presents the
Work Capability Assessment (WCA), the test for receiving Employment Support Allowance (ESA),
the main work substitution benefit for disabled people, and discusses the main criticisms which
have been made of WCA and the Employment Support Allowance regime, before finally drawing
conclusions about the difficulties encountered in changing the patterns of social assistance and
employment for disabled people.


1.         Introduction

Over the last 30 years, the United Kingdom (UK) – like many countries has seen a dramatic rise in
the share of the working age population receiving sickness and disability benefits (hereafter
disability benefits): According to the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) (2013b), the UK
government spent 2.4 percent of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) on disability benefits, a fifth
more than the European average, and significantly more than Germany, France, Italy, and Spain
and increased spending by a third between 2005 and 2009.

In the context of austerity, and with the election of a government committed to shrinking the size
of the public sector, spending on disability is vulnerable to cuts. Given that the Coalition
government had committed to no cuts in spending on health and education and pensions, this
adds to pressure on the disability budget.

Traditionally, disability is considered to be something unfortunate and undesirable which is
outside an individual’s control. Therefore, there has been widespr ead public support for state
expenditure on disability benefits. Disability rights perspectives challenge this charitable and
individualized approach, and argue that disabled people are disadvantaged less by any limitations
of their bodies and brains, and more by discriminatory barriers in society. If people are unable to
work, it is due to lack of access to education, inaccessibility of transport and workplaces and
prejudice on the part of employers, rather than to their impairments.

In the United Kingdom, successive legislation is perceived to have been successful in removing
discriminatory barriers. Most public buildings and transports systems are now accessible, and law
protects disabled people from unfair discrimination. This makes it possible for governments to
highlight the apparent equality between disabled and non-disabled people. In this rhetoric, if
disabled people are not working, it is now their own fault, and no longer explained by their bodies
and minds, or disabling barriers. Research shows that newspaper and policy pronouncements on
disability have become increasingly framed in terms of disability benefit fraud. A distinction is

1
    Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of East Anglia.

                                                                                                 88
drawn between ‘genuine’ disabled people, and those thought to be fraudulently claiming
disability benefits (Strathclyde Centre for Disability Research/Glasgow Media Unit 2013). This
political rhetoric has underpinned a harsher regime, where entitlement to benefits has been
tightened, and public spending on disability reduced. Assessment of disability is therefore a highly
contentious issue, with disability rights organizations and charities in conflict with government.

2.      Development and evolution of disability benefits in the UK
The history of state support for persons with disabilities in the UK dates back to the 17th century
(Stone 1986): The Poor Law of 1601 stipulated taxes for the 'necessary relief of the lame,
impotent, old and blind'. Charitable support for poor persons with disabilities was considered an
important means for the rich to secure salvation. Yet, from its inception, claimants faced popular
suspicion that their conditions were faked, and the Tudor welfare legislation fostered the
distinction between “deserving and undeserving” poor.

During the second half of the 18th century such concerns were compounded by increasing
pressure on parochial resources. As a consequence, the receipt of welfare assistance for persons
with disabilities was based on firmer medical principles and charitable initiatives focused more on
returning sick persons and those with disabilities to the workforce (Turner 2012). Yet, by the early
nineteenth century, war and a rapid population growth have put this welfare system under severe
strain.

The Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834, also called the “New Poor Law”, established the principle
of less eligibility, whereby reliance on the public purse should be made an undesirable situation.
Measures to classify sick persons and those with disabilities, together with the expansion of
institutional care for blind, deaf and mentally impaired persons both furthered the separation of
this group from the mainstream society.

Successive welfare laws during the late nineteenth- and early twentieth century included the
introduction of compensatory benefits (e.g. war pensions), compensation for injured or disabled
workmen and unemployment and health insurance in 1911 (including temporary disability
benefits). The latter expanded the support systems for persons with disabilities beyond the Poor
Law. Yet, it also promoted anxieties about a 'crisis of malingering' (Turner 2012) and to date, most
disability benefits are still based on its principle of ‘less eligibility’.

While the 1970s and 1980s saw the expansion and improvement of earnings-replacement
benefits, the rise in disability benefit expenditure and recipients became a major concern for the
government of the late 1970s. The growth in welfare spending was considered to encourage
rather than reduce dependency which led to a major policy review of disability benefits from the
1980s onwards: It included the Fowler reforms which targeted mainly income replacement
benefit, the attachment of all long-term benefits to prices rather than earnings and the conversion
of short-term sickness benefits from earning-related to a flat-rate (Burchardt 1999).

Besides the ‘compensatory’ benefits like the Industrial Injuries benefit, ‘extra costs’ benefits’ like
the Disability Living Allowance (DLA) have become an increasingly significant component of the
UK benefit basket for persons with disabilities: DLA together with the Social Security Act 1992 that
underpinned it were a response to the findings of a number of disability surveys in the mid-1980s
that established that persons with disabilities had significant unmet needs despite the above
benefits (Roulstone & Prideaux 2012). The increase in numbers claiming income replacement


                                                                                                   89
benefits between 1970-1985 has been explained in terms of the normal lag before a newly
introduced welfare benefit reaches stable levels, followed by the widening of access to Invalidity
Benefit in 1984 (Burchardt 1999). Changes in employment rates/benefit claim rates for disabled
people have not coincided with major changes in social security rules and procedures (Berthoud
2011).

The continued growth in spending throughout the 1980s and 1990s 2 was followed by a
contraction and by the late 1990s, resistance had formed against further growth in welfare
spending. This led to the biggest reviews of a range of disability-related benefits since the
establishment of the welfare state under the Blair government from 1997 onwards. The ‘moral
panic’ (Roulstone & Prideaux 2012) was particularly fuelled by the growing numbers in receipt of
DLA, an increasing albeit legal overlap of IB and DLA recipients (Beatty et al. 2009) and the limited
success of getting persons with disabilities off income replacement benefits. Despite the 1994
Social Security (Incapacity for Work) Act which was to stem the numbers of recipients of disability
income replacement benefits, claimant numbers continued to grow.

In social policy terms, the 1990s brought a new dawn of social and legal entitlements: Under
pressure from the disability rights movement, the 1995 Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) was
passed. While it recognized some social components in discrimination against persons with
disabilities, it has received criticism, especially from the disability movement for its limited anti-
discrimination stance due to restrictive definitions and qualifying conditions and its orthodox view
of disability (Gooding 2000). The 2005 Disability Discrimination Act had a wider and stronger
remit, although the 2010 Equality Act saw a reduced impact for the Equality Duty.

Garthwaite et al. (2014) argue that the considerable reforms of the UK’s disability benefit system
since the 1980s rather brought about a decrease in benefit levels and duration of support, a
greater focus on compulsory participation in welfare to work schemes and a tightening up of
eligibility criteria. Particularly in the context of latter, the Employment & Support Allowance
(ESA)—a reformulation of earnings replacements benefits in 2008 which involves a lengthy
assessment protocol (see sections 4 & 5 below)—has been widely criticised. Prevailing public and
policy assumption in the UK that many recipients are not sufficiently sick or disabled to ‘deserve’
welfare benefits—claims that have been made in the absence of empirical data on the health of
recipients (Garthwaite et al. 2014)—show that the focus on ‘sturdy beggars’ in the early Poor Law
has never fully disappeared (Roulstone & Prideaux 2012). Governments rather seem to have
shifted the disability category and who counts as having a disability over time to fit policy and
fiscal targets, and reforms have made welfare claiming a perilous activity (Roulstone & Prideaux
2012).

Since coming to office in 2010, the current Government has pursued an extensive programme of
‘welfare reform’ that seeks to introduce ‟…greater fairness to the welfare and pensions systems
by making work pay and reinvigorating incentives to save for retirement…while protecting the
most vulnerable – disabled people and pensioners” (DWP 2013a, p.3). The current overhaul of
disability benefits aims at simplifying the system. Besides the replacement of the Disability Living
Allowance with Personal Independence Payments (PIP) , a number of working-age benefits (six of



2In the 1990s, the number of disability benefit recipients increased by 54% in Great Britain, and disability
benefit expenditures’ share of the GDP increased from 0.88 % in 1990 to 1.27% in 1999 (eds. Honeycutt &
Mitra 2005)

                                                                                                         90
the main means-tested benefits and tax credits) will be merged into a single payment called
Universal Credit. This controversial new benefits system is to be introduced by 2017/18.

3.   Overview of available benefits for persons with disabilities in the UK
For persons with disabilities, there are a number of benefits to claim that can be grouped in four
types (Burchardt 1999): These include compensatory benefits (for example, industrial injury and
war disablement benefits); earnings replacement benefits to provide an income for individuals
unable to earn as a result of disability (for example Employment and Support Allowance (ESA);
and extra costs benefits to support the extra costs of persons with disabilities. And in addition,
persons with disabilities may access a number of available means-tested mainstream benefits to
top-up their income: for example, Income Support but also Housing or Council Tax Benefits.

The main available disability-specific benefits will be presented in more detail below 3:

Employment and support allowance - partially taxable, partially contributory, partially means-
tested

ESA replaced the previous Incapacity Benefit (IB) in October 2008. There are two forms of ESA:

        Contributory ESA is only paid to claimants who meet the National Insurance conditions.4
        Income-related ESA is paid to claimants who have not satisfied these contribution criteria
         but have passed a means test.5

To be entitled to ESA, applicants must

        be aged 16 or over but under Basic State Pension age
        have a limited capability to work due to an illness or disability
        be present in Great Britain and satisfy the ‘habitually residence test’
        not be receiving Jobseeker’s Allowance, Statutory Sick Pay or Statutory Maternity Pay and
         not be in or have returned to work

To be entitled to contributory ESA, applicants must also pass a contributory test while the
eligibility for income-related ESA requires passing of a low income test.

The main change from the previous IB is that the old Personal Capability Assessment (PCA) was
replaced with the Work Capability Assessment (WCA), which the government claims to give a
better view of the claimant's ability to undertake work: Applicants must go through an
‘assessment phase’, which usually lasts for 13 weeks after the claim is made. During this phase,
they undergo the WCA which involves two separate assessments: The limited capability for work
assessment measures a person’s ability to perform certain activities relating to physical, mental,
cognitive and intellectual function and determines whether the individual can be awarded ESA or

3 The information is largely based on most recent information provided on the homepage of the DWP
https://www.gov.uk/browse/benefits/disability and Disability Rights UK factsheets (2014).
4
  Contributory ESA requires the passing of a contributory test verifying that the applicant paid enough
national insurance contributions in specific tax years.
5 Needs (and those of the partner, if you have one) are compared with the available money (e.g. income

and savings) to determine the income-related ESA rate. It can be paid on its own (if the claimant is not
entitled to contributory ESA) or as a top-up to contributory ESA (if he/she is). Income-related ESA can
include amounts to help towards mortgage interest payments and some other housing costs.

                                                                                                     91
should apply for Jobseeker’s Allowance instead. The limited capability for work-related activity
assessment determines the rate of ESA that will be paid after the first 13 weeks and whether the
claimant will be required to undertake any work-related activity as a condition of entitlement
(more information on the WCA in section 4 and 5).

Those judged via WCA as unable to work or with limited work capacity receive a higher level of
benefit and are placed in the Support Group with no conditionality, i.e. they will not have to
undertake work-related activities. Those who are deemed ‘sick but able to work’ are placed in the
work-related activity group and receive a lower rate of ESA than those in the support group. There
is a one-year limit on contributory ESA for those in the work-related activity group, including the
13-week assessment phase. Claimants placed in either the support or the work-related activity
group receive ‘main phase’ ESA. This includes either the ‘work-related component’, which is
conditional on attending work-focused interviews, or the ‘support component’, for those deemed
unable to work. Applicants deemed fit for work are moved onto Jobseekers Allowance (JSA) (paid
at a lower rate than ESA and means-tested after six months).

After the assessment phase, one of two additional components on top of the basic allowance is
provided: Claimants in the support group receive the ‘support component’ and those in the work -
related activity group receive the ‘work-related activity component’.

Some key changes to ESA are currently underway: Between 2013 and 2017 the income-related
ESA will be abolished and be paid as part of the universal credit (UC) - a new benefit to be
introduced over the period 2013 to 2017 (see section on UC below). Contributory ESA will remain
outside UC, yet a time limit of one year maximum claim has been introduced before people are
moved onto Income-related (i.e. means tested) ESA (UNISON 2013). Furthermore, ESA is included
in the list of benefits to which the ‘benefit cap’ applies which limits the total weekly benefits that
can be claimed. There are some exceptions, for example, the cap does not apply for those placed
in the ‘support group’ (UNISON 2013).

As at the end of February 2012, ESA had around 991,190 claimants and 921,250 beneficiaries. The
total expenditure on ESA rose sharply from £1.3 billion in 2009 –10 to around £3.6 billion in 2011 –
12 (Browne 2012).

Attendance allowance - Non-taxable, non-contributory, non-means-tested

Attendance Allowance (AA) is the alternative to DLA or PIP for people aged over 64 with care or
supervision needs. There are two rates of payment, a lower rate and a higher rate, depending on
care or supervision needs during the day or night.

To qualify for AA, the claimant must:

       be aged 65 or over
       pass at least one of the disability tests: The lower rate is paid if the claimant has day or
        night needs, i.e. requires frequent help or constant supervision during the day, or
        supervision at night. The higher rate is paid if claimants require help or supervision
        throughout both day and night, or are terminally ill.
       satisfy the relevant disability conditions for a period of six months before the award
       pass the residence and presence tests and not be subject to immigration control.



                                                                                                   92
Assessment is done based on the application form and sometimes a medical examination is
requested to determine eligibility.

AA does not have a mobility component and is not counted as income when calculating
entitlements to means-tested benefits such as income-related ESA.

In February 2012, approximately 1.7 million people were entitled to AA at an estimated cost of
just over £5.3 billion in 2011–12 (Browne 2012).

Carer’s Allowance - Taxable, non-contributory, means-tested

Carer’s Allowa nce (CA) is a weekly benefit for persons who regularly look after someone with
substantial caring needs.

To qualify for CA, the claimant must:

          be aged 16 or over
          spend at least 35 hours a week caring for someone
          not earn more than currently £102 per week after tax, national insurance contributions
           and half of any pension contributions have been taken into account or be in full-time
           education
          live in England, Scotland or Wales, or abroad as a member of the armed forces
          take care of a person that already receives one of following benefits: Personal
           Independence Payment (PIP) daily living component, Disability Living Allowance - the
           middle or highest care rate, Attendance Allowance, Constant Attendance Allowance at or
           above the normal maximum rate with an Industrial Injuries Disablement Benefit, or basic
           rate with a War Disablement Pension or Armed Forces Independence Payment

As of February 2012, CA was claimed by 594,860 people, with expenditure in 2011 –12 totalling
around £1.7 billion (Browne 2012).

War pensions and AFCS - Non-taxable, non-contributory, non-means-tested

Individuals who have suffered injury or disability as a result of service in the Armed Forces before
6 April 2005 are entitled to war pensions and after 6 April 2005 to benefits and payments from
the Armed Forces Compensation Scheme (AFCS). Illness and injuries are graded into 15 tariff
levels, depending on the severity of the conditions. Pensions are also available to widows,
widowers and dependants of those killed in service.

As of 31 March 2012, there were almost 135,000 claimants of the War Disablement Pension in
the UK (Browne 2012).

Industrial injuries benefits - Non-taxable, non-contributory, non-means-tested

Industrial injuries benefits are payable to individuals who have suffered injury in an industrial
accident, or who have contracted a disease 6 while at work, and, as a result are consequently
considered to be at least partially disabled. The main benefit is the Industrial Injuries Disablement
Benefit (IIDB). Additional benefits might be paid as increases to IIDB - the most important being


6
    The scheme covers more than 70 diseases, including asthma, chronic bronchitis or emphysema, deafness

                                                                                                     93
the Constant Attendance Allowance (CAA) and Exceptionally Severe Disablement Allowance
(ESDA).

To qualify for Industrial Injuries Disablement Benefit (IIDB), the applicant must have acquired the
illness or disability

       from an accident or disease that occurred while on employment
       while on an approved employment training scheme or course the work accident or event
        that caused your illness or disability happened in England, Scotland or Wales.

The amount of benefit depends on the level of disability which will be assessed by a ‘medical
advisor’ on a scale of 1 to 100 percent. Normally you must be assessed as 14% disabled or more
to get the benefit.

Eligibility is decided upon based on the application form, relevant evidence from the employer or
witnesses and a medical examination.

During the period 2011-12, over £850 million was spent on industrial injuries benefits (including
Reduced Earning Allowance) in 2011–12 (Browne 2012).

Disability living allowance for children - Non-taxable, non-contributory, non-means-tested

Disability Living Allowance (DLA) for children provides financial support with the extra costs of
looking after a child with disabilities.

To qualify for DLA, the child must:

       be under 16 years of age
       have difficulties walking or require more looking after than a child of the same age
        without a disability. They must have had these difficulties for at least 3 months and they
        are expected to last for at least 6 months, except if they are terminally ill.
       have lived in Great Britain for 2 out of the last 3 years if over 3 years old
       habitually reside in the UK, Ireland, Isle of Man or the Channel Islands

DLA has two components: the care component, which has three rates of payment and the mobilit y
component which has two rates of payment. Depending on the needs, a child can be paid one or
both components.

Care component

       For the lowest rate of the care component, the child must need attention in connection
        with their bodily functions for a significant part of the day (which can be during one or
        more periods) for some of the day or night.
       For the middle rate, the child must require another person to give them frequent
        attention throughout the day in connection with their bodily functions; or require
        prolonged or repeated attention during the night in connection with their bodily
        functions; or require continual supervision throughout the day in order to avoid
        substantial danger to themselves or others; or require, another person to be awake for a
        prolonged period or at frequent intervals at night, for the purpose of watching over them
        in order to avoid substantial danger to themselves or others.


                                                                                                94
       For the highest rate, the child must require one of the day conditions and one of the night
        conditions for the middle rate care component above or be terminally ill.

Mobility component

       For the lower rate of the mobility component, the child must need guidance or
        supervision with walking on unfamiliar routes because of the mental or physical
        disablement. He or she must need substantially more guidance or supervision than a child
        of the same age who is in normal physical or mental health. The child cannot receive the
        lower rate of the mobility component until they reach the age of five.
       For the highest rate, the child must be unable or virtually to walk, have had both legs
        amputated (or missing from birth) at or above the ankle, qualify for the highest rate of
        the DLA care component, be severely mentally impaired and show disruptive behaviour,
        have a severe visual impairment or be both blind and deaf and need assistance to move.

        The higher rate of the mobility component cannot be applied for until the child reaches
        the age of three.

Eligibility is determined through evaluation of the completed application form, and supporting
evidence / documentation from the applicant’s doctor. The DWP responsible for DLA claims may
also decide that a face- to-face medical with a health care professional is needed which is
subcontracted to a company.

For people of working age (i.e. aged 16 and over), DLA has been replaced by the personal
independence payment (PIP) (see below). Those of working age who are already on DLA, will be
asked to claim PIP rather than DLA at some point in the future.

In February 2012, over 3.2 million people were receiving DLA and related costs amounted to
approximately £12.6 billion in 2011–12 (Browne 2012).

Personal independence payment – Non-means tested, non-contributory, non-taxable

The Personal Independence Payment (PIP) is a benefit for people aged 16 to 64 to help with extra
costs caused by a long-term (one which is expected to last 12 months or longer) health condition
or disability. It is gradually replacing the Disability Living Allowance (DLA), except for children
under 16, being introduced in stages from 2013 to 2017. Most people will be affected in 2015.

To qualify for PIP, applicants must:

       be aged 16 to 64
       have a long-term health condition or disability and difficulties with activities related to
        ‘daily living’ and or mobility
       be resident in Great Britain when claiming (with some exceptions) and have been in Great
        Britain for at least two of the last three years

PIP is made up of two parts, the daily living component and the mobility component. People may
be able to get one or both components.

An applicant may be eligible for the daily living component if he/she needs help with:

       Preparing food

                                                                                                95
       Taking nutrition
       Managing therapy or monitoring a health condition
       Washing and bathing
       Managing toilet needs or incontinence
       Dressing and undressing
       Communicating verbally
       Reading and understanding signs, symbols and words
       Engaging with other people face to face
       Making budgeting decisions

An applicant may be eligible for the mobility component of PIP if he/she needs help with:

       Planning and following journeys
       Moving around

Claimants must have met the disability conditions for a ‘qualifying period’, i.e. 3 months prior and
at least nine months after the application, except in cases of terminal illness.

Each component is paid at two different levels: A ‘standard rate’ and an ‘enhanced rate’. Th e rate
to be paid depends whether the applicant’s ability to carry out daily living or mobility activities is
‘limited’ or ‘severely limited’ which is tested under the PIP assessment: It is points-related and
based on the applicant’s ability to perform abo ve 12 activities related to daily living needs and
mobility. Thereby, PIP does not separate day and night-time needs. The number of scored points
will determine eligibility for either component and at which rate. Within each activity is a series
of descriptors with scores ranging from 0 to 12. The descriptors explain related tasks of varying
degrees of difficulty and an applicant scores points when assessed as unable to complete a task
‘reliably’. The sum of highest descriptor score from each activity makes up the points for each
component. To be entitled to the standard rate, a score of at least 8 points under the daily living
or mobility activities is required, for the enhanced rate a score of at least 12 points.

The DWP is responsible for the PIP. Most claimants will need to undertake a ‘face to face
consultation’ with a health professional who will assess their ability to carry out key activities of
daily living and mobility. These assessments have been contracted out to ATOS Healthcare and
Capita Health and Wellbeing, depending on the location. The DWP will decide about a claim based
on the results of this assessment, the application and any supporting evidence that the applicant
submitted. If approved, there are no conditions as to how to spend the benefit. Successful
claimants will be regularly reassessed.

As of March 2014, 50 percent of applicants for PIP were being awarded the benefit (Personal
Independence Payment: Official Statistics, GB, published 5 June 2014)7.




Universal credit - Means-tested



7 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/317425/pip-
statistical-release-june-2014.pdf

                                                                                                   96
Universal Credit is a new welfare benefit in the United Kingdom that the government plans to
introduce over the period 2013 to 2017. It will replace six of the main means-tested benefits and
tax credits:

       child tax credit;
       housing benefit;
       income-related employment and support allowance;
       income-based jobseeker's allowance;
       income support;
       parts of the social fund; and
       working tax credit

Other benefits (e.g. disability living allowance and personal independence payment) will remain
largely unchanged by the new system. Like ESA, claims can be submitted at the local Jobcentre
Plus. All people receiving ESA and those being moved onto or applying for universal credit will be
assessed in addition to the application form with the WCA as to which group they will go in: (1)
limited capability for work or (2) limited capability for work and work-related activity (WRAG) or
(3) fit for work (see description of ESA above and chapter 4 for more information on the WCA).

The results of the WCA will be used by the universal credit adviser to decide what conditions and
work related requirements or activities people must meet to receive Universal Credit.

The maximum amount is made up of a ‘standard allowance’ and five ‘elements’, paid to cover
different needs, including:

       child element;
       housing costs element;
       limited capability for work elements;
       carer element; and
       child care costs element.

The previous Working Tax Credit (WTC) will not be available under Universal Credit (UC) for
anyone assessed as ‘fit for work’ under the Empl oyment Support Assessment (ESA) work
capability assessment apart from those who qualify as ‘not fit for work’.

Personal budget – Means-tested

In 2010, the Department of Health set out its vision for Adult Social Care with a commitment to
the personalisation of care. Direct payments and personal budgets are a central part of the
'personalization’ agenda to give people choice and control over the care services which they
receive from adult social care funding by self-directing their own support.

Persons with disabilities may be eligible for support under this scheme towards community care
services which they have been assessed as needing. In order to apply for a personal budget (or
individual budget in some regions), the applicant is required to complete the local authority Self-
Assessment Questionnaire (SAQ). This assessment will identify the applicant’s needs, looking at
life aspects that are affected by the impairment, such as personal care needs, health and safety,
social inclusion etc. Furthermore, the applicant will be requested to fill in a financial assessment.
After submitting these to the local authority, social services will decide on an Indicative Personal
Budget, i.e. an estimate of the amount needed to meet the requirements which will enable

                                                                                                  97
development of a support plan. The plan will list the types of support required to meet the needs
identified in the initial assessment and how the budget will be spent to meet those needs. It
recognises that there are other issues in addition to medical needs that can impact on a person’s
health and well-being.

People can either take their personal budget as a direct payment (while still choosing how their
care needs are met and by whom) or leave the Council / social services with the responsibility to
buy the services on their behalf. People can also choose to go with a combination of the two. The
payments must only be spent on the services identified in their support plan.

As part of this Self Directed Support (SDS) persons with disabilities can get different funding
streams and resources other than those from Social Services. These include for example Disabled
Student Allowance or Access to Work which is a benefit to meet additional costs incurred by
people in employment, for example extra costs of travel to work or workplace adaptations caused
by having an impairment, or a support worker in the workplace.

4.   The Work Capability Assessment (WCA)
     4.1.   History of disability assessments in the UK and rationale for the introduction of the
            WCA

The economic restructuring in Britain’s industrial communities in the 1980s resulted in rising
unemployment which over the medium-term contributed to increased numbers of claimants for
Invalidity Benefits and subsequently Incapacity Benefits (Sissons 2009): The number of working-
age recipients of Incapacity Benefit more than doubled from 1.2 million in 1984 to 2.5 million by
1997 and reached 2.8 million in 2003 (Sissons 2009). This continued an upward trend which began
in the 1970s and accelerated through the 1980s and much of the 1990s (Beatty, et al. 2009) - a
concern to both Conservative and Labour governments over the past two decades (Grover &
Piggott 2009).

In this context, welfare reforms focused on increasing the ‘employability’ of persons with
disabilities and reducing the caseloads and costs of incapacity-related benefits (Clayton 2011,
Roulstone & Prideaux 2012): In 1995, Invalidity Benefit was replaced by the less generous
Incapacity Benefit as the main income replacement benefit. While before 1995, eligibility was
largely determined by the claimant’s GP, the introduction of the Incapacity Benefit came along
with the ‘All Work Test’ which assessed general capacity to work through a series of ‘descriptors’
but marginalised evidence from the claimant’s GP.

In 1997, the then Labour government started adopting active labor market policies (e.g. the New
Deal for Disabled People, Pathways to Work) to support the return of people with health and
disability-related barriers to employment. In 2000, the All Work Test was succeeded by the
Personal Capability Assessment (PCA) - a more rigid medical eligibility test in order to reduce
claimants of benefits that did not require active job search and provide a more objective
assessment of functional limitation. The PCA again focused on what a person was able to do and
how they could be supported back into work involving self-administered questionnaire and if
needed face-to-face examination. The administration of the PCA was contracted out to a
company called SchlumbergerSema which was taken over in 2004 by the now Atos Healthcare
and its employees assessed the claims, using the Logical Integrated Medical Assessment computer
system. Yet, these evaluations proved unreliable and the number of successful appeals against


                                                                                               98
decisions skyrocketed. In 2003, the DWP introduced ‘Pathways to Work’, in which claimants had
to undertake a work-focused interview with a personal advisor. If not screened out, they would
go on to mandatory monthly interviews where they would be encouraged to return to work.

Still, in 2006, the welfare reform Green Paper ‘A new deal for welfare - Empowering people to
work’ criticised that ‟almost nothing is expected of [incapacity] claimants – and little support is
offered” (DWP 2006a, p. 4). In 2007, a report commissioned under the previous Labor government
concluded that some two thirds of those receiving Incapacity Benefit were indeed capable of
work. As a response to this criticism, continuing reforms saw in 2008 the replacement of the
Incapacity Benefit with the Employment Support Allowance (ESA) (Franklin 2013). As part of the
ESA, the Welfare Reform Act 2007 established the more stringent Work Capability Assessment
(WCA) to determine a claimant’s eligibility for Employment and Support Allowance (ESA) -
although the Government argued during the introduction of ESA that the existing Personal
Capability Assessment (PCA) was ‘already recognised by the OECD as being one of the toughest in
the world’ (Secretary of State for Work and Pensions 2006). As such, t he introduction of ESA and
the WCA was embedded in the ‘moral panic’ over fraud although it has never been substantiated,
the more conditional welfare context of the late 1990s and 2000s and an increased shift to
conditionality, means testing and reduced take-up of IBs (Roulstone & Prideaux 2012). Between
2000 and 2011, the number of disability benefit claimants fell from 7.4 percent of the working
age population to 6.5 percent (Jones and Wass 2013).

The introduction of the ESA presented a central element in the government’s efforts to increase
employment rates, reduce on-flows to sickness benefits and increase off-flows in the medium
term. Thereby, the arguments for the introduction of ESA and the WCA can be summarised as
follows (Grover & Piggott 2010): IB was considered as not targeted enough upon ‘genuinely’ sick
people and / or those with disabilities. It was specifically argued that the way IB was structured
made access to the scheme too easy and encouraged beneficiaries to remain on it for long periods
(Secretary of State for Work and Pensions 2006). Furthermore, the receipt of IB has become
framed by popular concerns that the majority of claimants are fraudulently claiming IB or abusing
its lax administration – despite the lack of evidence to support this belief (Grover and Piggott
2009, 2010). Lastly, the introduction of ESA was put forward in the context of a ‘support’
discourse, i.e. ESA as a mechanism to support people who experience health or disability-related
barriers to work in accessing employment and thus, address socio-economic disadvantages that
they face (see, for example, Secretary of State for Work and Pensions 2006).

The WCA was designed to provide a functional assessment, based on the premise that eligibility
for ESA should not be determined by the description of a person’s disability or health condition
but rather by how their ability to function is affected (Litchfield 2013). As such it was designed to
look at the effects of a condition rather than the condition itself since the focus is on function,
reflecting at least nominally the WHO’s ICF. It is to present a means of distinguishing people who
cannot work due to health related problems from those who are fit for some work or could, with
support, eventually return to employment. If assessed as able to undertake work related
activities, claimants receive a lower level of benefit than those judged unable to work. As such, it
is as a social policy mechanism that classifies the claimants into administrative categories
(Litchfield 2013, Grover & Piggott 2010). Grover and Piggott (2010) argue that this process of
sorting was central to address the governments’ argument of the gateway onto IB being too lax
and the existing Personal Capability Assessment not discerning enough: The WCA was designed
to ensure that only the most ‘needy’ (those who are assessed to have the most limiting health
conditions) and the most ‘deserving’ (those who are judged compliant and fully engaged with

                                                                                                  99
requests) claimants can access the highest amount of ESA. It does this by placing paid work, more
specifically, efforts to develop or maintain a relationship to it, at the centre of its qualifying
criteria. As such, it also reflects an increasingly sharper shift in policies for people who are sick
and/or have disabilities towards a return to work focus and work-related solutions to their socio-
economic problems (Grover and Piggott 2010).

For the time being, up to 1.5 million of IB claimants still needs to be assessed under the WCA for
their eligibility for ESA and it is not yet fully clear how this process will interact with the conversion
of ESA claimants to universal credit (see section 3) (UNISON 2013).

     4.2.    Procedures and mechanisms of the WCA

All people receiving ESA and those being moved onto Universal Credit will be assessed with the
work capability assessment (WCA). Thus, the WCA plays an important role in determining
entitlement to various benefits where claimants’ current health condition or disability must be
found to restrict their ability to work. As such, this section will have a closer look at how the WCA
as the central assessment procedure operates in practise.

The DWP (2013c) describes the Work Capability Assessment as the process of gathering
information and evidence, which may include a face to face assessment, in order to determine
whether a claimant has limited capability for work, and if so, whether they have limited capability
for work–related activity. Limited capability for work is thereby understood as the extent to which
a claimant’s health condition or disability affects their capability for work (DWP 2013c). Limited
capability for work-related activity as the extent to which a claimant’s health condition or
disability affects their capability for work-related activity (DWP 2013c).

The WCA should be completed within the first 13 weeks of claiming benefit (unless a person is
terminally ill in which case the assessment does not apply). During this period, claimants receive
the assessment rate. The WCA has two components:

1) Limited Capability for Work test to help determine benefit entitlement based on the extent to
which their health condition or disability affects their capability for work.

2) Limited Capability for Work-Related Activity test to determine whether the claimant can be
placed into the Support Group where she/he will not have to undertake work-related activities or
the work-related activity group (WRAG) where she/he will be expected to adhere to work-related
conditions in order to continue receiving the benefit in full (e.g. attendance of work focused
interviews as part of Pathways to Work/The Work Programme) and receive a lower benefit rate
than if placed in the support group.

In some cases a DWP decision maker may be able to decide on limited capability for work base d
on the information in the application form. The WCA recognises a number of special
circumstances in which a claimant may be treated as having limited capability for work: These
include for example terminal illness, awaiting, receiving or recovering from cancer treatment by
way of radiotherapy and / or chemotherapy, undergoing medical or other treatment as a patient
in a hospital or similar institution where they have been advised by a health care professional to
stay for 24 hours or longer, or which is a day of recovery from that treatment etc. (DWP 2013c).
In practise, most cases are referred to an external subcontractor—currently ATOS—who
implements the WCA.


                                                                                                     100
Once a claim has been referred to the external subcontractor, they will send the claimant a self -
assessment questionnaire – ESA 50 – to complete. Claimants normally have four weeks to fill out
the questionnaire. It seeks the claimant’s views on the effect s of their disabling condition in each
of the functional areas in the assessment. The claimant will be asked to identify (by a tick in a
box) the descriptor in each affected area which best describes the effect of their disabling
condition, and to give any further information or supporting evidence from other sources (e.g.
the GP) that they think should be taken into account.

The limited capability for work test is points related and assesses the applicant’s ability to carry
out a range of physical and mental, cognitive and intellectual activities.

The physical descriptors are grouped into ten types of activity (DWP 2013c):

  1. Mobilising unaided by another person with or without a walking stick, manual wheelchair
     or other aid if such aid is normally, or could reasonably be worn or used
  2. Standing and sitting
  3. Reaching
  4. Picking up and moving or transferring by the use of the upper body and arms
  5. Manual dexterity
  6. Making oneself understood through speaking, writing, typing, or other means which are
     normally or could reasonably be, used, unaided by another person
  7. Understanding communication by
     (i) verbal means (such as hearing or lip reading) alone,
     (ii) nonverbal means (such as reading 16 point print or Braille) alone, or
     (iii) a combination of (i) and (ii), using any aid that is normally, or could reasonably be used,
     unaided by another person.
  8. Navigation and maintaining safety, using a guide dog or other aid if either or both are
     normally, or could reasonably be used
  9. Absence or loss of control whilst conscious leading to extensive evacuation of the bowel
     and/or bladder, other than enuresis (bed-wetting), despite the wearing or use of any aids
     or adaptations which are normally, or could reasonably be worn or used
  10. Consciousness during waking moments


Thereby, the assessment takes into account the abilities when using any aid or appliance the
applicant would normally, or could reasonably be expected to use.

The descriptors of the mental, cognitive and intellectual activities are grouped into seven types of
activity (DWP 2013c):




  1. Learning tasks
  2. Awareness of everyday hazards (such as boiling water or sharp objects)



                                                                                                   101
  3. Initiating and completing personal action (which means planning, organisation, problem
     solving, prioritising or switching tasks)
  4. Coping with change
  5. Getting about.
  6. Coping with social engagement due to cognitive impairment or mental disorder
  7. Appropriateness of behaviour with other people, due to cognitive impairment or mental
     disorder


As an example, within the first activity on ‘Mobilising’ there are five descriptors (DWP 2013a):

(a) Cannot either:

     (i) mobilise more than 50 metres on level ground without stopping in order to avoid
     significant discomfort or exhaustion; or

     (ii) repeatedly mobilise 50 metres within a reasonable timescale because of significant
     discomfort or exhaustion.

(b) Cannot mount or descend two steps unaided by another person even with the support of a
handrail.

(c) Cannot either:

     (i) mobilise more than 100 metres on level ground without stopping in order to avoid
     significant discomfort or exhaustion; or

     (ii) repeatedly mobilise 100 metres within a reasonable timescale because of significant
     discomfort or exhaustion.

(d) Cannot either:

      (i) mobilise more than 200 metres on level ground without stopping in order to avoid
      significant discomfort or exhaustion; or

      (ii) repeatedly mobilise 200 metres within a reasonable timescale because of significant
      discomfort or exhaustion.

(e) None of the above apply.

Within each type of activity is a list of ‘descriptors’ explaining related t asks of varying degrees of
difficulty with fixed scores ranging from 0 (not applicable) to 15 (Cannot at all). Though more than
one descriptor may apply, the applicant can only pick up one score from each type of activity; in
each case whichever scores the highest. If the claimant scores 15 points in any physical and/ or
mental activity or a total of 15 or more points from a combination of activities, then the criterion
for limited capability for work is met for benefit entitlement purposes.

The limited capability for work-related activity test has a further sixteen activities and
descriptors, relating to both physical and mental, cognitive or intellectual functions which are
considered to determine if a claimant who has limited capability for work also has limited
capability for work-related activity (DWP 2013c):

                                                                                                  102
  Mobilising unaided by another person with or without a walking stick, manual wheelchair or
  other aid if such aid is normally, or could reasonably be worn or used
  Transferring from one seated position to another
  Reaching
  Picking up and moving or transferring by the use of the upper body and arms (excluding
  standing, sitting, bending or kneeling and all other activities specified in this Schedule)
  Manual dexterity
  Making oneself understood through speaking, writing, typing, or other means normally, or
  could reasonably be, used, unaided by another person
  Understanding communication by hearing, lip reading, reading 16 point print or using any aid
  if reasonably used
  Absence or loss of control whilst conscious leading to extensive evacuation of the bowel
  and/or voiding of the bladder, other than bed-wetting, despite the wearing or use of any aids
  or adaptations which are normally, or could reasonably be, worn or used.
  Learning tasks.
  Awareness of hazard
  Initiating and completing personal action (i.e. planning, organisation, problem solving,
  prioritising or switching tasks)
  Coping with change
  Coping with social engagement, due to cognitive impairment or mental disorder
  Appropriateness of behaviour with other people, due to cognitive impairment or mental
  disorder
  Conveying food or drink to the mouth
  Chewing or swallowing food or drink


Again, the assessment takes into account the abilities when using any aid or appliances.

As an example, within the first activity on ‘Mobilising’ are two descriptors (DWP 2013c):

Cannot either:

      (a) mobilise more than 50 metres on level ground without stopping in order to avoid
      significant discomfort or exhaustion; or

      (b) repeatedly mobilise 50 metres within a reasonable timescale because of significant
      discomfort or exhaustion.

If at least one descriptor is satisfied, the claimant will be placed in the support group. If none is
satisfied, they will be placed in the work–related activity group.

In most cases, applicants will also be asked to attend an assessment carried about by a health care
professional from the external provider. At such face-to-face assessment they will identify
whether or not the applicant’s account in the questionnaire corresponds with their fi ndings,
asking a series of questions relating to physical and mental, cognitive or intellectual capabilities
and may give a physical examination. The healthcare professional (usually a doctor or a nurse)
may ask the claimant about a normal day and not necessarily the same questions that are on the
ESA50 form. The healthcare professional may also consider that further information from the
claimant’s doctor or other sources is required. In the case of persons with most severe levels of

                                                                                                 103
disability, the approved healthcare professional may consider all available evidence on the claim
and give advice to the decision maker without a face-to-face assessment.

The decision on whether or not an applicant has a limited capability for work and a limited
capability for work-related activity will not be taken by the health care professionals from the
external provider. The healthcare professional conducting the assessment will complete a report
of the assessment to a DWP decision maker with a recommendation, for the purposes of
determining entitlement, on whether a claimant can be considered to have limited capability for
work. The DWP decision maker will then decide based on the report, the applicant’s application
form and a statement of fitness for work from the claimant’s own doctor. If the DWP decides that
the claimant has limited capability for work and is eligible for ESA, they then have to decide
whether she/he also has ‘limited capability for work related activity’ for which they look at the
results of the set of descriptors under the Limited Capability for Work-Related Activity test. In
practise, this assessment is usually carried out at the same time as the limited capability for work
assessment.

The healthcare professional will also make recommendations as to when the claimant should be
re-assessed under the WCA.

5.   Experience with the WCA to date and related criticism and developments
While earlier independent reviews concluded that the WCA is conceptually right (Harrington
2010, 2011 & 2012), it has generated a range of criticisms from disabled people’s organisations
(DPOs) and governmental and non-governmental and academic commentators alike since its
inception in October 2008.

One of the main concerns revolves around the perception that the WCA is heavily weighted
towards a medical model (e.g. National AIDS Trust 2013, Grover & Piggott 2010). Designed as a
functional assessment of how someone's condition affects their work capability, critics claim that
the assessment by a health care professional forms the dominant part of the evidence base used
by DWP decision makers without sufficiently taking into account the psycho-social factors that
influence a person’s capability for work in the decision-making (e.g. NAT 2013, Grover & Piggott
2010). Nearly half the claimants for Employment Support Allowance have mental health
problems.

Likewise, the latest independent review (Litchfield 2013) observes the great reliance on
information from medical records which however, rarely describe capability. This leads to
assumptions about capability being made on the basis of diagnoses which may not only
undermine the policy intent but also reinforces the stigma that persons with disabilities face in
accessing employment. The review underpins above concern that additional non-medical
evidence (e.g. information from support workers, carers) which might be more useful in
constructing a full picture of capability is not sufficiently sought and given appropriate
consideration (Litchfield 2013).

In social policy terms, there has been some recognition of the social model of disability, reflected
e.g. in the adoption of the DDA in 1995 and the Equality Act in 2010 or in government documents
on the ESA which recognize to some degree that persons with disabilities face a range of barriers.
However, there are concerns that the current approach disregards the social model: The process
of sorting into either a ‘support’ or an ‘employment’ group that the WCA involves is considered


                                                                                                104
to reinforce division and exclusion along the lines of deserving public support and capability to
engage in work – a contradiction to the government’s argument for the changes in income
replacement benefits to be concerned with the inclusion and equality of persons with disabilities
(Grover and Piggott 2010, Garthwaite 2014).

As such, the ESA with the WCA is seen to continue the tradition of the medicalisation of disability.
For example, Grover and Piggott (2010) highlight how the majority of members of the technical
working groups involved in the transformation of the previous PCA (IB) to WCA (ESA) were from
medical backgrounds. Moreover, the focus of the working groups was on:

        ‟proposals for transforming the Personal Capability Assessment (PCA) from an incapacity-
        based tool for determining entitlement to Incapacity Benefit, to a more positive
        assessment incorporating assessment of capability and of health-related interventions
        which would contribute to overcoming health-related barriers preventing people with
        disabilities engaging in wo rk” (DWP 2006b, p.2).

As such, commenters conclude that the review of the PCA failed to challenge the ‘medicalisation’
of sickness and impairment, but rather redrafted the medical test, introducing greater
conditionality and more stringent eligibility criteria (e.g. Grover and Piggott 2010, Garthwaite
2014).

Yet another concern with the WCA is t he influence of ‘statistical norms’, or expectations on the
decision as to who will be granted benefit: Franklin (2013) collected evidence from the original
contract between Atos and DWP, Atos employees and Freedom of Information requests which
indicates that outcomes for ESA claimants are not only driven by the severity of their condition or
the nature of their disability but seem to be geared by the imposition of ‘statistical norms’ towards
a desired result. The previous test for Incapacity Benefit, the Personal Capability Assessment, was
criterion-based, awarding points based upon how a person scored against certain criteria. For
example, those who could walk less than 50 metres were awarded more points than those who
could walk less than 200 metres. If the person scored the number of points the criteria demanded
for benefit receipt then they would be entitled to the benefit. The WCA in contrast uses is a norm-
referenced system. People must score the number of points required for benefit receipt and also
fall within the proportion of people the norms system will allow to receive the benefit. In practice
this means there is a finite number of claims the assessment system will allow to be awarded the
benefit (Franklin 2013).

Franklin (2013) found that Atos monitors the performance of their assessors by using a computer
system which compares the average results for each practitioner with those of other practitioners
in the same region and nationally. These criteria for the audit system are set by the DWP and the
numbers for the ‘norms’ were given to Atos by the DWP, based on the percentage of cases the
DWP expects to fall into each category. As such, DWP specified in the original contract with Atos
that it expects 11 percent of claimants to fall within the support group—the figure rose to 16
percent in 2011 following the first independent WCA review by Professor Harrington (2010).
Although described as ‘statistical norms’, in practice this system operates like a de facto target
system: It guides the outcome of the entire process and constrains assessors to ensure all
descriptor choices fall within the margin of the norms permitted by the DWP.

In addition, the audit system uses the estimated national trends to also audit the performance of
regions and individual assessors. As such, it fails to account for variation in terms of the frequency


                                                                                                 105
of conditions an assessor gets to assess each day yet, also demographic variations in health and
levels of disability. This places both those claiming in areas where levels of sickness and disability
are considerably higher than others and the assessors working in those areas at a significan t
disadvantage.

In the above context, protest by the public and DPOs against the WCA is sparked particularly by
widespread dissatisfaction with the outcome of the assessment: The number of successful
appeals against ESA/WCA decisions continues to rise (e.g. Jeory 2013, Franklin 2013). According
to the Ministry of Justice, 327,961 appeals were received for the period 2012 – 13. 225,236
appeals were heard, of which approximately 43% were decided in favour of the claimant (Franklin
2013). In June 2014, an investigation of ilegal.org.uk into DWP statistics relating to the Work
Capability Assessment revealed that of 1,287,323 ESA appeals, at least 567,634 claimants have
had the original DWP ESA refusals overturned in their favor. 8 These figures challenge previous
claims of the DWP that the initial Work Capability Assessment outcomes are a valid measure of
the claimant's ability to work and only a relatively low number of decisions have been overturned.
An article in the Express in 2013 warns that rising unemployment, a large backlog and confusion
over the reforms and controversial WCA mean that the figure is forecast to hit nearly £1billion by
the end of this Parliament in 2015 (Jeory 2013).

These findings add to the call of DPOs and disability campaigners to scrap the WCA. Besides the
above questions concerning the reliability of the decision making process, such groups further
question the following key aspects of the assessment process:

       The failure of the WCA to recognise invisible, mental and intermittent fluctuating
        conditions. This has historically been a problem, which disability organisations attribute
        for example to poorly designed mental health descriptors which do not reflect the full
        range of issues experienced by those with mental health disorders and the “snapshot”
        problem of the face-to-face assessment.

       Organisations like MIND or Rethink Mental Illness also criticise that the WCA substantially
        disadvantages people with mental health conditions. In 2013, a tribunal panel ruled that
        the DWP had failed to make reasonable adjustments to ensure people with mental health
        problems were treated fairly by the system. The judgment agreed with the arguments of
        charities (e.g. Mind, Rethink Mental Illness etc.) that people with mental health problems
        struggle with the assessments because they could be confused by their symptoms, be
        unable to accurately explain how the condition affects them or have difficulty in
        understanding the questions while assessors may fail to understand the complexities of
        such conditions (Gentleman 2013).

As a result, the court said that it is especially important for the DWP and Atos assessors to take
medical evidence from applicants’ community health professionals, and that unless the system
was adapted to take such medical evidence into account at the early stages of the process it is
unfair to people with mental health problems. Following the judgement, the DWP considers that
no procedural changes need to be made: “The Upper Tribunal did not direct us to make specific
changes to the WCA process, and the Court of Appeal’s judgment does not change this direction.
It will be business as usual for DWP Operations. Individuals will apply for ESA and undergo the

8 (http://ilegal.org.uk/thread/8640/release-staggering-numbers-overturned-
secrecy?page=1&scrollTo=21759)

                                                                                                 106
WCA in the normal way. Those currently on Incapacity Benefit will be reassessed as planned”
(Disability Rights 2013).

       The scope of the evidence taken into account in assessing the eligibility for benefits more
        generally.

       The impact of the WCA and the reassessment on persons with disabilities and the impact
        on perceptions of the benefit system. Litchfield for example notes in his review of the
        WCA that “length and complexity of the process contributes to dissatisfaction and
        negative perceptions surrounding the assessment” (Litchfield 2013).

The legislation (Welfare Reform Act 2007) provided for an independent assessment review of the
WCA in its first five years of operation. As such, the WCA has evolved since its introduction and
as the last review states will continue to evolve as circumstances change (Litchfield 2014).
Changes during the past years of operation relate both to the process and the management of
the WCA:

       The previous Government appointed in 2008 Atos Healthcare as the sole provider for
        carrying out Work Capability Assessments. Atos was frequently alleged to be the cause of
        the problem. In 2013, a Public Accounts Committee concluded that the WCAs resulted in
        too many wrong decisions being overturned (see above). In view of mounting evidence
        that a significant number of applicants have been wrongly judged to be fit for work and
        ineligible for government support, the DWP announced in March 2014 a settlement for
        Atos to exit the contract (DWP 2014a). The plan is for the new contract to be awarded
        late 2014, with a view to the new provider taking responsibility for delivery of Work
        Capability Assessments by 2015. The DWP also considers moving to multiple providers in
        the longer term to increase competition (DWP 2014a).

       Largely in response to the recommendations of the independent reviews, some of the
        descriptors have been removed, the questionnaire formats were changed to allow
        claimants to explain in their own words how their condition affects them, a personal
        statement intended to explain to the claimant why they have or have not been allocated
        the benefit was added, a number of special circumstances that ensure both limited
        capability for work and limited capability for work-related activity were added. Audio
        recording of the assessments is also theoretically permitted, but in practice prevented by
        lack of equipment (Franklin 2013).

       Between 2008 and 2010 a work-focused health-related assessment was included in the
        WCA to identify the kind of work a claimant who received the work-related activity
        component could do and identified ways of improving their capacity for work. The
        assessment was abolished from July 2010 as a result of the planned introduction of the
        Work Programme.

       Following the 2013 independent review measures included enhancing the capacities of
        the external Atos health care professionals to conduct the WCA, i.e. retraining and re-
        evaluating all Atos healthcare professionals, with those not meeting the required
        standard having their work audited or their approval to carry out assessments withdrawn
        (DWP 2013d).



                                                                                               107
However, Franklin (2013) notes that such changes are minor and presentational, rather than
substantial. It remains to be seen whether changing the provider without revising the process
may bring about greater public acceptance of the WCA.

In March 2014, in its response to the latest independent review of the WCA, the DWP announced
‘that there is no evidence that changes to the WCA descriptors would significantly improve the
overall assessment’ (DWP 2014b). Dr Litchfield made a total of 32 recommendations to the DWP
in his review concerning implementation of previous recommendations, effectiveness and
perceptions of the WCA, decision-making, simplifying the process and mental health. The
majority of recommendations were accepted and as a result DWP committed among others to 1)
carry out a full impact assessment into the alternative approach to the decision making process
as outlined by Dr Litchfield; 2) continue work already begun to develop a new form for healthcare
professionals to use for the collection of further medical evidence and 3) review all letters and
forms used in the WCA process – including the Limited Capability for Work Questionnaire (ESA50)
(DWP 2014c).

Yet, it has to be noted that critic of assessment procedures to determine eligibility for disability
benefits extends also to other assessments such as the one for PIP which has recently been
described as an assessment nightmare which forces persons with disabilities routinely to undergo
a barrage of evaluations.

6.   Conclusion

In January 2015, UK Employment Minister Mark Harper MP heralded a 2.5 percent increase in the
disability employment rate, with a quarter of a million more disabled people in work since the
previous year (Harper 2015). This was explained because more efforts had being made to help
people into work through one-to-one employment support and through the Access to Work
benefit. However, an alternative explanation could be that this rise reflects the general rise in
employment in 2014-15: the UK employment rate of 73.2 percent was at the highest level since
statistics began and overall unemployment declined to 5.7 percent (ONS 2015).

At the same time, Deaf people were complaining that they were at risk of being excluded for work
because of restrictions to how sign language interpretation costs would be compensated by
Access to Work (Deaf ATW). The percentage of people receiving secondary mental health services
in paid work fell from 8.8 percent in 2012-13 to 7.1 percent in 2013-14. The proportion of learning
disabled people known to social care who were in paid employment fell slightly from 7 percent to
6.8 percent over the same period (Department of Health 2014). Scope’s analysis suggests that
more disabled people are leaving the work force than are entering it (Trotter 2014). The
Department of Work and Pensions found that 7 out of 10 disabled people were not receiving any
support to find work (DWP 2013e).

Despite the earlier-than-planned replacement of one Work Capability Assessment operator, Atos,
by Maximus (DWP 2014a), the test has not been changed, and continues to cause considerable
concern. In 2014, the retiring head of the appeals tribunal said that the WCA had undergone
‘virtual collapse’ (Siddique, 2014). The removal of legal aid funding for adv ice and assistance on
welfare rights, together with ‘sanctioning’ (temporary removal of benefits) has meant further
difficulties for claimants. Scope’s analysis of Department of Work and Pensions data indicates
that a total of 120,000 disabled people have had their benefits suspended since November 2012
(Trotter 2014).


                                                                                               108
The problems with Employment Support Allowance and the Work Capability Assessment have
caused considerable hardship to disabled people. Media coverage of welfare reform has
generated a hardening of attitudes towards disabled people claiming benefits (Strathclyde Centre
for Disability Research/Glasgow Media Group 2012). From reviewing the evidence, our
conclusion would be that a punitive approach to reducing disability benefit claimant levels is more
effective in causing misery than in raising employment rates, leads to a high level of appeals, and
consequently creates a political backlash. Prior to recent welfare benefit changes, the UK welfare
benefit system was already regarded as being relatively strict (OECD 2003), which suggests that
cutting welfare benefits for disabled people was seen as politically expedient by the 2010-2015
Coalition government, which had already pledged not to reduce spending on older people’s
pensions, the National Health Service, and foreign aid.

Promoting work for disabled people is clearly a good thing, both for school leavers with existing
health conditions, and older people developing health conditions which lead them to leaving the
workforce. This requires investment in appropriate vocational rehabilitation and return to work
strategies (Anderson et al 2012, Edwards 2014, Tompa 2008, van Stolk et al 2014), and a flexible
and fair welfare benefit system. Evidence shows that one third of disabled people in work, and
two thirds of disabled people out of work, have health conditions which limit the type and/or
amount of work they can do. These individual limitations, together with realistic assessment of
the possibilities for a disabled individual to find work in a particular employment market, need to
be taken into account if the human rights of disabled people are to be respected.




References
Anderson, M. F. et al. 2012. “Meta-synthesis of Qualitative Research on Return to Work among
     Employees with Common Mental Disorders,” Scand J Work Environ Health 38 (2): 93-104.



                                                                                               109
Beatty, C., S. Fothergill, and D. Platts-Fowler. 2009. “DLA Claimants–A New Assessment: The
      Characteristics and Aspirations of the Incapacity Benefit Claimants Who Receive Disability
      Living                                                                       Allowance. ”
      http://www.researchonline.org.uk/sds/search/taxonomy.do%3Bjsessionid=AD683F2AA98
      745E55DEEBCE81087063F?action=document&pager.offset=0&ref=B13334&taxonomy=UI
      N, Accessed 27 June 2014.

Berthoud, R. 2011. “Trends in the employment of disabled people in Britain,” Institute for Social
      and Economic Research, https://www.iser.essex.ac.uk/files/iser_working_papers/2 011-
      03.pdf, Accessed 9 March 2015.

Browne, J., and A. Hood. 2012. “A Survey of the UK Benefit System,” Institute for Fiscal Studies
     Briefing Note, IFS, London. http://www.ifs.org.uk/bns/bn13.pdf, Accessed 23 June 2014.

Burchardt, T. 1999. “The Evolution of Disability Benefits in the UK: Re-weighting the Basket,” CASE
     Paper, CASE/26, Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion, London School of Economics,
     London,
     http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/6490/1/The_Evolution_of_Disability_Benefits_in_the_UK_Re-
     weighting_the_basket.pdf

Clayton, S., C. Bambra, R. Gosling, S. Povall, K. Misso, and M. Whitehead. 2011. “Assembling the
      Evidence Jigsaw: Insights from a Systematic Review of UK Studies of Individual-Focused
      Return to Work Initiatives for Disabled and Long-Term Ill People,” BMC Public Health 11
      (170).

Deaf     ATW.    “Information to Help Challenge          Access to Work                Decisions,”
       http://www.deafatw.com/30-hour-rule.html, Accessed 9 March 2015.

Department of Health. 2014. The Adult Social Care Outcomes Framework 2015/16, Department
     of                                    Health,                               London,
     https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/375431
     /ASCOF_15-16.pdf, Accessed 9 March 2015.

DWP (Department for Work & Pensions). 2006a. “A New Deal for Welfare - Empowering People
     to                                                                           Work,”
     https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/272235
     /6730.pdf, Accessed 23 June 2014.

_____. 2006b. “Transformation of the Personal Capability Assessment,” Report of the Physical
     Function and Mental Health Technical Working Groups, Commissioned by the Department
     for Work and Pensions, http://www.whywaitforever.com/dwpatos-tpca.pdf, Accessed 23
     June 2014.

_____. 2013a.      “DWP Reform:        DWP’s      Welfare Reform Agenda         Explained,”
     http://www.legco.gov.hk/general/english/library/stay_informed_overseas_policy_update
     s/welfare_reform_brf.pdf, Accessed 24 June 2014.

_____. 2013b. “Fulfilling Potential: Making It Happen,” http://odi.dwp.gov.uk/docs/fulfilling-
     potential/making-it-happen.pdf          and        http://odi.dwp.gov.uk/docs/fulfilling-
     potential/making-it-happen-action-plan.pdf, Accessed 24 June 2014.


                                                                                               110
_____. 2013c. “A guide to Employment and Support Allowance–The Work Capability
     Assessment,”                                                               ESA214 ,
     https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/248826
     /esa214-rev-oct2013.pdf, Accessed 22 June 2014.

_____. 2013d. “Hoban – taking action to improve the Work Capability Assessment ,” Press release,
     https://www.gov.uk/government/news/hoban-taking-action-to-improve-the-work-
     capability-assessment, Accessed 9 July 2014.

_____. 2013e. “A Survey of Working Age Benefit Claimants.”

_____. 2014a. “Early Exit of Atos from WCA Contract,” Press                                  Release,
     http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-vote-
     office/March_2014/27%20March/32-DWP-Atos.pdf, Accessed 24 June 2014.

_____. 2014b. “Government's response to the year four independent review of the Work
     Capability Assessment,” Presented to the Parliament by the Secretary of State for Works
     and      Pensions    by     Command       of    Her      Majesty,    DWP,       London,
     https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/296328
     /wca-review-year-4-response.pdf, Accessed 24 June 2014.

Disability Rights UK. 2013. “Government No Action on WCA Mental Health Case,”
      http://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/news/2013/december/govt-no-action-wca-mental-
      health-case#sthash.aeJmJkXH.dpuf, Accessed 26 June 2014.

_____. 2014. “Fact Sheets on Disability Benefits,” http://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/, Accessed 24
     June 2014.

Franklin, K. 2013. “Investigating the Real Reason for the Misery of 'Fit for Work' Assessment ,”
      http://www.centreforwelfarereform.org/uploads/attachment/400/how-norms-become-
      targets.pdf, Accessed 22 June 2014.

Garthwaite, K., C. Bambra, J. Warren, A. Kasim, and G. Greig. 2014. “Shifting the Goalposts: A
     Longitudinal Mixed-Methods Study of the Health of Long-Term Incapacity Benefit
     Recipients during a Period of Substantial Change to the UK Social Security System,” Journal
     of Social Policy, 43: 311-330, doi: 10.1017/S0047279413000974.

Gentleman, A. 2013. “Fitness-for-Work Tests Unfair on People with Mental Health Problems ,
      Court            Says,”         The           Guardian,           May            22,
      http://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/22/fitness-work-tests-mental-health-
      unfair, Accessed 9 July 2014.

Gooding, C. 2000. “Disability Discrimination Act: from Status to Practice,” Critical Social Policy, 20
     (4): 533-49.

Grover, C., and L. Piggott. 2009. “Retrenching Incapacity Benefit: Employment Support Allowance
     and Paid Work,” Social Policy and Society 8 (2): 159-170.

_____. 2010. “From Incapacity Benefit to Employment and Support Allowance: Social Sorting,
     Sickness and Impairment and Social Security,” Policy Studies, 31:2, pp. 265-282.


                                                                                                 111
Harper, M. 2015. “Major Companies Waking Up to Employment Talents of Disabled People,”
     https://www.gov.uk/government/news/harper-major-companies-waking-up-to-
     employment-talents-of-disabled-people, Accessed 9 March 2015.

Harrington, M. 2010. An Independent Review of the Work Capability Assessment – Year One.
      London: The Stationery Office Ltd. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/work-
      capability-assessment-independent-review-year-1, Accessed 26 June 2014.

_____. 2011. An Independent Review of the Work Capability Assessment – Year Two. London: The
     Stationery                                  Office                                  Ltd.
     https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/70102/
     wca-review-2011.pdf, Accessed 26 June 2014.

_____. 2012. An Independent Review of the Work Capability Assessment – Year Three. London:
     The                     Stationery                     Office                    Ltd.,
     https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/70123/
     wca-review-2012.pdf, Accessed 26 June 2014.

Honeycutt, T. and S. Mitra, eds. 2005. Temporary and Partial Disability Programs in Nine
     Countries. http://www.dri.uiuc.edu/research/p04-12h/learning_final_report.pdf , Accessed
     26 June 2014.

Jeory, T. 2013. “£500m Bill for Appeal Battles over Benefits,” Sunday Express, May 19,
      http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/400721/500m-bill-for-appeal-battles-over-benefits,
      Accessed 22 July 2014.

Jones, M., and V. Wass. 2013. “Understanding Changing Disability-Related Employment Gaps in
      Britain 1998-2011,” Work, Employment and Society 27: 982-1003.

Litchfield, P. 2013. An Independent Review of the Work Capability Assessment – Year Four.
       Stationery             Office              Limited              Ltd.,         London.
       https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/265351
       /work-capability-assessment-year-4-paul-litchfield.pdf, Accessed 2 July 2014.

National AIDS Trust. 2013. The Work Capability Assessment – A Call for Evidence: First Litchfield

Review (and Fourth Independent Review). “Evidence from NAT (National AIDS Trust),”
     http://www.nat.org.uk/media/Files/NAT_Submission_to_the_Litchfield_Review_of_the_
     WCA.pdf, Accessed 26 June 2014.

OECD. 2003. Transforming Disability into Ability: Policies to Promote Work and Income Security
     for Disabled People, Paris: OECD.

ONS (Office for National Statistics). 2015. “Labour Market Statistics,” ONS, London.
    http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/lms/labour-market-statistics/january-2015/index.html

Roulstone, A. and S. Prideaux. 2012. “Understanding Disability Policy,” Policy Press, Bristol.

Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. 2006. A New Deal for Welfare: Empowering People to
      Work. Cm 6730. London: The Stationery Office.



                                                                                                 112
Siddique, H. 2014. “Work Capability Assessment System a t ‘Virtual Collapse’ Says Judge,” The
      Guardian, June 11. http://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/11/work-capabil ity-
      assessment-collapse-benefits, Accessed 9 March 2015.

Sissons, P. 2009. “Welfare Reform and Recession: Past Labour Market Responses to Job Losses
      and the Potential Impact of Employment Support Allowance,” People, Place & Policy Online
      3 (3): 171-182.

Stone, D. 1986. The Disabled State . Philadelphia PA: Temple University Press.

Strathclyde Centre for Disability Research/Glasgow Media Group. 2013. “Bad News for Disabled
      People: How Newspapers Are Reporting Disabilit,” Inclusion London, London.
      http://www.gla.ac.uk/media/media_214917_en.pdf , Accessed 22 July 2014.

Tompa, E. et al. 2008. “A Systematic Review of Disability Management Interventions with
    Economic Evaluations,” J Occup Rehabil 18: 16-26

Trotter, R. 2014. A Million Futures: Halving the Disability Employment Gap. Scope, London.

Turner, D. M. 2012. “‘Fraudulent’ Disability in Historical Perspective,” History and Policy,
      http://www.historyandpolicy.org/policy-papers/papers/fraudulent-disability-in-historical-
      perspective , Accessed 6 July 2014.

UNISON. 2013. “Welfare Reform Changes Affecting Disabled People ,” UNISON, London.
     https://www.unison.org.uk/upload/sharepoint/On%20line%20Catalogue/21709.pdf,
     Accessed 24 June 2014.

Van Stolk, C, et al. 2014. Psychological Wellbeing and Work, RAND Europe for DWP/DoH, London.

Wisenthal, A., and T. Krupa. 2013. “Cognitive Work Hardening: A Return-to-Work Intervention for
     People with Depression,” Work 45: 423-430.




                                                                                             113
              Annex 5: Mandatory Disability Insurance Systems
                                Overview1


The report analyses the challenges that disability insurance systems face in terms of costs
and beneficiary identification, especially as disability insurance has been opened up to
new medical conditions; and it discusses reforms that have been introduced to contain
an expansion of the system and its costs.

Background

Disability insurance 2 protects the insured against drops in income due to loss of
productive capacity because of health problems that make it difficult for the person to
work at his or her regular job, or any job. In their basic form, disability plans are public
schemes managed by public agencies and financed on a pay-as-you go basis out of payroll
taxes, sometimes supplemented with general budget transfers. 3 Disability plans pay
defined benefits, usually at least 70 percent of recent wages.

Spending on public and mandatory private disability benefits in OECD countries stretches
from less than 1 percent to almost 6 percent of GDP, with an average of 2.6 percent.
Public spending on disability is around 10 percent of all social spending. Beneficiaries vary
from less than 1 percent to 9 percent of the working age population. This range in
spending and beneficiaries partly reflects variations in social security coverage between
countries, and in part differing design features of the disability plan that make it more or
less attractive to apply for disability benefits.

The profile of applicants and beneficiaries has changed over time. Originally, disability
insurance was intended for people with well-defined chronic illnesses, but increasingly,
disability plans have been opened up to more difficult-to-define conditions with a more
uncertain impact on disability, and their prevalence among applicants and beneficiaries
has ballooned. Currently, muscular-skeletal (in particular low-back pain) and mental
health conditions constitute over half of all new entrants; and while the risk of disability
is strongly and positively correlated with age, with the new medical conditions, the inflow
of young disability beneficiaries has been growing rapidly.

This change in health conditions leading to disability has occurred as the approach to
disability has shifted from a purely medical one to one that emphasizes the applicant’s
ability to function in the workplace, either through rehabilitation or (often subsidized)

1 This overview was prepared by Hjalte Sederlof, a consultant to the World Bank. It is a summary of a much
longer background paper prepared by Estelle James, a consultant to the World Bang, for the study on
disability assessment.
2
  In this document, “insurance” will denote contributory payrol l-funded as well as non-contributory budget-
funded schemes.
3
  In a few cases, private plans also exist, tied to an employer, occupation or pension plan.

                                                                                                       114
employment; and a participatory role for the private sector. Such approaches increase
the likelihood that benefits accrue to the genuinely disabled, while at the same time
reducing system costs.

The report looks at contributory disability insurance financed by (formal sector)
employers and workers, focusing on key assessment and governance processes. It does
not directly address the broader issue of disability beyond those in formal employment,
and that is financed exclusively from budget resources. Such interventions form part of
social assistance, albeit targeted at persons with disability. Still, many the issues raised in
the report also are valid for the social assistance-based disability schemes.

Issues in disability insurance

As disability insurance has opened up to new medical conditions, the determination of
disability based on impairment has become more difficult and selection problems have
arisen. At the same time, high wage replacement rates have made disability an attractive
option when compared to other safety net mechanisms, or even work.

Assessing disability: As understanding of disability has changed towards the interaction
of a person with a health condition and his / her environment and it pertains to all health
conditions, not only those related to physical health, it has become more difficult to
observe and measure it, define its severity and determine work capacity of a person with
a health condition using traditional impairment or functional limitation approach. Hence
the errors of assessment have increased – some beneficiaries are wrongly included (errors
of inclusion-false positive), while others are wrongly excluded (errors of exclusion-false
negative). In countries where this has been studied, one third or more of all decisions
about claims are estimated to be wrong.

Screening procedures: The tightness of screening procedures – years of work needed for
eligibility, the waiting period before the benefit can begin, the extent of capacity loss
required, and the qualifications and generosity of gatekeepers – determine the rate at
which applicants are accepted or denied. And it affects the behavior of potential
applicants, introducing elements of self-selection when higher denial rates discourage
individuals from applying and more lax ones encourage application.

Replacement rates: Irrespective of screening procedures, benefit generosity may
encourage more applications – with high replacement rates, individuals with poor health
are more likely to stop working when they qualify for a benefit; and they are less likely to
seek alternative benefits that may be less generous, such as social assistance,
unemployment benefits and sick leave. And some countries (Austria, Netherlands, and
Sweden) have explicitly used disability as an alternative to unemployment compensation
or early retirement, especially for older workers.

Disability insurance design may discourage work . In OECD countries, disabled persons
have employment rates that are only 60 percent of non-disabled ones and their

                                                                                           115
unemployment rates are twice as high. When the disabled work, it is likely to be part-time
and at low wages. The picture is even worse for disability beneficiaries: only one-third
work and their incomes are less than the (often low) earnings threshold that is allowed
for benefit recipients. This is due to health problems impeding their work, but it also
reflects design features in the disability insurance system itself that discourage individuals
from using their remaining work capacity - working makes individuals ineligible for
insurance benefits. To receive the benefit, applicants must exit employment; and once
receiving a benefit, it will stop if the person resume employment. In the US it will cease if
a person works beyond a threshold - that is, there is an implicit tax on work that might be
as high as 100 percent. And the return to work becomes more difficult, the longer the
time out of work. As a result, once people qualify for disability benefits, they tend to
remain on disability until retirement (or death).

Reform strategies

Faced with these challenges, a number of reforms to disability insurance are being
introduced that seek to contain program costs while raising accuracy and work. Some
reforms are parametric, changing design features such as eligibility and screening,
periodic reassessment of eligibility, and better coherence between disability and
substitutes to disability within the safety net. Others place the emphasis on drawing
disabled into jobs wherever possible by providing subsidies for working instead of
benefits for not working. And still others attempt to move responsibilities onto private
sector agents, such as employers, insurance companies and service providers.

1. Parametric reforms.

In considering parametric reforms, key questions in considering adjustments to design
features are the following:

Eligibility. Normally, eligibility extends to formal sector workers who contribute through
payroll taxes. Should eligibility extend beyond contributors to the system ? Some
countries have introduced flat benefits for persons with disability, regardless of work
experience, and in some instances they have linked this to means-testing. For those with
a work history, decisions have to be made concerning the length of the contribution
period before eligibility is established; the circumstances under which full and partial
benefits are granted; and the emphasis to be placed on job search assistance and
unemployment benefits.

Benefit amount and replacement rate . The benefit amount and the replacement rate
should seek to strike a balance between benefit generosity and costs, including both
direct and indirect costs. Relatively high replacement rates are found in most countries –
generally above 70 percent – but evidence about the adverse effects of high replacement
rates on claim applications and labor force participation suggest caution in setting rates.



                                                                                          116
Screening. Screening—assessing the degree of disability —involves finding the right
balance of stringency. That determines the number of errors of inclusion (lax screen ing)
and of exclusion (stringent screening). The most common indicator of stringency is the
denial rate, with a median of 45 percent of applicants in OECD countries. Rather than
stringency, accuracy might be emphasized – introducing more unbiased information into
the screening process. This would include drawing on external experts hired by the
medical insurance system, and private sector parties such as employers acquainted with
the applicant, or vocational counselors with understanding of the links between medical
impairment and ability to work. System procedures that raise the cost of applying, such
as application fees or waiting times, may discourage marginal applicants. Intensified
screening and counseling during sick leave, including job counseling and job search
assistance, can be a means of reducing so-called disability traps that are created when
easy eligibility and high replacement rates for extensive sick leave make re-entry into the
work force difficult.

Periodic Reassessment of eligibility. Once on the disability rolls, exits before reaching
retirement age are rare. This is at odds with the fact that a person’s medical condition
can improve, and treatments evolve; and it argues for periodic reassessment. But it needs
to be weighed against the costs of periodic reassessment of beneficiaries and challenges
of labor market reinsertion after long periods of inactivity. Recent reforms treat many
disabilities as temporary conditions that periodically should be re-evaluated, while
permanent disability is reserved for a small proportion of the disabled that have little
chance of improvement.

Disability as part of the safety net system . When unemployment, early retirement, and
social assistance plans are reformed, disability rolls may grow, and conversely, when the
disability program is reformed, other social programs may grow. Therefore, changes in
individual programs should take into account their effects on the demand and costs for
other programs.

2. Increasing work incentives.

Keeping disabled people in the labor force, and getting them back to work have become
key elements of reform to disability insurance. The main levers include setting earnings
thresholds, introducing trial work periods, eliminating the implicit tax, making use of wage
supplements and subsidies , and anti-discrimination legislation, workplace
accommodations and employment quotas.

Thresholds and trial work periods . An increasing number of countries allow individuals
to earn up to a threshold amount without loss of eligibility or benefits. Thresholds are
generally low, which may limit the opportunity for full-time work and deter some
individuals from entering the labor force. Sometimes recipients are allowed trial work
periods with earnings above the threshold, without losing their benefit and having to
reapply. However, in practice, neither the introduction of thresholds or trial work periods
have proven very effective in enticing beneficiaries back to work. In many instances, their

                                                                                        117
disability may be too severe; in others, information flows may be weak, or the benefit
may be competitive with the potential wage.

Eliminating the implicit tax. Eliminating the implicit tax simply means that the benefit is
not lost if the person works. The financial disincentive to work is removed, and the work
decision is guided by the replacement rate, as well as the capacity and willingness to work.

Wage subsidies and supplements . Some countries are experimenting with replacing
benefits by wage subsidies or supplements for partially disabled individuals. The
combination of a wage and a subsidy reduces system costs per recipient by the amount
of the wage, and allows fewer people to be designated as fully disabled. However, more
people are likely to apply for benefits and cut down on work if they can keep their partial
wage in addition to their partial benefit, and more individuals will qualify if partial
disability is the criterion and the gatekeeper is lax.

Anti-discrimination legislation, workplace accommodation and employment quotas .
Attempts to encourage work by disabled individuals would have little effect if employers
were allowed to discriminate against them in hiring and firing or refused to make simple
workplace accommodations to compensate for disability. Such measures may be
subsidized by the Government. In many countries, firms also face mandatory
employment quotas for disabled workers, usually comprising some 3 to 6 percent of a
firm’s employees.

3. A Larger Private Sector Role

The past two decades have seen movement toward a greater private role in providing
information about applicants, insurance, finance and services -- although the gatekeeper
role continues to be carried out by public officials. The systems are structured so as to
give participating private entities incentives to keep costs under control by shifting
beneficiaries into work rather than into benefits.

In the Netherlands, much of the costs of the system have been shifted onto private
employers. Private employers pay for up to two years of sick leave and make reasonable
workplace accommodations, and contract with private providers for rehabilitation and
vocational counseling. With sick leave being the major pathway to disability benefits in
many European countries, the objective is to get persons with short and medium-term
illness back to work before they enter the disability rolls. If the individual still claims to
be disabled, (s)he is sorted into full, part-time or no-disability categories. Partly disabled
remain the responsibility of the employer for a period of ten years, receiving the same
services as during sick leave, and if working, the state provides a wage supplement.
Periodic reassessment of eligibility is undertaken. The system provides efficiency gains in
terms of better information on the worker/applicant, and hence improved gatekeeping;
it discourages unnecessary applications, and it facilitates movement back into work.



                                                                                          118
In Denmark, too, applicants are sorted into the three categories, and partially disabled
get a wage supplement. But responsibility for running the program is vested in
municipalities rather than employers. Until recently, municipalities were reimbursed by
the central government for two thirds of their expenditures, and so had few incentives to
encourage the partly disabled to work. There was, moreover, no periodic reassessment:
once given, the benefit becomes permanent. Facing high application rates, the system
recently has been modified to improve work incentives, by reducing reimbursements to
municipalities and subsidies to workers, and by increasing reimbursements for employer-
and employment-oriented measures.

In Australia, disability benefits go only to those who are permanently unable to work
more than 15 hours a week. The remainder are evaluated and assigned to a private,
competitively selected, service organization for training and personal support. They
receive unemployment benefits for a limited time, and are required to engage in job
search.

In Chile, workers contribute to retirement savings accounts. Pension funds purchase
disability insurance policies where the premium is dependent on the previous claims
experience of the fund. Full and par tial disability is covered, partly from the worker’s own
retirement account, (which may discourage claims); and the remainder through a top -up
financed with a group insurance policy purchased by the pension fund. Thus, workers,
pension funds and insurance companies all have an interest in controlling disability
claims. Initial claims are evaluated by regional medical boards, and medical protocols
spell out the criteria granting partial or full disability. Pension funds and insurance
companies can participate in the assessment process, present information, contest claims
and bring appeals. This contrasts with the previous system, where decisions were made
by regional medical boards based on information provided by the individuals own doctor.

So far, results of reforms introducing a greater role for the private sector have been
mixed. In the Netherlands, inflows into disability benefits per 1000 working age
population shows a decline from over 11 to 4 between 2000 and 2008; while spending as
a percentage of GDP over the 2000-2005 period dropped from some 4.6 percent to 4
percent. Denmark saw an increase in inflows into disability benefits from 4 to 5 percent,
while spending rose from 3.8 percent to 4.4 percent of GDP between 2002 and 2005.
Reforms in Australia also saw inflows fall, albeit slightly, from 6.2 to 6.1 percent, while
spending a share of GDP fell from 3.5 percent to 3 percent of GDP over the 2000-2005
period.




                                                                                         119
Endnotes

i
  World Health Organization. 2001. The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
(ICF). Geneva: World Health Organization.
ii
  World Health Organization and World Bank. 2011. The World Report on Disability. Geneva and
Washington, D.C.
iii
       WHO, 2001, supra.
iv
       Ibid.
v
      For further information visit: http://www.who.int/disabilities/data/mds/en/.
vi
    Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, G.A. Res. 61/106 (2007). Accessible at
http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/rights/convtexte.htm.
vii
  OECD. 2010. Sickness, Disability and Work: Breaking the Barriers. A Synthesis of Findings across OECD
Countries. Paris, OECD.
viii
       Ibid., p. 10.
ix
    In this report we stayed away from disability assessment in children, because of its specificity and
particularity. As it happens, most people develop poor health during adulthood either from work or non-
work related injuries and non-communicable diseases or simply because of the ageing process. The
likelihood of a person experiencing poor health increases with age. Adults who have acquired disability in
childhood, either because they were born with a health condition or acquired a health condition before the
age of 18, make up only a small share of the overall population with disability. Issues of education and labor
market participation for this population are different from those faced by adults whose health deteriorates
after they have reached adulthood. It should also be noted that a number of people who would report
experiencing disability in households or other population surveys would always be several times higher than
a number of people assessed as disabled based on countries criteria for disability (see WHO and the World
Bank, 2011, supra).
x
  The 2012 OECD report on work and mental health issues documents the challenge the high cost arising
from mental ill-health poses to the labor market. See OECD. (2012). Sick on the Job? Myths and Realities
about Mental Health and Work. Paris, OECD.
xi
       OECD, 2010, supra.
xii
   This strategy is used in the Dutch disability insurance reforms, which has made the Netherlands one of
the very few countries that has managed to significantly cut inflow into disability benefits. One element of
the reform was the extension of a paid sickness leave to 104 weeks, which put pressure on the worker, the
social insurance agency and its disability assessment arm, the employer and other social services to work
together to ensure full return to work. Disability assessment criteria were changed as well and today they
are quite close to the full application of the ICF approach to disability assessment. See, Van Sonsbeek, J.M.
and Gradus, R. 2012. Estimating the effects of recent disability reforms in the Netherlands . Oxford Economic
Papers 2012, 1 of 24. Oxford University Press. De Yong, P.R. (2012). Recent Changes in Dutch Disability
Policy. University of Amsterdam and Aarts and APE. Amsterdam. Geurts, S., Kompier, M. and Gründemann,
R. 2000. Curing the Dutch disease? Sickness absence and work disability in the Netherlands. ISSR 53(4): 79-
103.
xiii
        OECD, 2010, supra.
xiv
  Autor, D. and Duggan, M. 2006. The Growth in the Social Security Disability Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding.
NBER Working Paper No. 12436.
xv
       Ibid.

                                                                                                          120
xvi
    Livermore, G. A., Hoffman, D., and Bardos, M. 2012. Ticket to Work Participant Characteristics and
Outcomes Under the Revised Regulations. Cornell University: Center for Studying Disability Policy.
Mathematica Policy Research¸ Thornton, C., Livermore, G ., Fraker, T, Stapleton, D., O’Day, B, Wittenburg,
D. et al. 2007. Evaluation of the Ticket to Work Program Assessment of Post-Rollout Implementation and
Early Impacts. Cornell University: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
xvii
         Van Sonsbeek Gradus, supra.
xviii
     See in general Brage, S., Konrathsdottir, A.D. and Lindenger, G. Work disability evaluation. In Escorpizo,
R., , Brage, S., Homa, D. and Stucki, G. (eds.) 2015. Handbook of Vocational Rehabilitation and Disability
Evaluation. New York: Springer, pp.107-140.
xix
  It is argued that situation in the labor market is one of the factors taken into account in deciding on
whether a claimant is disabled or not in the US Social Security Disability Insurance system. See: Autor, D.
and Duggan, M. 2006. The Growth in the Social Security Disability Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding. Working
Paper 12436. Cambridge, Massachusetts: NBER and Autor, D. 2011. The Unsustainable Rise of the Disability
Rolls in the United States: Causes, Consequences and Policy Options. MIT and NBER. November 2011.
xx
   See in general, Bickenbach, J. 2012. Ethics, Law and Policy. Vol 4 of the SAGE Reference Series on
Disability: Key Issues and Future Directions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
xxi
    For the most exhaustive and regularly updated source on social security programs around the world,
including information on disability benefits provided through country specific social security systems see:
Social Security Programs throughout the World. http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/. Very
few countries would not have any disability related provisions. See also a background paper on UK disability
benefits and assessment prepared for this study by Ola abu Algaib and Tom Shakespeare from the F aculty
of Medicine and Health, University of East Anglia presented as Annex 1 to the study.
xxii
    Because of the many levels of reconsiderations and appeals, the US Social Security Administration’s
disability evaluation process may take years to complete, and so is one of the most costly to administer in
the world: Stobo, J.D., McGeary, M. and Barnes, D.K (eds). 2007. Improving the Social Security Disability
Decision Process. Washington DC: National Academic of Sciences, Chapter 4.
xxiii
     See Burdorf, A. ICF from a population health perspective. The impact of chronic disease on work
participation and its consequences for intervention and treatment. In Escorpizo, R., Brage, S., Homa, D. and
Stucki, G. (eds.) 2015. Handbook of Vocational Rehabilitation and Disability Evaluation. New York: Springer,
pp. 43-71.
xxiv
         Bickenbach, supra, p. 30.
xxv
   Stone D. 1979. Physicians as gatekeepers: illness certification as a rationing device. Public Policy. 27(2)
227-254. Stone, D. 1984. The Disabled State. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
xxvi
    Coile, C., Milligan, K. and Wise, D. 2014. Social security Programs and Retirement around the World:
Disability Insurance Programs and Retirement – Introduction and Summary. Working Paper 20120.
Cambridge, Massachusetts. NBER.
xxvii
   There are many discussions of these models, but the best is Shakespeare T. 2014. Disability Rights and
Wrongs Revisited, 2nd Edition. London: Routledge. For a broader historical treatment, see Bickenbach J.
1993. Physical Disability and Social Policy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
xxviii
     Morris, J. 1992. Personal and Political: a feminist perspective on researching physical disability.
Disability, Handicap and Society, 7(2):157- 166.
xxix
         WHO, 2001, supra.
xxx
   A similar discussion can be found in Bickenbach, J. 2015. Legal dimensions of disability evaluation: Work
disability and human rights. In Escorpizo, R. et al. supra, pp. 141 -160.
xxxi
         Autor and Duggan, 2006, supra.
                                                                                                          121
xxxii
    Special Issue: Social security and the challenge of demographic change. 2010. International Social
Security Review, 63(3-4) and International Labor Organization. 1989. From Pyramid to Pillar: Population
Change and Social Security in Europe.
xxxiii
    Coile, C. 2014. Disability Insurance Incentives and the Retirement Decision: Evidence from the U.S.
NBER Working Paper No. w20916.
xxxiv
          Ibid.
xxxv
    Van Sonsbeek, J.M. and Gradus, R. (2012). Estimating the effects of recent disability reforms in the
Netherlands. Oxford Economic Papers (2012), 1 of 24. Oxford University Press. De Yong, P.R. (2012). Recent
Changes in Dutch Disability Policy. University of Amsterdam and Aarts and APE. Amsterdam.
xxxvi
     See Geurts, S., Kompier, M. and Gründemann, R. 2000. Curing the Dutch disease? Sickness absence
and work disability in the Netherlands. ISSR 53(4): 79-103.
xxxvii
          See the Americans with Disabilities Act, Pub. L. No. 101-336, 104 Stat. 328 (1990).
xxxviii
          S 223(d) of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 423(d).
xxxix
    Brunel University. 2002. Definition of Disability in Europe: A comparative analysis. DG Employment and
Social Affair, European Commission.
xl
  E.g. Dal Pozzo, C., Haines, H., Laroche, Y., Fratello, F. and Scorretti, C., Council of Europe, 2002. Assessing
disability in Europe – Similarities and differences, Strasbourg: Council of Europe and Lederer, V., Loisel, P.,
Rivard, M. and Francois, C. 2014. Exploring the diversity of conceptualizations of work (dis)ability: A scoping
review of published definitions Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation 24: 242–267.
xli
  Jette, A.M. and Badley, E. 2002. Conceptual issues in the measurement of work disability. In N.
Mathiowetz and G.S. Wunderlich (eds.) Survey measurement of work disability: Summary of a Workshop.
Washington D.C.: National Academy Press. pp. 4-27. Bickenbach 2015, supra.
xlii
  See, e.g. International Employment Law, 2 nd ed., 2013. Center for International Legal Studies. Huntington,
NY:Juris Publishing.
xliii
   See the standard text for these tools in McDowell, Ian. 2006. Measuring Health: A Guide to Rating Scales
and Questionnaires, Third Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
xliv
   Supporters of the AMA Guidelines are particularly adament about this: e.g. Holmes, E.B. 2011.
Impairment      rating   and      disability  determination.    Medscape        assessible    at
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/314195-overview.
xlv
        See Dal Pozzo et al. 2002, supra.
xlvi
        Ibid.
xlvii
   Rondinelli, R.D., Genovese, E., Kat, R,T., et al. (eds.). 2008. Guides to the evaluation of permanent
impairment. 6th ed. Chicago: American Medical Association.
xlviii
    AMA Guides Sixth Edition: Perceptions, Myths, and Insights. Christopher R. Brigham, W. Fred erick
Uehlein,       Craig        Uejo        and        Leslie        Dilbeck.        Assessible        at
http://www.bibliopedant.com/read.php?hash=bGequpf8Gpj95y862A7U.
xlix
   See, e.g., McCarthy, M.L., McAndrew, M.P., MacKenzie, E.J. et al. 1998. Correlation between the
measures of impairment, according to the modified system of the American Medical Association, and
function. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery. 80:1034–1042; Spieler, E.A., Barth, P.S., Burton, J.F. Jr,
Himmelstein, J. and Rudolph, L. 2000. Recommendations to guide revision of the guides to the evaluation
of permanent impairment. JAMA. 283:519–523; Forst, L., Friedman, L. and Chukwu, A. 2010. Reliability of
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Journal of Occupatinal and Environmental
Medicine. 52(12): 1021-3.
l
    Bickenbach, 2015, supra.
                                                                                                            122
li
      See, e.g. Harten JA. 1998. Functional capacity evaluation. Occupational Medicine. 13(1): 209 –212.
lii
  Wunderlich, Gooloo S. (ed.). 1999. Measuring Functional Capacity and Work Requirements: Summary of
a Workshop. Washington DC:National Academy Press.
liii
   Uniform Data System for Medical Rehabilitation.1997-2001. The UDS-PRO System ℠ (Including the FIM™
Instrument) Clinical Guide Version 1.0, Buffalo (NY): Uniform Data System for Medical Rehabilitation.
liv
  The Working Capacity Assessment is an assessment procedure developed by ATOS Healthcare for the UK
Department of Work and Pensions for use I deterning entitlement for employment and support allows.
After much criticism, the Department reported it will discontinue use by March 2015.
lv
  Disability of the Shoulder, Arm and Hand Questionnaire (DASH), Pain Disability Index, Blankenship, Ergos
Work Simulator and Ergo-Kit variation, the Isernhagen Work System, Hanoun Medical, Physical Work
Performance Evaluation (Ergoscience), WEST-EPIC and AssessAbility. In general see Granger, Carl C. et al.
Functional Assessment. In International Encylopedia of Rehabilitation, assessible at
http://cirrie.buffalo.edu/encyclopedia/.
lvi
  Magasi S, Wong A, Gray D, et al. Theoretical foundations for the measurement of environmental factors
and their impact on participation among people with disabilities. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2015 (96) :597-77.
lvii
        See http://www.who.int/classifications/icf/whodasii/en/.
lviii
        See http://www.who.int/classifications/icf/training/icfchecklist.pdf.
lix
  For a general introduction to ICF Core Sets and their uses see Bickenbach, Jerome, Cieza, Alarcos, Rauch,
Alexandra and Stucki, Gerold (eds.). 2012. ICF Core Sets Manual for Clinical Practice. Hogrefe Verlagsgruppe.
lx
   These concerns are discussed in Council of Europe. 2002. Assessing Disability in Europe: Similarities and
Differences Report drawn up by the Working Group on the assessment of person-related criteria for
allowances and personal assistance for people with disabilities (Partial Agreement) (P-RRECA), Council of
Europe Publishing, Strasbourg.
lxi
       Ibid.
lxii
   See, e.g. Frost, L., Friedman, L. and Chukwu, A. 2010. Reliability of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine. 52(12):1021-3; McCarthy,
M.L., McAndrew, M.P., MacKenzie, E.J., et al. 1998. Correlation between the measures of impairment,
according to the modified system of the American Medical Association, and function. Journal of Bone and
Joint Surv Am. 80:1034 –1042; 7; Nitschke, J.E., Nattrass, C.L., Disler, P.B., Chou, M.J. and Ooi, K.T. 1999.
Reliability of the AMA guide’s model for measuring spinal range of motion. Its implication for whole -person
impairment rating. Spine. 24:262 –268; and Patel, B., Buschbacher, R. and Crawford, J. 2003. National
variability in permanent partial impairment ratings. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 82:302 –306.
lxiii
    Rondinelli, R.D. and Katz, R. 2002. Merits and shortcomings of the American Medical Association Guides
to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition A physiatric perspective Phys Med Rehabil Clin N
Am. 13: 355 –370.
lxiv
   Pryor, E.S. 1990. Flawed promises: a critical evaluation of the AMA’s Guides to the evaluation of
permanent impairment. Harv Law Rev. 103(4):964 –76.
lxv
  Seabury, S.A., Neuhauser, F., and Nuckols, T. 2013. American Medical Association Impairment Ratings
and Earnings Losses Due to Disability. Journal of Ocupational and Environmental Medicine. 55(3): 286-291.
Council of Europe 2002, infra n.28.
lxvi
   Stobo, J.D., McGeary, M. and Barnes, D.K. (eds.). 2007. Improving the Social Security Disability Decision
Process. Washington, DC: National Academy Press: 2007, p. 3.
lxvii
   Owens, P. 2004. The use of functional capacity measures in public and private program s in the United
States and in other countries. In G.S. Wunderlich (ed.), Measuring Functional Capacity and Work
Requirements. Summary of a Workshop . pp. 59-63. Institute of Medicine and National Research Council,
                                                                                                           123
Washington,       D.C.,     National     Academy         Press.                              Assessible          from
http://www.nap.edu/openbook/030906385X/html/59.html#pagetop.
lxviii
          Jette, A. M. and Badley, E. 2000, supra.
lxix
   Reneman, M.F. and Dijkstra, S.J. 2003. Introduction to the Special Issue on Functional Capacity
Evaluations: From expert based to evidence based. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitaiton. 13: 203 -6.
lxx
   Feinstein, A., Joseph, B., and Weis, C. 1986. Scientific and Clinical Problems in Indexes of Functional
Disability. Annals of Internal Medicine 105:413 –420.
lxxi
        See Stobo, J.D., McGeary, M. and Barnes, D.K supra.
lxxii
    Krause, N., Frank, J.W., Dasinger, L.K., Sullivan, T.J. and Sinclair, S.J. 2001. Determinants of duration of
disability and return-to-work after work-related injury and illness: challenges for future research. Am J Ind
Med. 40:464 – 484; and de Croon, E.M., Sluiter, J.K., Nijssen, T.F., Kammeijer, M., Dijkmans, B.A., Lankhorst,
G.J. and Frings-Dresen, M.H. 2004. Predictive factors of work disability in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic
literature review. Ann Rheum Dis. 63:1362 – 1367.
lxxiii
    Ustun, T.B., Chatterji, S., Bickenbach, J., Kostanjsek, N. and Schneider, M. 2003. The International
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health: a new tool for understanding disability and health.
Disabil Rehabil. 25:565 –571.
lxxiv
          See, e.g. Geyh, S., Peter, C., Muller, R., Bickenbach, J.E., Kostanjsek, N., Ustun, B.T., Stucki, G. and
Cieza, A. 2011. The Personal Factors of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
in the literature - a systematic review and content analysis. Disabli. Rehabi. 33:1089 –1102.
lxxv
         WHO, 2001, supra, p. 20.
lxxvi
      WHO, International Classification of                   Disease    10 th   Edition   (ICD-10),   assessible     at
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/.
lxxvii
   Bickenbach, J.E. 2010. Ethical Aspects of the Application of ICF in Elias Mpofu and Thomas Oakland (eds.)
Rehabilitation and Health Assessment in Rehabilitation: Applying ICF Guidelines, New York, Springer
Publications, pp. 47-66.
lxxviii
     Schwegler, U., Anner, J., Boldt, C., Glässel, A., Lay, V., De Boer, W., Stucki, G. and Trezzini. 2012. Aspects
of functioning and environmental factors in medical work capacity evaluations of persons with chronic
widespread pain and low back pain can be represented by a combination of applicable ICF Core Sets. BMC
Public Health. 12:1088.
lxxix
    Kaptyn, A., Smith, J. P: and Van Soest, A. 2006. Dynamics of Work Disability and Pain. Rand Labor and
Population working paper. And see Johnson, W.G., M.L. Baldwin and R.J. Butler. 1998. Back pain and work
disability: the need for a new paradigm. Industrial Relations, 37(1): 9-34; Strine, T.W., J.M. Hootman, D.P.
Chapman, C.A. Okoro and L. Balluz. 2005. Health related quality of life, health risk behaviors, and disability
among adults with pain related activity difficulty. American Journal of Public Health, 95(11): 2042-2048;
Schwegler, U., Anner, J., Glässel, A., Brach, M., De Boer, W., Cieza, A. and Trezzini, B. 2014. Towards
comprehensive and transparent reporting: context-specific additions to the ICF taxonomy for medical
evaluations of work capacity involving claimants with chronic widespread pain and low back pain. BMC
Health Services Research. 14: 361.
lxxx
   Wang, H., Dwyer-Lindgren,L. ,Lofgren, K.T., Rajaratnam,J.K, Marcus, J.R., Levin-Rector, A., Levitz, C.E.,
Lopez, A.D. and Murray, C. 2012. Age-specific and sex-specific mortality in 187 countries, 1970 –2010: a
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 380(9859): 2071 -2094
lxxxi
    Krause, N., Daslinger, L.K. and Neuhauser, F. 1998. Modified work and return to work: A review of the
literature. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation. 8(2): 113-39; Jang, Y., Want, Y-H. and Wang, Y-D. 2005.
Return to work after spinal cord injury in Taiwan: the contribution of functional independence. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil. 86:681-6; MacEachen, E., Clarke, J., Franche, R-L., Irvin and E., 2006. Systematic review of the
                                                                                                                   124
qualitative literature on return to work after injury. Scand J Work Environ Health. 32(4): 257 -69; and
Shames, J., Treger, I., Ring, H. and Giaquinto, S. 2007. Return to work following traumatic brain injury: trends
and challenges. Disability and Rehabilitation. 29(17): 1387-1395.
lxxxii
     See, for example, Young, A.E., Roessler, R.T., Wasiak, R., McPherson, K.M, van Poppel, M.N.M, and
Anema, J.R. 2005. A developmental conceptualization of return to work. Journal of Occupation
Rehabilitation, 15(4): 557-568 and Slebus, F.G., Sluiter, J.K., Kuijer, P. 2007. Work-ability evaluation: A piece
of cake or a hard nut to crack? Disability and Rehabilitation. 29(16): 1295 – 1300.
lxxxiii
     Jessica Anner, Urban Schwegler, Regina Kunz, Bruno Trezzini and Wout de Boer. Evaluation of work
disability and the international classification of functioning, disability and health: what to expect and what
not. Anner et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:470; Urban Schwegler, Jessica Anner, Christine Boldt, Andrea
Glässel, Veronika Lay, Wout Ernst Lodewijk De Boer, Gerold Stucki and Bruno Trezzini. BMC Public Health
2012, 12:1088- 1103; Stucki, G., Brage, S., Homa, D. and Escorpizo, R. Conceptual framework: Disability
evaluation and vocational rehabilitation, in Escorpizo, R. et al. supra, pp 3-10.
lxxxiv
     Bickenbach, J.E. Legal dimensions of disability evaluation: Work disability and human rights. In
Escorpizo, R. et al. supra, pp.141-160.
lxxxv
    See, e.g., Marfeo, E.E., Haley, S.M. Jette, A.M. Eisen, S.V. Ni, P., Bogusz, K. et al. 2013. Conceptual
Foundation for Measures of Physical Function and Behavioral Health Function for Social Security Work
Disability Evaluation Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 94(9):1645 –1652.
lxxxvi
   Ustun, B., Chatterji, S., & Kostanjsek, N. (2004). Comments from WHO for the Journal of Rehabilitation
Medicine special supplement on ICF core sets. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine, (Suppl. 44), 7 -8.
lxxxvii
     Schwegler, U., Selb, M., Escorpizo, R. and Stucki, G. Selection of ICF core sets for functioning assessment
in disability evaluation towards the assignment to return to work programs and/or disabiltiy benefits. In
Escorpizo, R. et al. supra, pp.413-436.
lxxxviii
     Finger, M.E., Escorpizo, R., Glässel, A., Gmünder, H.P., Lückenkemper, M., Chan, C. et al. 2012. ICF Core
Set for vocational rehabilitation: results of an international consensus conference. Disabil Rehabil 2012,
34(5):429 –438.
lxxxix
     Cieza, A., Oberhauser, C., Bickenbach, J., Chatterji, S. and Stucki, G. 2014. Towards a minimal generic
set of domains of functioning and health. BMC Public Health 14:218.
xc
  See Selb., M. Glässel and Escorpizo, R. ICF-based tools in rehabilitation toward return to work: Facilitating
inter-professional communication and comprehensive documentation. In Escorpizo, R. et al. supra, pp.413-
436 and Finger, M.E., De Bie, Nowak, D. and Escorpizo, R. Development and testing of an IC-based
questionnaire to evaluate functioning in vocational rehabilitation: the Work Rehabilitation Questionnaire
(WORQ) In Escorpizo, R. et al. supra, 495-520.
xci
       WHO, Model Disability Survey, accessible at http://www.who.int/disabilities/data/mds/en/.
xcii
    See Brage, S., Donceel, P. and Falez, F. 2008. Development of ICF core set for disability evaluation in
social security. Disability and Rehabilitation. 30(18): 1392 – 1396 and De Boer, W., Bruls, G. and Falez, F.
2004. ICF and evaluation of work disability in social insurance. What are they about? What is their
relationship? What is the use of ICF in disability evaluation? In XV EUMASS Congress; 2004; Lille: EUMASS.
Assessible at: /www.eumass.com/media/lille2004/bruls.PDF.
xciii
    Cieza A, Brockow T, Ewert T, Amman E, Kollerits B, Chatterji S, et al. Linking health-status measurements
to the international classification of functioning, disability and health. J Rehabil Med 2002 (34): 205–
210.Cieza A, Geyh S, Chatterji S, Kostanjsek N, Üstün B, Stucki G. ICF linking rules: an update based on
lessons learned. J Rehabil Med. 2005; 37(4):212-8.
xciv
   OECD. 2010. Sickness, Disability and Work: Breaking the Barriers. A Synthesis of Findings across OECD
Countries. Paris, OECD.

                                                                                                            125
xcv
   Cosco, T.D., Prina, A.M., Perales, J., Stephan, B.C. and Brayne, C. 2014. Operational definitions of
successful aging: a systematic review. Int Psychogeriatr. 26:373-381.
xcvi
    See, e.g. Escorpizo, R., Trenanman, L.M. and Miller, W.C. 2015. Spinal cord injury: Vocational
rehabilitation and disability evaluation. In Escorpizo, R. et al. supra, 239-262
xcvii
    Cieza, A., Oberhauser, C., Bickenbach, J., Jones, R. N., Ustün, T.B., Kostanjsek, N., Morris, John N. and
Chatterji, Somnath. 2014. The English are healthier than the Americans: really? International Journal of
Epidemiology. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyu182.
xcviii
     Whiteneck G. Conceptual models of disability: past, present and future. 2006. In Field MJ, Jette AM,
Martin L, editors. Workshop on disability in America: a new look —summary and background papers.
Washington (DC): National Academies Press. pp 50-66; and Jette AM, Haley SM, Kooyoomjian JT. 2003. Are
the ICF activity and participation dimensions distinct? J Rehabil Med. 35:145-9.
xcix
    Nagi SZ. 1965. Some conceptual issues in disability and rehabilitation. In: Sussman MB, editor. Sociology
and rehabilitation. Washington (DC): American Sociological Association, pp 100 -13; Nagi SZ. 1976. An
epidemiology of disability among adults in the United States. Milbank Mem Fund Q Health Soc 54:439-67;
and Nagi S. 1991. Disability concepts revisited: implications for prevention. In: Institute of Medicine, editor.
Disability in America: toward a national agenda for prevention. Washington (DC): National Academy Press.
pp 316-32.
c
  Whiteneck GG, Harrison-Felix CL, Mellick DC, Brooks CA, Charlifue SB, Gerhart KA. 2004. Quantifying
environmental factors: a measure of physical, attitudinal, service, productivity, and policy barriers. Arch
Phys Med Rehabil 85:1324-35; Whiteneck, Gale and Dijkers, Marcel P. 2009. Difficult to measure constructs:
Conceptual and methodological issues concerning participation and environmental factors. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil 90(11): S22-S35; and Magasi et al., supra.
ci
   See Gray DB, Hollingsworth HH, Stark SL, Morgan KA. 2006. 2006. Participation surv ey/mobility:
psychometric properties of a measure of participation participation for people with mobility impairments
and limitations. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 87:189-97 and Gray DB, Hollingsworth HH, Stark S, Morgan KA.
2008. A subjective measure of environmental facilitators and barriers to participation for people with
mobility limitations. Disabil Rehabil 2008, 30:434-57.
cii
       WHO, 2001, supra p 17.
ciii
       UN Convention, 2006, supra.
civ
       Ibid.




                                                                                                           126
