    Report No: ACS18763
.




    World
    GPOBA W1 Sector Analysis Energy
    SCIENCE OF DELIVERY FOR
    QUALITY INFRASTRUCTURE AND SDGS

    ENERGY SECTOR EXPERIENCE
    OF OUTPUT-BASED AID




.
    1-June-2016


.
    GSUOA
    OTHER
.
.
.
    Standard Disclaimer:
.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
    findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
    Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
    included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
    imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
    acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:


    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
    may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
    encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
    Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
    4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
    World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




    GPOBA:



    The Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) is a global partnership program administered by the World Bank. It
    was established in 2003 to develop output-based aid (OBA) approaches across a variety of sectors — among them water,
    energy, health, and education. As of September 2015, through a portfolio of 44 projects with US$228 million in commitments
    for subsidy funding and ongoing technical assistance activities, GPOBA is demonstrating that OBA can deliver a diverse
    range of services and lasting results for the poor. The program’s current donors are the United Kingdom’s Department for
    International Development (DFID), International Finance Corporation (IFC), Directorate-General for International
    Cooperation of the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs (DGIS), Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT),
    and Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida). For more information about GPOBA, please visit
    www.gpoba.org.




    Acknowledgement:



    This report was prepared by GPOBA. Oleh Khalayim was the Task Team Leader and Hywon Kim was co-Task Team Leader,
    with key analytical roles of Enrique Crousillat, Robert Warner and Richard Vaughan and data support from FERDI interns
    Coumba Ngom and Mamady Nana Kaba. The analytical deliverables were reviewed by head of GPOBA Catherine C.
    O'Farrell as well as its water coordinator Rajesh K. Advani, energy coordinator Juliet Pumpuni, lead evaluation specialist Pia
    Schneider and data reporting analyst Daniel Coila.



                                                   Page 2 of 36
      ENERGY
SECTOR EXPERIENCE
OF OUTPUT-BASED AID




       Page 3 of 36
                                                June 2016




                                                 Summary

The mutually-reinforcing relationship between              approach – but one mechanism through which
electricity access, economic development, and              efficiency gains of sector reform and efficiency
poverty reduction is well established. Electricity         improvements can be shared with low income
access also improves welfare outcomes. The                 users. Also, it should be acknowledged that
challenge is that more than 1 billion people lack          OBA’s greater emphasis on delivery brings
access to electricity, 87% of whom are in Sub-             about a higher costs/risk to service providers and
Saharan Africa and South Asia. Sustainable                 the use of additional resources in the verification
Development Goal #7 “Ensure Access to                      process.
Affordable, Reliable, Sustainable, and Modern
                                                           Overall, the performance of the energy
Energy for All? creates a framework for tackling
                                                           portfolio has been mixed with a balanced on
the challenge of mobilizing the large investments
                                                           the positive side. This positive balance is quite
required and making energy available at
                                                           evident when assessing the effectiveness and
affordable prices.
                                                           efficiency of energy projects, as well as the
                                                           performance of the main participants involved
                                                           (Borrowers and the World Bank). The portfolio’s
SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
                                                           sustainability is perceived as being weaker, a
GPOBA has demonstrated the feasibility of                  drawback common to the universe of
the OBA approach in the energy sector and                  rural/poverty oriented projects, including OBA
particularly in addressing successfully the                and non-OBA approaches.
affordability barrier in reaching low-income
                                                           The relevance of GPOBA’s energy portfolio is
rural households. In Bangladesh, overcoming
                                                           confirmed when compared to the WBG
the affordability barrier through a combination of
                                                           energy strategy. The energy portfolio deals
longer-term consumer credit, GPOBA subsidies
                                                           directly with two of the most important WBG
and product choice opened the way to
                                                           energy goals: universal access and the expansion
widespread adoption of solar home systems. A
                                                           of renewable energy, as well as addressing key
flexible design, adaptable to the conditions of
                                                           barriers to electrification. Also, the portfolio’s
each community and to the potential contribution
                                                           technological and regional diversity –which
of local governments, proved to be successful in
                                                           included power grid extension and off-grid and
maximizing the benefits in rural electrification in
                                                           mini-grid electrification, as well as gas related
Bolivia. Often building over existing IDA
                                                           projects– was the appropriate strategy for a
operations, and integrated into the World Bank’s
                                                           program aimed at testing new approaches within
country level work, GPOBA projects have
                                                           an environment of diverse needs.
offered an effective mechanism in targeting the
poor and enhancing the quality of the product.             Overall, the independent verification of
                                                           delivery     has     functioned      efficiently,
OBA approaches have advantages over
                                                           contributing towards quality assurance and
traditional approaches in targeting subsidies
                                                           the timely delivery of outputs and subsidies
and a stronger delivery focus, thus, helping
                                                           disbursement. The World Bank placed special
improving sector performance. However, it
                                                           attention on this key component of the OBA
should be recognized that OBA has
                                                           approach as in most cases the IVAs were funded
limitations associated to its scale and, hence,
                                                           by the project and valuable technical assistance
its scope, and to some characteristics
                                                           was provided.
associated to its output focus. OBA should not
be seen as a substitute for sector reform – which          There is evidence of an ongoing learning that
is an essential condition for scaling-up the               is helping to improve the overall performance


                                                 Page 4 of 36
of the energy portfolio. An effective monitoring          when    dealing      with     renewable    energy
process that has been particularly helpful in: (i)        technologies that are still evolving.
improving the performance of projects –i.e.
                                                          GPOBA’s experience confirms that an OBA
through project restructuring often aimed at
                                                          approach shifts risks to service providers and
amending the subsidy scheme, also taking into
                                                          incorporates a stronger focus on delivery and
consideration the technological changes such as
                                                          quality of service. Paying on outputs effectively
pre-paid meters; and (ii) enhancing the design of
                                                          transfers an important component of project
subsequent projects, including improvements in
                                                          implementation risks, including technical
the OBA scheme with view to achieve greater
                                                          compliance and financial management, to service
sustainability    and     innovative    financing
                                                          providers. However, the extent to which service
mechanisms to address the pre-financing and
                                                          providers can bear additional risks should be
affordability challenges.
                                                          assessed carefully since shifting excessive risks
SUMMARY OF LESSONS FROM                                   to providers could hamper their ability to deliver
PROJECT DESIGN AND                                        outputs. In particular, issues to assess prudently
IMPLEMENTATION                                            are market risks that could be beyond the control
                                                          of the provider or, specific economic conditions,
These     lessons     address      design    and
                                                          such as exchange risks in financially unstable
implementation issues of energy access projects
                                                          environments.
that would require special attention when scaling
up an OBA approach.                                       Access to financing to cover the up-front costs
                                                          (pre-financing) of service providers and
The success of an OBA project relies greatly
                                                          connection costs of users, when relevant, is
on the quality and thoroughness of its design.
                                                          critical to OBA schemes and can become a
An experience common to all projects is that
                                                          serious obstacle to the success of a project.
time spent in the design and preparatory effort is
                                                          There have been notable cases of success in
critical for a smooth implementation and the
                                                          addressing this challenge, such as in Bangladesh,
success of a project. Conversely, the lack of
                                                          where well-established microfinance institutions
thoroughness, or gaps, in project design, is quite
                                                          were instrumental in the functioning of the OBA
often the main cause of project failure. Specific
                                                          model, and Armenia, where donor-supported
lessons associated to the need of a sound design
                                                          credit lines were allocated transparently and
are:
                                                          commercially determined. However, in countries
        Time spent in project preparation pays.          with limited or a weak microfinance
        Scalability is more important than scale.        environment it is necessary to undertake a
        Sound analytical work is required to             thorough assessment of the credit needs
         confirm the economic viability of the            associated to the project and ensure that donor
         proposed project and design effective            financing is made available through a sound
         subsidy schemes.                                 institutional setting that guarantees adequate
        An objective assessment of the energy            financial management standards and an efficient
         sector challenges is essential to                allocation of resources. Failure to do so could
         anticipate implementation problems and           put undue burden on the provider and/or result in
         setting realistic targets for electricity        tariffs unaffordable to users.
         access projects.                                 An OBA approach offers tangible advantages
        Failure to identify physical and socio-          in terms of quality assurance and a stronger
         political constraints may lead to                focus on output delivery. A well-designed OBA
         implementation delays and, ultimately,           approach to rural electrification incorporates an
         to project failure.                              independent monitoring and verification system
A key lesson stemming from most projects is               that helps tracking the performance of service
that flexibility of design is one of the main             providers, confirming payments and ensuring
factors explaining the success or failure of              that benefits reach the target population.
OBA projects. By nature, pilot projects are               Whereas an OBA scheme can include features
aimed at introducing or exploring new                     that may offer some after sales benefits – such as
approaches and, hence, its implementation is              selling systems on credit that, indirectly, offers
undertaken under considerable uncertainty. As             the opportunity to provide maintenance services
projects advance, technology may change and               when collecting payments – achieving
unforeseen conditions may arise, particularly             sustainability may require other long-term


                                                Page 5 of 36
approaches.                                                following recommendations are made for future
                                                           GPOBA activities and mainstreaming OBA:
Extensive public outreach activities help
training customers in the use of the                       Explore a broader range of RBF mechanisms .
technologies as well as in ensuring local                  Focusing more on innovation and a systematic
commitment to electrification projects.                    learning process –from own and others’
Familiarizing customers in the correct use and             experience– could enhance the program’s global
primary maintenance of photovoltaic equipment              relevance and regain momentum of its early
helped in achieving the full benefits of                   years. This effort could include the following:
electrification in Bolivia. Also, consumers’
awareness and training fostered trust in new                   As global thinking has moved towards
technologies in Armenia and Bangladesh and                      various RBF instruments, it is worth
increased consumers’ demand. An early public                    exploring other, more flexible, options such
outreach can be paramount also in ensuring the                  as disbursing the subsidy upon completion
active involvement of local governments in                      of intermediate targets or steps prior to the
improving projects design and contributing                      final output delivery (e.g. partial
towards their financing.                                        completion, resolution of specific hurdles,
                                                                licenses) and/or seeking OBA ways to
Subsidy requirements may change within the                      provide guarantees to winning bidders;
lifetime of a project, hence, subsidy schemes                  GPOBA and partners should also extend
should incorporate enough flexibility to adapt                  piloting to related forms of RBF that may be
to new conditions and, consequently, avoid                      applicable within sector-wide engagements
delays and costly formal amendments.                            and that make greater use of national
Experience in implementing OBA project reveals                  systems. In particular, a promising option to
that the subsidy required to bridge the                         consider working with other donors to
affordability gap could decrease either as a result             develop output-based disbursement projects,
of economies of scale, rising rural incomes, the                given that it has been successfully adopted
development of a market for electricity services                in other sectors (e.g. water project in
and/or bidding processes designed to maximize                   Indonesia).
outcomes. Conversely, there are experiences,
such as in India and Ethiopia, where subsidies             Seek opportunities to develop projects
proved to be too small to incentivize utilities or         integrated into a larger (ideally multi-donor)
service providers in implemented projects as               and longer-term energy access/services
designed. Both cases point out the need of a               program. These projects are more likely to
flexible subsidy scheme able to undertake agile            succeed as they are consistent with the long-term
adjustments to subsidy levels and expected                 nature of the electrification effort, and they
outputs.                                                   benefit from the strengthening of the required
                                                           institutional and regulatory framework as well as
                                                           from the existing implementing capacity, more
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE WAY                                resources and a greater leverage in addressing
FORWARD                                                    the sector wide issues mentioned in the previous
                                                           bullet. Adding a long-term scope to OBA
Besides incorporating into project design and              approaches enhances sustainability.
implementation the lessons presented above, the




                                                 Page 6 of 36
                                 CONTENTS



1.   INTRODUCTION
     Electricity Access and Development
     The Challenge of Expanding Electricity Access
     Extending Electricity Access: Strategy and Drivers of Success
     World Bank Energy Sector Strategy
     Barriers to Electrification
     Output-Based Aid Approach and the World Bank
     About GPOBA
     Study Objectives and Scope

2.   GPOBA ENERGY PORTFOLIO
     GPOBA Energy Projects
     The Strategic Context
     Critical Features of Project Design

3.   ASSESSING THE ENERGY PORTFOLIO
     Portfolio Effectiveness
     The Energy Portfolio and Country Assistance Strategies
     Efficiency
     Impact and Sustainability
     The Portfolio as a Pilot

4.   CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
     Main Findings
     Lessons from Project Design and Implementation
     The Way Forward




                                   Page 7 of 36
             ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADB     Asian Development Bank
AEI     Africa Electrification Initiative
AEPC    Alternative Energy Promotion Center (Nepal)
AF      Additional Financing
AFD     Agence Française de Développement
BSP     Biogas Support Program (Nepal)
CAS     Country Assistance Strategy
CDCF    Community Development Carbon Fund (Nepal)
CFL     Compact Fluorescent Lamp
CPS     Country Partnership Strategy
DALY    Disability-adjusted Life Year
DGIS    Directoraat Generaal Internationale Samenwerking, Netherlands
DO      Development Objectives
DPL     Development Policy Loan
EEPCo   Ethiopia Electric Power Corporation
ERT     Energy for Rural Transformation (Uganda)
GEF     Global Environmental Facility
GEO     Global Environmental Objective
GHG     Greenhouse Gas
GOA     Government of Armenia
GoB     Government of Bangladesh
GoN     Government of Nepal
GPOBA   Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid
GPRS    Ghana Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy
GRM     Grant Reporting and Monitoring
GTZ     Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit
HDI     Human Development Index
ICR     Implementation Completion and Results Report
IDA     International Development Agency
IDCOL   Infrastructure Development Company Ltd. (Bangladesh)
IDP     Index of Development and Peace (Colombia)
IDTR    Infraestructura Descentralizada para Transformación Rural (Bolivia)
IEA     International Energy Agency
IEG     Internal Evaluation Group
IFC     International Finance Corporation
ISR     Implementation Supervision Report
IVA     Independent Verification Agent
KEEP    Kenya Electricity Expansion Project
KfW     Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
KPLC    Kenya Power and Lighting Company
LDC     Licensed Distribution Company (Uganda)
LED     Light-emitting diode
MDG     Millennium Development Goals
NDP     National Development Plan (Colombia)
NGO     Non-Government Organization
OBA     Output-Based Aid
PBS     Protection of Basic Services (Ethiopia)


                                  Page 8 of 36
PDO      Project Development Objective
PO       Partner Organization (Bangladesh)
PPP      Public-Private Partnership
PSNP     Productive Safety Nets Program (Ethiopia)
PV       Photovoltaics
RBF      Results-Based Financing
REA      Rural Electrification Agency (Uganda)
RERED    Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Development (Bangladesh)
RIL      Reliance Infrastructure Limited (India)
R2E2     Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund (Armenia)
R&D      Research and Development
SE4All   Sustainable Energy for All
SHS      Solar Home System
SNV      Stichting Nederlandse Vrijwilligers, Netherlands
TA       Technical Assistance
TTL      Task Team Leader
UHP      Urban Heating Project (Armenia)
UNDP     United Nations Development Program
USAID    United States Agency for International Development
WBG      World Bank Group




                                  Page 9 of 36
I.      INTRODUCTION

ELECRICITY ACCESS AND DEVELOPMENT
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) placed access to basic services at the center of
international development in 2016-2030. Out of 17 goals, five address the access of poor people
to basic services: to health in SDG3, to education in SDG4 and SDG5, to water and sanitation in
SDG6, to energy in SDG7, and to urban services in SDG11. The Rio+20 Earth Summit of 2012
approved the thematic areas of the SDGs while demonstrating a great attendance and unanimity
of the world leaders. This cohesion of priorities in international development and environmental
activism has not been seen in the previous two Earth Summits in Rio in 1992 and in
Johannesburg in 2002. This rising prominence of access to basic services in the future fifteen
years is both a big step forward and a logical follow-on from the two previous fifteen-year cycles
of global agenda setting – the Washington Consensus with its focus on macroeconomic
stabilization and openness and the Millennium Development Goals with their focus on extreme
poverty. Energy access agenda did not feature in the MDGs but was present indirectly,
particularly through agendas on eradicating extreme poverty in MDG1 and on improving lives of
slum-dwellers in Target 7.D as a part of ensuring environmental sustainability under MDG7.1
The mutually reinforcing relationship between electricity access, economic development,
and poverty reduction is well established. Overall, countries with higher levels of electricity
use are associated with higher levels of national income. Increased levels of electricity access are
also associated with lower incidence of extreme poverty. These empirically observed
relationships underline the link between electricity access and the goals of reducing poverty and
improving shared prosperity.
The SDGs framed access to basic services as a matter of dignity. This framework was
confirmed in 2014 in SDG synthesis report The Road to Dignity by 2030 prepared by the UN
Secretary-General. The report traces this framework back to the UN Charter of 1945 where the
governments committed “to reaffirm faith… in the dignity and worth of the human person? (p.3).
Explaining the progression from extreme-poverty alleviation to dignity, the report acknowledges
that the MDGs furnished evidence of how “[t]ransparency was enhanced, multilateral approaches
were strengthened and a results-based approach to public policy was fostered? (p.5), thereby
laying the foundation for addressing dignity in international development. The SDG synthesis
report also promotes self-reliance of developing countries rather than just the North-to-South aid,
as the challenge of poverty and exclusion extends beyond charity to the hungry and the most
deprived. SDG7 is poised to Ensure Access to Affordable, Reliable, Sustainable and Clean
Energy for All by 2030 with the targets of (7.1) universal access, (7.2) substantial increase in
renewable energy, (7.3) doubling of energy efficiency improvements, (7.4) international
cooperation as to research on access and energy technologies, and (7.5) increase in energy
infrastructure, especially in countries that are least developed, land-locked or small islands – in
accordance with their respective programs.2
Electricity access improves welfare outcomes. Directly or otherwise, access to electricity
results in progress in all dimensions of human welfare and development including education,
health care, access to water, essential communications and information as well as simple financial
transactional services, income generation, and environmental sustainability. Also, a positive
relationship can be seen between electricity access and the Human Development Index (HDI).



1
  Target 7.D was the only one with the timeframe of 2020 (rather than 2015) because of the complexity of
the challenge.
2
  From http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/energy

                                              Page 10 of 36
THE CHALLENGE OF EXPANDING ELECTRICITY ACCESS
About 1.1 billion people lack access to electricity worldwide; the access challenge is most
marked in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. The population without access to electricity is
concentrated in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, which together, account for 87% of the
world population without access (Table 1). These regions face a major challenge in mobilizing
the large investments required for expanding access to electricity and making it available at
affordable prices. In Sub-Saharan Africa, the number of people gaining access to electricity
during 1990-2010 (156 million) was overwhelmed by population growth (340 million). South
Asia fared better during this period by connecting 647 million people, while the overall
population grew by 489 million.

                            Table 1 - Population with Electricity Access by Region
    Region                                 Share of      Population      Population      Population
                                          Population    added during   gaining Access   without Access
                                          with Access    1990-2010       1990-2010           2010
                                             2010         (Million)       (Million)        (Million)
    Europe and Central Asia                 100%            13              20                0
    Latin America and the
                                             95%            145             166              30
    Caribbean
    East Asia and the Pacific                95%            346             461              102
    Middle East and North Africa             94%            104             118              18
    South Asia                               74%            489             647              417
    Sub-Saharan Africa                       32%            340             156              589
    WORLD                                    80%           1437            1568             1,157
    Source: SE4ALL (2013)

Sub-Saharan Africa accounts for 86% of the population without access in Low Access countries
(i.e. with a coverage of less than 50%) while most of the people without access to electricity in
Medium Access countries (50% to 75%) are in South Asia (99.7%). A ‘business-as-usual’
scenario will result in the access figures shown in Table 2 for the year 2030. That is, unless there
is a leap in scale and quality of electricity access efforts, the population –mostly poor– without
access in Low Access countries will continue growing dramatically.
Achieving global universal access to electricity requires large-scale investments. The
expansion of electricity access competes with other development opportunities in the allocation of
scarce resources as well as opportunities for policy and institutional reform. The IEA estimates
that achieving universal electricity access requires additional investments of about US$900
billion between 2010 and 2030. More than 60% of that would be in Sub-Saharan Africa, which
needs an extra $19 billion per year to meet such target by 2030. Developing Asia accounts for
38% of the additional investments required in achieving universal electricity access. These
requirements far exceed the scale of financing coming from multilateral and bilateral donors. For
instance, the World Bank Group (WBG) contributed about US$4 billion per year towards
investments in the energy sector during 1999-20133.




3
 Excluding Development Policy Loans (DPL) but including generation and transmission projects that do
not always address the electricity access challenge.

                                                 Page 11 of 36
 Table 2 - Population `without Access to Electricity: 2010 and 2030 (projected): “Business-
                                   as-Usual?* Scenario
                                                                          Projected
                              Population        Projected Population    New connections    Projected Population
                          without access 2010     added 2010-2030      added 2010-2030     without access 2030

                                 574                   503              165                        884
  Acees Category



                   Low

               Medium           397                  341                       623        51

                   High    81                      204                   261              48

          Universal        17                       312                   329             67

                                                                Population (millions)

 Sources: Electricity Access: SE4All, Population: WDI and UNDP; IEG Estimates
 * Assumes new connections are added at annual average rate obtained during 2000-2010


EXTENDING ELECTRICITY ACCESS: STRATEGY AND DRIVERS OF SUCCESS
A country can set as its goal universal access or maximizing the net benefits of electrification.
Their choice, which implies a compromise between economic efficiency and equity objectives, is
a function of each country’s values and development objectives. Given the importance of poverty
reduction and the inequality dimensions of electricity access, countries often target large numbers
of low-income households in their electricity access programs.
The electricity access challenge encompasses two main pillars: (1) the economic viability of
electricity access, and (2) the need to ensure its financial and operational sustainability, including
social and environmental objectives.
Countries like Brazil, China, South Africa, Thailand and Vietnam, have achieved near universal
access during the last two decades, many under challenging circumstances. Bangladesh and Sri
Lanka have made significant progress in off-grid electrification. Together, these countries span a
wide range of low to middle income levels. Whichever the approach adopted, three important
features that appear to be present in all successful programs are:
 Strong and sustained Government commitment to a nationwide electricity access program
     and implementation plan, backed by adequate resources, and focused on the poor.
 Supportive policy framework for enabling access targets linked to the national vision;
     comprehensive institutional and regulatory arrangements with strong institutions accountable
     for results. Including provision for private sector participation, as appropriate.
 Ensuring the financial viability of utilities and the power sector as a whole; the adoption of
     rational tariffs and well-designed subsidy policy and delivery mechanisms aimed at
     affordable electricity services for the poor.
These drivers of performance do not provide a universal recipe but point to principles constituting
an umbrella of enabling environment for electricity access improvements.

WORLD BANK ENERGY SECTOR STRATEGY
The World Bank pioneered the access to basic services agenda. Its flagship World Development
Report series published Making Services Work for Poor People in 2003 that focused on
education, health, water, sanitation, and electricity as the “services that have the most direct link
to human development? (p.1). Its main message is that accountability between poor people,
service providers and policy makers is critical for service delivery. It provides a detailed account
of why the services were failing: “public spending… is typically enjoyed by the non-poor,… even


                                                              Page 12 of 36
when public spending can be reallocation towards poor people… the money does not always
reach the frontline service provider,… even if the share [of subsidy for frontline service
providers] is increased… the incentives for effective service delivery are weak,… [and] poor
people [show] the lack of demand,… sometimes [because of] the poor quality of the service.?4 In
2004, the World Bank and the donors established a Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid with
the UK to promote access to basic services for the poor by means of Output-Based Aid, a type of
results-based financing (RBF) that disburses after the service such as electricity has been
delivered and used by poor people, thus addressing the challenges described in the World
Development Report.
The World Bank Group (WBG) engagement in the energy sector is aimed at securing
affordable and reliable energy to reduce poverty and promote shared prosperity, as well as
in assisting countries in pursuing environmentally, financially, fiscally and socially sustainable
energy sector development. The WBG approach mirrors the objectives of the UN’s Sustainable
Energy for All (SE4All) Initiative 5 , which has established three goals by 2030: (i) universal
access to electricity and clean cooking fuels; (ii) doubling the share of renewable energy in the
global energy mix (from 18% to 36%); and (iii) doubling the energy efficiency improvement rate.
The WBG recognizes that each country’s transition to a sustainable energy sector involves a
unique mix of resource opportunities and challenges, as well as a different emphasis on access,
renewable energy and efficiency. In supporting these objectives, the WBG has established the
following directions for its engagement in the energy sector:6
1) Focus on the Poor – Universal Access. Supporting universal access to reliable modern
energy is a priority. In countries with low energy access, the priority will be affordable and
reliable energy, including grid, mini-grid, and off-grid solutions for electricity. Engagement in
cleaner cooking and heating solutions will grow.
2) Accelerate Efficiency Gains. Energy efficiency efforts will be scaled up according to
countries’ needs and opportunities. Options vary widely but include increasing the efficiency of
the existing energy infrastructure, moderating demand for energy and adopting more efficient
technologies.
3) Expand Renewable Energy. Support and finance all forms of renewable energy, including
wind and solar power, geothermal, biogas and biomass-based energy. Also, the sustainable
development of hydropower projects that meet environmental and social safeguard standards will
continue. To help manage trade-offs between financial and environmental costs, the WBG will
support more expensive energy options with smaller global environmental impact if there is
strong client ownership, and if concessional climate finance is available to cover the incremental
costs.
4) Create an Enabling Environment. Promoting: (i) a long-term sector-wide planning to
achieve optimal and cost-effective results; (ii) regional integration, for a more cost-effective use
of regional energy resources; (iii) market solutions, including: helping create the right policy and
regulatory frameworks; strengthening institutions; ensuring the creditworthiness of public
utilities; and providing guarantees where appropriate; (iv) innovation and technology transfer,
through demonstration projects to promote clean energy, innovative policies and market
mechanisms; and (v) opportunities to encourage local community involvement, and empower
women to achieve sustainable solutions.
5) Intensify Global Advocacy. To reduce the costs of cleaner energy and efficiency to levels
affordable for poorer countries, the WBG will encourage developed countries to provide

4
  World Development Report Making Services Work for Poor People. pp.3-4
5
  which is co-led by the World Bank.
6
  World Bank. Toward a Sustainable Energy Future for All - Directions for the World Bank Group’s
Energy Sector. 2015.

                                             Page 13 of 36
incentives for more efficient and environmentally sound energy production and consumption and
support R&D for new energy technologies. Also, support will be offered to governments keen to
address underpricing of energy and minimize market distortions while providing social safety
nets for the poor and vulnerable.
GPOBA’s energy sector activities support the SE4All initiative, placing special attention
into Universal Access, a goal that is strongly linked to poverty reduction. Also, GPOBA is
strongly aligned to the expansion of renewable energy and energy efficiency.

BARRIERS TO ELECTRIFICATION
In addressing the Universal Access objective, the World Bank Group highlights the following
barriers:7
1. High costs of supplying rural households. Rural areas tend to have a low population density
and many poor households whose energy consumption is very low. This results in high unit costs
of supply. Due to technical reasons, rural systems also face higher operating costs and technical
losses. High costs pose three additional challenges that are linked to each other:
      Households cannot afford to pay the high cost of electricity, including connection fees.
      Unless a cost-recovery tariff is in place, providing rural electricity services is not viable
         financially and, hence, utilities have no incentives to do so.
      Investments required to meet the electricity gap exceed the capacity of low-income
         countries to mobilize domestic sources of financing.
2. Absence of an appropriate incentives system. The high costs of electricity supply in rural areas
and the limited affordability of households make it difficult to attract investment in rural
electrification. To do so requires a system of tariffs and subsidies that ensures sustainable cost
recovery while minimizing price distortions. A key element is supplementing the utilities’
revenues with subsidy funds to match the costs of an efficient service. However, such a scheme is
absent in many countries, being common the presence of ill-designed subsidies that favor the
majority of consumers. This is the case in Sub-Saharan Africa, where subsidies tend to be highly
regressive.
3. Weak implementing capacity. A well planned, carefully targeted, and effectively implemented
electrification program requires technical and managerial capacity that is not always in place.
Countries committed to extending electricity access need to go through an initial period of
strategy development and capacity building. This process may entail new or amended legislation,
strengthening of institutions, careful planning, defining selection criteria for projects, and
establishing technical standards and regulatory procedures tailored to the case. Such a task
requires a significant government commitment and, often, a good deal of technical assistance.
4. Power generation shortage. An important obstacle to rural electrification in low access
countries is their insufficient power generation capacity to serve existing grid-connected demand.
Load shedding has been a problem in recent years, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, where
several countries had to resort to short-term leases of emergency generating capacity or to bare
the cost of power outages. It is unrealistic to expect that these countries can make more than
modest gains in increasing electricity access by means of grid extension, until the capacity
constraint is removed.
5. Rapid growth of population. A further challenge in expanding electrification is the rapid
growth of rural population. While the migration from rural areas to cities is accelerating in the
developing world, the reductions in rural requirements resulting from this migration tend to be
offset in many countries by rising population growth. This is a main factor explaining the
7
 World Bank. Addressing the Electricity Access Gap – Background Paper for the World Bank Group
Energy Strategy. 2011.

                                           Page 14 of 36
‘business-as-usual’ scenario (Table 2), which foresees an aggravation of the access problem in
Sub-Saharan Africa.
6. Urban Electricity Access – Rapid Urbanization and Illegal Connections. Of the 1.1 billion
people without electricity about 200 million live in urban areas, mostly in Asia and Sub-Saharan
Africa. The urban access gap has decreased in most regions, except for Sub-Saharan Africa which
accounts for around two thirds of the urban population without electricity. Meeting the fast
growth of urban demand is complicated by the following factors:
     A large portion of the rapidly growing demand stems from low-income households, who
        consume small amounts of electricity and cannot afford the full cost of supply.
     High levels of illegal connections and theft caused by households’ limited affordability
        and/or their ineligibility to be connected exacerbate this problem.
     The weak financial position of utilities reduces their chance to access the financing
        required for a timely extension of their distribution grid.
GPOBA addresses directly most of these barriers, such as the limited affordability of poor
households, rural and urban, and the lack of incentives to serve the poor. Through its technical
assistance components, GPOBA can also support the strengthening of technical and managerial
capacity required to implement electrification programs.

THE GPOBA AND OUTPUT-BASED AID APPROACH AND THE WORLD BANK
Results-based financing (RBF) is an instrument that links financing to pre-determined results,
whereby success is measured in terms of the quality and quantity of actual actions or outputs.
RBF is not new to the World Bank Group lending operations. This approach has been applied in a
variety of forms initially supporting policy and institutional reforms –such as the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Credits (PRSC) introduced in 2001– and, more recently, through the
Program-for-Results (PforR) financing instrument. Output-Based Aid (OBA) is a type of RBF
that focuses on explicit performance based subsidies in the delivery of basic services.
World Bank Group electricity access projects incorporated OBA concepts since the early years,
as final payments were always made upon satisfactory delivery of outputs. However, these early
projects did not include some distinctive components of a formal OBA approach, such as the pre-
financing responsibilities of service providers, explicit targeting of subsidies and the presence of
an independent verification entity. Hence, the focus on shifting of performance risk to service
providers and targeting the poor was limited.
The WBG started a formal approach to OBA in the early 2000s. By 2003, there were 22 OBA
projects among all sectors, a number that grew by the end of the decade to 127, of which 27 were
in the energy sector. An additional 66 OBA projects were identified outside the WBG. While by
2010 the OBA portfolio of the WBG had increased in volume to US$3.5 billion, the overall share
of OBA in projects’ volume has always been small (from less than one percent to 8 percent). This
is explained by the fact that OBA can be used only selectively and it is not suitable for large
upstream investments, such as large power generation projects.
A systematic effort to test OBA pilot experiences was not performed until the World Bank-
administered Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) was established in 2003 8 .
GPOBA’s initial portfolio consisted mainly of energy and water projects.
GPOBA’s mandate is to fund, design, demonstrate, and document output-based approaches to
improve the delivery of basic services to the poor. Accordingly, GPOBA’s vision is to
increasingly incorporate OBA aid into infrastructure and social sectors and to become a Center of
Expertise.
8
 During its three years of existence, GPOBA provided technical assistance and dissemination grants to
design and support WB OBA projects.

                                              Page 15 of 36
Through subsidy funding and technical assistance activities, GPOBA’s goal is to mainstream
OBA approaches within projects that are often carried out by other development practitioners,
including governments, multilateral financial institutions, bilateral donors and private
foundations. Such approaches have been tested in all regions and applied in six sectors, including
energy, water and sanitation, health, solid waste management, education, and information and
communication technology.
Increasing access to basic infrastructure and social services remains a challenge because of the
gap between the cost to deliver a desired level of service and what can be funded through user
fees, especially for the poor. OBA is designed to enhance access to basic services for the poor
through the use of performance based incentives or subsidies.
Subsidies are targeted to benefit the poor through geographic targeting and/or self-selection
targeting mechanisms.
OBA links the payment of aid to the delivery of specific services or “outputs,? such as connection
of poor households to electricity grids or off-grid services. Under such scheme, service delivery is
contracted out to a third party—public or private—which receives a subsidy to complement or
replace the required user contribution. The service provider is responsible for pre-financing the
project, and is reimbursed only after the services or outputs have been delivered and fully verified
by an independent verification agent (IVA).

STUDY OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
This study is poised to analyze whether OBA has been tested enough in the energy sector, and if
so, whether its experience be generalizable and useful for the global agenda on access to energy
(SDG7 with its contribution of the idea of quality infrastructure) as well as for the “science of
delivery? that includes questions of appropriateness and imbedded flexibility of project design
and agile implementation.
The objective of the study is to analyze the project portfolio and capture global lessons from
GPOBA energy sector projects, provide recommendations for mainstreaming OBA, synthesize
lessons as well as reflect on the impact that the projects have made collectively in the sector.
Relying on GPOBA’s sector-wide best practices and lessons, the study aims at highlighting the
areas of focus during project identification, structuring and implementation in the energy sector,
as well as recommended lessons-gathering practices throughout the project cycle.
To this end, the study is based on the review and assessment of results and impact of GPOBA’s
energy portfolio, which includes seven completed projects. That is, it is essentially a case study
approach that has been complemented by interviews with managers and practitioners in the field
plus the preliminary review of nine ongoing GPOBA energy projects. The study benefits also
from an earlier field visit undertaken by the author to one of the completed energy projects
(Bolivia).
The review of completed and several ongoing projects aims at synthesizing relevant lessons
within the context of the overall OBA approach to support increased access to electricity services
for the poor. The synthesis considers, among others, the following questions: (i) effectiveness of
the GPOBA energy portfolio; (ii) projects efficiency, including monitoring and evaluation; (iii)
impact of the energy projects; and (iv) prospects for sustainability.
It should be noted that given the relatively small size of the portfolio being assessed – i.e. seven
completed projects – this is a “small n? study that does not engage in any quantitative analysis of
statistically significant trends. While the study focuses mainly on the set of completed projects, it
addresses also experiences of particular interest among the ongoing projects, with an
acknowledged challenge of reviewing older and newer projects’ monitoring and evaluation
frameworks that have not been standardized and sometimes without capturing performance


                                            Page 16 of 36
indicators of interest. Furthermore, the relatively short period of operation of most of the projects
that have been completed does not allow arriving to unambiguous conclusions on the projects’
sustainability.
This study looks into questions of project performance to glean lessons for delivery of access to
energy. The term “science of delivery? originates in healthcare and has been promoted by the
World Bank and its president Jim Yong Kim, MD/PhD. Calling for creating a science of
delivery, he notes:
         “Many countries have strong, coherent development policies and programs on paper
         but... are not getting the results they want… [However,] delivery is crucial for the public
         sector… as part of government’s social contract with citizens... [While] we can point to
         individual examples of delivery success in countries at all levels of income,… we need to
         move from isolated examples to broad global progress… There is an urgent need for a
         science of delivery… but that science does not yet exist. We must create it together... We
         must advance from the experiential know-how of individual practitioners to the level of
         analytical knowledge—the level of science.?9
Combining lessons on project performance with insights about impact of completed projects
allows to see the impact of access to energy on poor people’s lives. An even more comprehensive
approach which is termed as “quality infrastructure? includes both how infrastructure was built
and is managed as well as what impact it achieves.10 This report will look both into awareness
campaigns which are part of project implementation and longer-term issues such as sustainability
of energy services.




9
  From the Speech of The World Bank Group President at the World Knowledge Forum, Seoul, Republic of
Korea, October 8, 2012 (http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/speech/2012/10/08/delivering-development-
harnessing-knowledge-build-prosperity-end-poverty last retrieved on May 1, 2016).
10
   More background information and definitions of quality infrastructure can be found at the Partnership for
Quality Infrastructure led by the Government of Japan of which the World Bank is a part.
(www.mofa.go.jp/files/000117998.pdf last retrieved on May 1, 2016).

                                               Page 17 of 36
   II.       GPOBA ENERGY PORTFOLIO

   GPOBA ENERGY PROJECTS
   GPOBA’s energy sector portfolio consists of sixteen projects in five regions. Seven of these
   projects have been completed while the remaining projects are under different levels of
   implementation. The total volume of GPOBA grants adds to US$97.9 million for an average of
   US$ 6.1 million per project. The grants awarded to the completed projects amounted US$ 46.3
   million (i.e. US$ 5.8 million/project), indicating that the average size of grants has not change
   significantly in time. In most cases, GPOBA’s financing was complemented by –or more
   properly, helped complementing– other sources of finance, being these IDA credits or other
   donors contributions, government, utilities or private sources and, most important, the
   contribution of customers. The aggregate contribution of customers to GPOBA’s energy portfolio
   is expected to be in the order of US$ 37 million, a significant figure considering that a main
   objective of the program is to target poor households. A complete list of the energy GPOBA
   projects is presented in Table 3.

                                     Table 3 - GPOBA Energy Portfolio
                                                                                                       GPOBA
              Project       Year                                                                      Grant US$
 Country        ID        approved                             Project Name                            million
Completed projects as of August 2015
Armenia       P103071         2006      Gas and Heating                                                 3.10
Bangladesh    P119546/49      2009      Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Development          13.95
Bolivia       P102479         2007      Decentralized Electricity for Universal Access - SHSs           5.15
Colombia      P102095         2006      Access to Natural Gas                                            5.1
Ethiopia      P105651         2008      Electricity Access Rural Expansion                                8
India         P104649         2009      Mumbai Improved Electricity Access for Slum Dwellers            1.65
Nepal         P103979         2007      Biogas Support Program IV                                        5
Ongoing projects as of August 2015

Bangladesh    P119547         2010      Rural Electrification – Mini Grid Project                        1.1
Bangladesh    P154576         2015      Scale-up for Bangladesh Rural Electrification                    15
Ghana         P105617         2008      Solar PV Systems to Increase Access to Electricity Services     4.35
Kenya         P125388         2011      Kenya Electricity Expansion                                     5.15
Liberia       P110723         2011      Monrovia Improved Electricity Access                             10
Mali          P146287         2013      Rural Electrification Hybrid System Project                       5
                                        Grid-Based OBA Facility - Energy for Rural
Uganda        P120108         2012      Transformation II                                                5.5
Vanuatu       P133701         2013      Improved Electricity Access                                     4.85
Zambia        P146636         2014      Electricity Access for Low-income Households                    4.95

   Table 3 shows that four of the seven projects that have been completed or closed as August 2015
   addressed electricity access objectives, while the other three projects were gas-related operations
   (e.g. natural gas, biogas). In contrast, all the nine ongoing projects aim at reducing the electricity
   access gap referred in chapter I. Also, another noticeable trend is the greater emphasis on the
   Africa region, as six of the nine ongoing projects are in Sub-Saharan African countries.




                                               Page 18 of 36
Overall, the actual and expected beneficiaries of the GPOBA energy portfolio, for both completed
and ongoing projects, amounted around one million households (approximately four million
people), of which about 90 percent corresponded to electricity access projects.
The electrification projects supported by GPOBA have a diverse nature, as some focus on grid
extension efforts and others on off-grid and/or mini-grid services, particularly solar home systems
(SHS). All off-grid and/or mini-grid projects address renewable energy technologies. GPOBA’s
recent focus on electricity access, as opposed to gas related projects, is consistent with the World
Bank energy strategy as it acknowledges the magnitude and importance of the global challenge
and the strong links between electricity access and the MDG goal of reducing poverty.
GPOBA energy activities include also a set of technical assistance and dissemination grants
aimed at supporting its mandate through knowledge products, analytical work associated to
project preparation, training and scaling-up studies.

THE STRATEGIC CONTEXT
Overall, all completed projects were aligned to –and consistent with– the Development
Objectives of the World Bank’s corresponding Country Assistance Strategy (CAS or CPS) and
the World Bank Energy Strategy, and this practice has continued with the ongoing projects. A
main project objective that is shared with the CAS of practically all countries is the reduction of
poverty, which is common to all GPOBA projects. Other objectives consistent with the respective
countries’ CAS are the promotion of private sector led economic growth, increasing access based
on community institutions and micro-credit, improving living conditions and the empowerment of
rural people, supporting the development of rural economies and the provision of an adequate
physical infrastructure as a critical element for sustained economic growth.
Several projects benefited from an early GPOBA grant that was useful in project design and in
disseminating the OBA approach among all players, i.e. implementing agencies as well as
potential service providers and micro-financiers. Given the pilot nature and, hence, the limited
scope of all GPOBA project, other important enabling efforts such as regulatory and structural
reforms as well as the removal of sector barriers to a better implementation, were not usually part
of the project’s preparatory effort but, when available, were addressed by other larger and
complementary operation, such as an IDA project.

CRITICAL FEATURES OF PROJECT DESIGN
The design of GPOBA projects presents many common features that are determined by the OBA
approach and poverty focus that characterizes the program in spite of the diversity in terms of
country contexts, technology and energy sources involved.
The recipient of GPOBA grant is usually the Government of the respective country through its
ministry of finance or, alternatively, an entity that acts on behalf of the Government, such as a
utility –when project implementation involves an existing grid (e.g., India, Kenya)– or an entity
established specifically to promote rural energy or alternative energy development (e.g. R2E2
Fund in Armenia, Fundación Promigas in Colombia, Reliance Infrastructure Limited-RIL in
India). Often times, the latter type of recipient acts also as the project’s implementing agency.
Typically, the role of the implementing agency is to carry out the project according to an
Operational Manual agreed with GPOBA, which includes provisions for financial management
and procurement as well as for monitoring and reporting activities. The implementing agency is
responsible also for establishing the eligibility of service providers, setting technical standards
(directly or through a technical unit/committee). The verification of outputs is done by an
independent verification agent (IVA), which is appointed by the implementing agency although
there are cases where this agent is internal, or linked, to the implementing agency, particularly

                                           Page 19 of 36
when dealing with a public sector model (e.g. Bolivia). In the Ethiopia project, monitoring and
verification was a World Bank executed activity.
Implementing agencies can either manage directly the funds, thus constituting a special purpose
fund or a financing entity/intermediary (e.g. R2E2 Fund in Armenia, IDCOL in Bangladesh,
Apex Bank in Ghana, AEPC in Nepal), or simply assume project management responsibilities,
while authorizing payments that are made effective by another entity (e.g. Ministry of Finance in
Bolivia).
Specific features of the OBA scheme for the seven completed projects and selected ongoing
projects are presented in Annex 1. Some important similarities and differences are addressed
below:
        Pre-financing: a cornerstone of the GPOBA approach is the shift of risks to service
         providers, including risks associated to overall project performance and pre-financing,
         thus introducing a stronger emphasis on the delivery of a quality and timely service for
         the poor. Service providers are, therefore, expected to pre-finance fully or partially the
         provision of expected outputs. Depending on the financial markets of each country, the
         financial strength of service providers, as well as the capacity to pay of households and
         the presence of other donors participating in the project, pre-financing requirements were
         addressed through borrowing in local market (micro-financing), suppliers credits,
         households down payment, or other donors grants or credits, and usually a combination
         of these options. In countries with a strong micro-financing tradition, such as Bangladesh,
         service providers (Partner Organizations) did not have difficulties in getting short-term
         credits; others required additional donors support including, in exceptional cases, advance
         payments from the GPOBA grant (e.g. Bolivia, India). In spite of several cases of
         success, pre-financing remains as one of the main challenges of the OBA approach in
         low-income and institutionally weaker countries.
        Exploratory subsidy design: GPOBA grants are aimed to address directly the
         affordability gap that prevents poor households to receive an appropriate energy service.
         Accordingly, the grant constitutes a subsidy to bridge such gap. In most cases, the size of
         the subsidy was analyzed and determined during project design as a ‘grant to the poor’
         required for achieving a financially viable operation, i.e. the subsidy required to cover the
         gap between the unit cost of connection and what households can afford to pay.11 Special
         features of the subsidy experience are:
              o Discovering subsidy size. Subsidies were usually structured in a progressive
                  manner, i.e. they increase in relative terms with decreasing size of the equipment,
                  thus favoring poorer households. Subsidies could vary within a broad range, from
                  11% to 95% of the installation and/or connection cost, depending on the
                  characteristics of each case. The size of the subsidies is considered flexible and,
                  in fact, can vary with time. For example, in Bangladesh subsidies have been
                  gradually reduced as costs of solar panels have decreased, LEDs (light-emitting
                  diode) introduced to the market and a competitive local market for SHS services
                  was developed. The Bolivia experience involved a particularly interesting case
                  whereby the size of the subsidy was not fixed a priori but was established within
                  a bidding process that aimed maximizing the number of households to be served
                  by a fixed grant volume, i.e. the winning bid was decided on the basis of the
                  lowest unit subsidy proposed.

11
  Such cost comprises the connection to the grid in grid-connected projects or the cost of supply of an off-
grid energy source (e.g. solar home systems-SHS). It should be acknowledged that often the subsidy is
influenced also by the government’s social and economic policy.

                                               Page 20 of 36
        o    IVA. Service providers are paid the value of the subsidy upon independent
             verification of a satisfactory installation. This could be a full payment, though in
             more recent projects (Ghana, Uganda), a certain percentage of the subsidy (20%
             to 33%) is released afterwards, upon satisfactory demonstration of maintenance
             and/or good functioning.
   Targeting; two main approaches used are geographical targeting and self-selection, being
    a combination of both a frequent feature. Geographical targeting is a common strategy in
    off-grid projects as governments often select remote rural areas of widespread poverty
    (sometimes based on a poverty mapping exercise or a social protection program, e.g.
    Kenya, Uganda, Bolivia, Colombia, Armenia). Self-selection mechanisms are also used,
    such as households connected after 1-1.5 years since the gird arrived to the village
    (Uganda, Ethiopia) and/or eligibility criteria that combine technical and/or legal aspects
    (e.g. ownership or tenancy) with a measure of households’ ability to pay (Nepal).
   Sustained technical assistance: all projects included an important, though in a relative
    sense small, component of technical assistance that was used either for project
    preparation (often as seed money prior to the approval of the main grant, e.g. Bolivia,
    Congo), including establishing technical standards and awareness/education programs on
    the OBA scheme or specific technologies, as well as for the supervision and monitoring
    (verification) of outcomes.




                                       Page 21 of 36
III.    ASSESSING THE ENERGY PORTFOLIO
This chapter aims at evaluating how well did the seven completed projects performed in
delivering their development objectives, both in terms of quantity and quality, focusing in
particular on the projects’ effectiveness, efficiency, and the impact and sustainability of their
development outcomes. The assessment is based principally on existing ICRs and related
documents, complemented by the feedback obtained in interviews with several TTLs, managers
and practitioners in the field. Experiences of particular interest of selected ongoing projects are
also incorporated into the evaluation.
As mentioned earlier, it is worth noting the limitations of this exercise. Besides the relatively
small size of the sample –of only seven completed projects, that does not allow for quantitative
results of statistical significance– the monitoring and evaluation process has not always followed
a standard approach. For example, the reporting format of ISRs and, to a lesser extent, ICRs, has
changed during the period of analysis (2005-2014), thus making more complex a comparative
analysis. Other two caveats are: (i) the relatively short period of operation of most of the
completed projects does not help in arriving to robust conclusions on the sustainability of
projects; and (ii) the overall results of GPOBA’s energy portfolio have not been compared to the
much broader universe of non-OBA energy access interventions, nor OBA projects implemented
outside the GPOBA program.
The lessons learned from this exercise are presented in chapter IV. A summary of the portfolio’s
performance is presented in Table 4, which includes the ratings available for the main
performance indicators for the completed projects. In cases where the ICR did not provide a
rating for a specific category, the table includes a brief text aimed at capturing the qualitative
assessment of the corresponding ICR. A more detailed account of the projects’ performance is
included in Annex 2.
Overall, the performance of the energy portfolio has been getting better from earlier pilots to
OBA’s more recent subsidies. Five projects were rated positively for their overall outcome
(raging from highly satisfactory-HS to moderately satisfactory-MS), and two earlier projects –
urban grid electrification in slums of Mumbai in India and rural grid electrification in Ethiopia –
rated unsatisfactory (U and HU).12
The assessment of performance of the grantees and the World Bank is tilted towards positive, as
the performances are rated satisfactorily – from highly to moderately satisfactory – with the
exception of the aforementioned projects in India and Ethiopia. It is important to note that there is
evidence of an effective monitoring process that has been particularly helpful in: (i) improving
the performance of projects –i.e. through project restructuring often aimed at amending the
subsidy scheme, e.g. Bolivia, Nepal; and (ii) enhancing the design of subsequent projects,
including improvements in the OBA scheme with view to achieve greater sustainability (e.g.
Ghana, Uganda) and innovative financing mechanisms to address the affordability challenge (e.g.
Kenya, Ghana). That is, there is an ongoing learning process among the main participants
(Borrowers and the World Bank) that is helping to improve the overall performance of the energy
portfolio.
The sample includes four electricity projects and three projects related to different forms of gas
supply. We cannot avoid noticing that there were differences in the performance of these two
groups. The two unsatisfactory projects addressed electricity access objectives while all the ‘gas-
related’ projects performed well. However, given the pilot character of the program being

12
  It should be noted that the Mumbai Improved Electricity project was closed in June 2013 having utilized
less than 3 percent of the grant proceeds and, consequently, no ICR was required. Ratings from this project
are taken from a GRM Completion Report, covering the period 4/27/2009-09/30/3013.

                                               Page 22 of 36
assessed, and the size of the sample, these anecdotal results cannot be used in supporting any
conclusions in favor or against a specific type of energy project.

                  Table 4 – GPOBA Energy Portfolio: Performance Ratings
     Project                                                       Ratings
                    Overall           Participants          Relevance        Achievement       Efficiency     Sustainability
                    Outcome           performance               of            of PDOs -                         – Risk to
                                     WB       Borrower      Objectives/      Effectiveness                    Development
                                                             Design                                             Outcome
Armenia - Gas      S             S           S              H                S                 Project        Moderate
and Heating13                                                                                  achieved
                                                                                               DOs in cost
                                                                                               effective
                                                                                               manner.
Bangladesh –       HS            S           S              H                S                 S              Moderate
Rural
                   GEO: S
Electrification
and Renewable
Energy Dev.
Bolivia –          MS            MS          MS             MS               MS                S              Significant
Decentralized
Electricity for
Universal
Access - SHSs
Colombia –         HS            S           HS             Project          Main              Project        Low or
Access to                                                   consistent       objectives were   achieved       Negligible
Natural Gas                                                 with CAS         achieved.         health
                                                            objectives.                        outcomes
                                                                                               cost
                                                                                               effectively.
Ethiopia –         U             MU          U              H                U                 MU             High
Electricity
Access Rural
Expansion
India – Mumbai     GRM completion report assigns HU ratings for the Achievement of Grant Objectives as well as for the
Improved           implementation of Grant Financed Activities. No rating was given for the project’s Overall Outcome.
Electricity
Access for Slum
Dwellers
Nepal – Biogas     S             S           S              Objectives       Project was       Ex-post        Low
Support                                                     remain           rated             financial &
Program IV                                                  relevant         Satisfactory      economic
                                                                             against revised   indicators
                                                                             PDOs.             surpassed
                                                                                               appraisal
                                                                                               estimates.
H: High; HS: Highly Satisfactory; S: Satisfactory; MS: Moderately Satisfactory; MU: Moderately Unsatisfactory; U:
Unsatisfactory; HU: Highly Unsatisfactory.

THE ENERGY PORTFOLIO AND COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGIES
As mentioned, all completed projects were aligned to the Development Objectives of the World
Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS or CPS), though this link was not always made
explicit. Typically, all CASs include among their main areas of focus, two objectives or pillars


13
 Ratings correspond to IDA’s Urban Heating Project. There are no ratings for the specific GPOBA project
which complemented IDA’s project.

                                                     Page 23 of 36
that are linked to the energy sector: (i) a macroeconomic objective aimed at fostering sustained
economic growth; and (ii) a human development objective that often includes a special emphasis
on poverty reduction. Annex 3 presents the main elements of each CAS and their performance, as
well as their links with energy. A review of the CASs objectives and performance vis-à-vis the
GPOBA project’s integration into the corresponding CAS, and their performance, led to the
following findings:
     Overall, the energy sector does not play a predominant role in the CAS. In fact,
         references to the energy sector or energy sector projects are quite infrequent, and the
         CAS evaluation very seldom includes energy indicators. This subordinate role of energy
         in the CASs may indicate that the role of energy in contributing towards human welfare
         and reducing poverty has yet to be fully acknowledged.
     A comparison of the CASs vis-à-vis the GPOBA energy projects’ did not reveal a clear
         correlation between the performances of CASs and energy projects, i.e. while there are
         cases where positive performances coincided (e.g. Armenia, Colombia), there were also
         cases of poor project performance within a favorable country environment (India) and,
         conversely, satisfactory projects in countries of mixed performance (Bangladesh,
         Bolivia).
     It is common that pro-poor initiatives, such as GPOBA, are implemented in poor
         performing countries. However, this is not necessarily an impediment for success, as
         evidence reveals that a satisfactory implementation is possible within a country
         environment with uneven performance, provided that some key conditions are met, such
         as sustained government support (Bangladesh, Bolivia), a favorable business climate
         (Bangladesh) and a thorough preparatory process.

PORFOLIO EFFECTIVENESS
A key question is, how well have GPOBA projects performed in terms of achieving the
Development Objectives they were intended for?
A review of the energy portfolio indicates that the quality at entry of most projects was
satisfactory. Overall, Project Development Objectives were relevant during appraisal as well as at
projects’ closure, in harmony with the CAS for each country, and fully consistent with the World
Bank Group energy strategy. As expected, some projects had specific, though not major, design
limitations, with the exception of the India project that presented serious design problems
associated to the subsidy scheme, an unbalanced allocation of risks and an incomplete assessment
of the market and working environment.
Five of the seven projects had a positive performance in terms achieving their PDOs, while two
were unsatisfactory in this respect. The five successful projects were able to meet fully, or almost
fully, their targets. Two of these projects were restructured; one, Bolivia, in order to adjust the
service provider model to market conditions (reducing the maintenance service period from 4 to 2
years) and the second, Nepal, to amend the subsidy scheme (increasing the subsidy level due to
higher than expected costs). Both cases experienced a slow start –a common problem among rural
projects– and, consequently, required closing date extensions to fulfill their objectives.
Findings of special interest are:
        Three successful projects, Armenia, Bangladesh and Bolivia, were designed and
         implemented as an integral part of larger programs whereby their role was to incorporate
         an OBA approach targeting lower income users. These projects benefited from the
         existing implementing capacity of the recipient and, thanks to a well-coordinated design
         and implementation, were able to take advantage of potential synergies. In Bolivia,
         GPOBA’s energy project was aimed at enhancing the OBA approach that had been


                                           Page 24 of 36
        initiated in a previous IDA lending operation complement and was subsequently
        followed by a third project. The successful performance of the three projects mentioned
        above confirms that the integration of GPOBA projects into larger energy programs is a
        suitable way to scale up the program’s activities. In fact, an important advantage of their
        integration to a larger program was the greater leverage that this exerted in addressing
        crucial sector wide issues, such as regulatory or tariff barriers.
       The main causes of Ethiopia’s unsatisfactory performance were related to a design that
        did not anticipate a set of barriers associated to: (i) other concerns of the Government,
        which gave priority to a power shortages crisis as opposed to addressing poor households
        needs); and (ii) institutional weaknesses of the Government and/or the implementing
        agency EEPCo (e.g. in procurement and monitoring). In spite of these challenges, the
        GPOBA grant accounted for about 75% of total EEPCo’s connections in the country
        over two year implementation period.
       The implementing agencies of both unsuccessful projects (Ethiopia and India) were the
        existing utilities, public and private, respectively. This highlights the challenges of
        incentivizing utilities, public or private, in addressing objectives that are often perceived
        by them as social rather than commercial. In the India project the subsidy scheme
        presented design deficiencies that, to a great extent, explained the projects’
        underachievement.
       Based on the experience of the completed projects, innovative approaches have been
        incorporated into a second generation of ongoing projects to address the affordability
        gap, one of the key challenges in reaching the poor. These include: (i) a combination of
        GPOBA grant and IDA-financed consumer credit of up to three years channeled through
        local rural banks (Ghana) and; (ii) a revolving fund (supported by a third donor) to
        provide credit to the poorest households (Kenya).
       GPOBA technical assistance activities carried out through the evaluation period have
        proven to be instrumental in supporting the preparation of projects and disseminating
        OBA approaches. Positive examples of these activities include work on regulatory
        framework (e.g. Philippines energy), willingness to pay analyses (Liberia), dissemination
        efforts (AEI, Lighting Africa, Clean Cooking Solutions), impact assessments
        (Bangladesh, Ethiopia) and mainstreaming OBA approaches (Nepal).

IMPACT AND SUSTAINABILITY
In addition to its contribution as a pilot program, the GPOBA energy portfolio was instrumental
in improving the living conditions of around 270,000 mostly poor households (around 1.3 million
people) through the provision of energy services, which implies an average subsidy of US$ 312
per household. This figure falls short when compared to the aggregate target of around 490,000
envisaged at the appraisal of the seven projects. The deficit is explained mainly by the cancelation
of the Mumbai project and the poor performance in Ethiopia (that achieved only 19% of its target
output). It is envisaged that the ongoing portfolio of nine additional electricity access projects,
will benefit around 350,000 households in mostly poor rural areas.
As expected from a poverty-oriented program, the social impact of the portfolio has been
significant. Surveys conducted on the impact of several projects confirm the mutually reinforcing
relationship between access to energy and improved living conditions. Besides the typical
benefits of energy access, such as savings in traditional and less efficient sources of energy (e.g.
kerosene, candles, batteries), it is reported that projects have contributed in several dimensions of
human welfare and development, including the following: jobs generation (Bangladesh) and
gender benefits (Bangladesh, Ethiopia), education and strengthening local institutions (Bolivia,
Ethiopia), health (Colombia, Ethiopia, Nepal) and improved access to communications and
entertainment in most cases. It is worth noting, however, that these benefits are not exclusive of

                                            Page 25 of 36
an OBA approach but can be achieved, in greater or lesser degree, by other projects or programs
aimed at delivering energy services to the poor. An OBA approach, and in particular GPOBA,
offers the additional advantage of focusing on the poor through better targeting and placing
greater emphasis on delivery.
Table 4 shows that, among the six completed projects, the risks to the projects’ Development
Outcomes are considered to be low or negligible in two projects (Colombia and Nepal), moderate
in another two (Armenia and Bangladesh), and high or significant risks in the remaining two
(Bolivia and Ethiopia). The reasons explaining this mixed expectations regarding the projects’
sustainability are:
       For projects of low or negligible risks; the presence in Colombia and Nepal of an
        implementing agency (in fact, a utility) with a good service record and the proven
        capacity to pay of customers enhances project sustainability. For example, the Nepal
        project benefited from a service (based on biogas plants) that: (i) does not require further
        financial nor technical assistance for its operation and maintenance; and (ii) is provided
        within a market that attracts new entrants and greater competition. That is, main factors
        favoring sustainability in these projects are institutional strength; a simple, easy to
        manage technology; and the development of a competitive market.
       Projects facing moderate risks in Armenia and Bangladesh enjoy the benefits of strong
        implementing agencies (i.e. an entity established with the objective of providing the
        specific energy service and a long term vision). However, in Armenia there are concerns
        about affordability of the gas-based heating due to uncertainty on future gas prices. On
        the other hand, concerns about the sustainability of Bangladesh’s rural electrification
        effort are perhaps exaggerated since they are associated to the much higher expectations
        of this particular project: to make the SHSs business fully commercial, with service
        providers borrowing at market terms from commercial sources, i.e. with no donors
        support.
       High risks are reported in Bolivia, due to the uncertainty faced upon the conclusion of
        the two-year maintenance period, when the providers of SHSs will no longer have any
        obligation and it is unlikely that the market would be sufficiently developed to ensure
        long-term sustainability. In Ethiopia, the precarious financial situation of the
        implementing agency (a public power utility), which is aggravated by the lack of tariff
        reform, threatens the financial and operational sustainability of the sector as a whole and,
        hence, the sustainability of the project.
Long-term sustainability in energy access projects is clear if judged by lead indicators but it is yet
to be proven by time. While all off-grid projects showed success, their challenge with longer-term
sustainability may be greater because in the absence of a utility, operation and maintenance
services have to be delivered by local providers that are more vulnerable in financial terms.
However, with off-grid electricity access an OBA approach could offer the advantage of
extending the obligations of service providers to the initial years of operation, as well as delaying
subsidy payments till specific maintenance targets are met. Such an approach is already being
followed by two GPOBA ongoing projects, in Uganda and Ghana, where 33% to 20% of the
subsidy is released from three months to three years after installation, respectively, upon
verification of a satisfactory service. It is important to note, however, that previous attempts to
allocate the additional risk borne by service providers proved to be excessive. That is why an
option of linking payments to intermediate deliverables – i.e. carrying out a Results-Based
Financing operation that is less strict than OBA – is discussed in among recommendations in this
report.
A more effective option for enhancing project’s sustainability would appear to be their integration
to a larger and longer term program, such as the electrification efforts of Bangladesh, that through

                                            Page 26 of 36
the continuity of successive operations, and the subsequent strengthening of the institutional and
regulatory framework, would guarantee a longer term presence of service providers, including
monitoring and evaluation, and offer the resources to take corrective actions.




                                          Page 27 of 36
EFFICIENCY
Overall, the independent verification of delivery has been functioning efficiently, contributing
towards quality assurance and the timely delivery of outputs and subsidies disbursement. It is
evident that the World Bank placed special attention on this key component of the OBA approach
as in most cases the IVAs were funded by the project and, in one particular case (Ethiopia), the
verification activities were executed directly by the Bank since the grant recipient was the service
provider (thus to avoid conflict of interest). An exception was during the initial stage of the
Uganda Energy Rural Transformation Project, which is still under implementation.
Similar to the projects’ effectiveness evaluation, five of the seven projects had a positive
performance in terms of efficiency. This assessment was based mostly on the estimation of ex-
post economic and financial internal rates of return which, with the exception of the
unsatisfactory projects, yielded positive results that frequently surpassed appraisal estimates.
These results are evidence of two main factors: (i) an efficient implementation of the projects that
often achieved their Development Objectives in a cost-effective manner (e.g. Colombia’s project
achieved health outcomes more cost-effectively that other health care interventions; Bolivia’s
competitive approach in setting subsidy levels helped maximizing project benefits for a given
budget); and (ii) the high economic value of energy –electricity or gas– to households that had no
previous access to such services and, consequently, had to bear a much higher cost for an energy
source of lower quality.
Subsidy schemes were usually based on sound analytical work undertaken during project
preparation (e.g. costs analysis and households capacity to pay). Also, in most cases such
schemes were structured in a progressive manner and, hence, conformed with GPOBA’s mandate
of focusing on the poor. Subsidies worked effectively in the five successful projects,
incorporating a stronger incentive for a timely and quality delivery of outputs. Given the
disparities of the sample, both in the type of technologies applied as well as in country conditions,
the level of subsidies relative to total costs varied within a very broad range (from 11% in
Bangladesh to 95% for the poorest households in Armenia). However, besides the Bolivia
experience of setting the subsidy through a market mechanism, the flexibility revealed by most
projects in terms of increasing (Nepal) or decreasing (Bangladesh) the subsidy proved to be the
right way of incentivizing service providers while maximizing the impact of the grant. In fact, it
can be argued that a key feature of the successful projects was their capacity to adjust subsidy
levels in order to meet target outcomes, while moving towards an economically efficient level of
subsidies.
The Ethiopia project was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory for project efficiency. While the
economic benefits remained high, very low tariff levels influenced negatively the results of the
financial analysis, which was further affected by a significant depreciation of the local currency.
This experience highlights the importance of a favorable sector environment in the performance
of a project. In this case, unstable macroeconomic conditions aggravated the project’s problems;
conversely, in Bangladesh a well-established institutional and financing framework was
instrumental for the project’s success.

THE PORTFOLIO AS A PILOT
GPOBA’s mandate is to pilot output-based approaches to improve the delivery of basic services
to the poor with view, in this particular case, to increasingly incorporate OBA into the energy
sector. GPOBA has also the stated objective of becoming a Center of Expertise in the subject. A
review of the portfolio from this perspective leads to the following conclusions:
       The relevance of GPOBA’s energy portfolio is confirmed when compared to the WBG
        energy strategy. Through its selection of projects and Development Objectives the energy


                                            Page 28 of 36
         portfolio deals directly with two of the most important WBG energy goals: universal
         access (and its focus on the poor) and the expansion of renewable energy and energy
         efficiency as well as addressing key barriers to electrification, such as the high cost of
         providing energy services in remote areas, the incorporation of an adequate incentive
         system and attending the needs of the urban poor.
        The scale of GPOBA energy projects (an average grant size of US$5.6 million) is
         consistent with this experimental or trial undertaking. Also, the initial technological and
         regional diversity –which included power grid extension and off-grid and mini-grid
         electrification, solar irrigation pumps as well as household gas related projects, and
         projects in the three regions of greater need– was the appropriate strategy for a program
         aimed at testing new approaches within an environment of diverse needs, as well as
         consistent with the directions established by the World Bank Group for a sustainable
         energy future.
        During recent years the energy program, i.e. ongoing projects, has narrowed its
         technology scope focusing exclusively on electrification projects including an important
         component of Sub-Saharan countries. This focus is consistent with the region of greater
         need and also coincides with the overall WBG energy program in rural areas.
        There appears to be consensus that during its initial years, GPOBA grants were
         instrumental in introducing OBA concepts into the provision of basic services. Grants
         helped gaining a momentum in this direction and, nowadays, OBA is becoming a
         common approach for expanding electricity access both in grid-connected projects and
         off-grid projects.
        Although GPOBA maintains its piloting objective, there are indications that projects of
         second generation are already going beyond this initial phase, and moving towards
         “mainstreaming? the OBA approach into a broader sector framework. Such is the case of
         the Uganda Energy for Rural Transformation Project, which is creating an OBA Facility
         (to be funded by IDA and other donors, as well as the Government) that will provide pro-
         poor output-based subsidies for utilities in the medium to long term.
        It is perceived the GPOBA pilots have offered useful practical lessons on the strengths
         and weaknesses of OBA. However, GPOBA’s aim to become a global Center of
         Experience is still a work in progress and the initial innovative effort needs to be
         reinforced. An IEG review of the program arrived to the conclusion that “sponsoring a
         broader range of RBF mechanisms, focusing more on innovation and learning from own
         and other’s experience, while strengthening in-house expertise, could enhance the
         program’s global relevance and reach.?14




14
  IEG, World Bank Group. World Bank Group Support to Electricity Access FY2000-FY2014. An
Independent Evaluation. 2015.

                                           Page 29 of 36
IV.     CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

MAIN FINDINGS
GPOBA has demonstrated the feasibility of the OBA approach in the energy sector and
particularly in addressing successfully the affordability barrier in reaching low-income rural
households. In Bangladesh, overcoming the affordability barrier through a combination of
longer-term consumers credit, GPOBA subsidies and product choice opened the way to
widespread adoption of solar home systems. A flexible design, adaptable to the conditions of each
community and to the potential contribution of local governments, proved to be successful in
maximizing the benefits in rural electrification in Bolivia. Often building over existing IDA
operations, and integrated into the World Bank’s country level work, GPOBA projects have
offered an effective mechanism in targeting the poor and enhancing the quality of the product.
OBA approaches have advantages over traditional approaches in targeting subsidies and a
stronger delivery focus, thus, helping improving sector performance. However, it should be
recognized that OBA has limitations associated to its scale and, hence, its scope, and to some
characteristics associated to its output focus. OBA should not be seen as a substitute for sector
reform –which is an essential condition for scaling-up the approach–, but one mechanism through
which efficiency gains of sector reform and efficiency improvements can be shared with low
income users. Also, it should be acknowledged that OBA’s greater emphasis on delivery brings
about a higher costs/risk to service providers. It is therefore essential to ensure that these
additional costs will not threaten the commercial viability of an OBA initiative.
Overall, the performance of the energy portfolio has been mixed with a balanced on the
positive side. This positive balance is quite evident when assessing the effectiveness and
efficiency of energy projects, as well as the performance of the main participants involved
(Borrowers and the World Bank). The portfolio’s sustainability is perceived as being weaker, a
drawback common to the universe of rural/poverty oriented projects, including OBA and non-
OBA approaches.
The relevance of GPOBA’s energy portfolio is confirmed when compared to the WBG energy
strategy. The energy portfolio deals directly with two of the most important WBG energy goals:
universal access and the expansion of renewable energy, as well as addressing key barriers to
electrification. Also, the portfolio’s technological and regional diversity –which included power
grid extension and off-grid and mini-grid electrification, as well as gas related projects– was the
appropriate strategy for a program aimed at testing new approaches within an environment of
diverse needs.
Overall, the independent verification of delivery has functioned efficiently, contributing
towards quality assurance and the timely delivery of outputs and subsidies disbursement. The
World Bank placed special attention on this key component of the OBA approach as in most
cases the IVAs were funded by the project and valuable technical assistance was provided.
There is evidence of an ongoing learning that is helping to improve the overall performance of
the energy portfolio. An effective monitoring process that has been particularly helpful in: (i)
improving the performance of projects –i.e. through project restructuring often aimed at
amending the subsidy scheme, also taking into consideration the technological changes such as
pre-paid meters; and (ii) enhancing the design of subsequent projects, including improvements in
the OBA scheme with view to achieve greater sustainability and innovative financing
mechanisms to address the pre-financing and affordability challenges.

LESSONS FROM PROJECT DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
The following lessons can be extracted from the energy GPOBA projects that have been

                                           Page 30 of 36
completed as of today. These lessons, both positive and negative, address design and
implementation issues of energy access projects that would require special attention when scaling
up an OBA approach.
The success of an OBA project relies greatly on the quality and thoroughness of its design . An
experience common to all projects is that time spent in the design and preparatory effort is critical
for a smooth implementation and the success of a project. Conversely, the lack of thoroughness,
or gaps, in project design, is quite often the main cause of project failure. Specific lessons
associated to the need of a sound design are:
       Time spent in project preparation pays. Adequate time is required in adapting a model to
        new conditions or countries, in identifying implementing agencies and developing
        institutional arrangements in an environment where a specific technology or subsidy
        scheme, such as GPOBA’s, has not been used previously. It is of utmost importance to
        assess the market conditions for pre-financing and the technical capacity of potential
        service providers
       Scalability is more important than scale. A design open to timely adjustments and aimed
        at leveraging local strengths and new participants allows the scalability of a project as
        demand grows. The Bangladesh SHS program is perhaps the best example, as it began as
        a modest pilot project which became the largest off-grid electrification project ever
        supported by the World Bank, proving that scalability is more important than aiming
        from the beginning a large-scale program.
       Sound analytical work is required to confirm the economic viability of the proposed
        project and design effective subsidy schemes. Such schemes were based usually on
        analytical work – i.e cost analyses, assessments of the households’ capacity to pay –
        undertaken during project preparation. Subsidy schemes were structured in a progressive
        manner in consistency with portfolio’s focus on the poor.
       An objective assessment of the energy sector challenges is essential to anticipate
        implementation problems and setting realistic targets for electricity access projects.
        Sector challenges such as an inadequate or incomplete regulatory framework (in
        particular, cost recovery tariffs), limited power supply, transmission and distribution
        networks and the utilities’ ability to pursue ambitious access programs, may constitute
        serious barriers that require special attention during project design (e.g. in Ethiopia,
        sector challenges influenced the performance of all access projects, including GPOBA).
        Regardless of a project’s scale, its design needs to be adapted to the context of the sector
        within which it will be implemented.
       Failure to identify physical and socio-political constraints may lead to implementation
        delays and, ultimately, to project failure. Specific difficulties in accessing rural and
        urban areas of service, such as poor access roads, as well as the presence of
        informal/illegal services run by cartels, can hamper the efforts of utilities and/or service
        providers in connecting new consumers. Such difficulties should be identified upfront
        and programs designed accordingly, including selection criteria that, upon other
        conditions equal, prioritize connections of smoother implementation.
A key lesson stemming from most projects is that flexibility of design and agility during
implementation are the main factors explaining the success or failure of OBA projects . By
nature, pilot projects are aimed at introducing or exploring new approaches and, hence, its
implementation is undertaken under considerable uncertainty. As projects advance, technology
may change and unforeseen conditions may arise, particularly when dealing with renewable
energy technologies that are still evolving. GPOBA experiences that illustrate the need for a
flexible design and implementation include:


                                            Page 31 of 36
       In Bangladesh, technology advancements reduced the cost and increased the efficiency of
        SHS. A flexible project design helped to update technical standards and make possible
        the use of new components without resorting to restructuring or lengthy administrative
        processes and, thus, reduced costs and the need for subsidies.
       Also in Bangladesh, the risk that SHSs might become unnecessary upon connection to the
        grid created concerns over up-take among rural households. To reduce the household’s
        purchase risk, service providers offered the option to buy back SHSs in the case the
        grid arrived to the community earlier than expected.
       A flexible design, in terms local contributions and the level of subsidy required,
        adaptable to the conditions of each community, as well as households’ affordability,
        helped in maximizing benefits in Bolivia.
       Project flexibility is needed to accommodate also to non-controllable, external, factors
        and modify incentives accordingly (e.g. subsidy amount and disbursement schedule). For
        example, upon the impact of high inflation in Ethiopia on the cost of working capital
        required upfront by EEPCo, and difficulties in adjusting the subsidy scheme, project
        implementation suffered considerable delays.
       Experience in implementing GPOBA projects suggests the need to follow an open
        approach in defining what should be covered by the subsidy and how should subsidies
        be designed. Such approach should take into account cultural and socio-economic
        characteristics of the beneficiary communities, as well as being agile in adapting the
        subsidy to changing or unforeseen conditions. Cases of particular interest are the design
        of strategies to make the payment of connection charges affordable to grid connected
        poor households, and the convenience of covering the costs of internal wiring to ensure
        an adequate demand for a safe electricity service.
While most GPOBA projects had, to greater or lesser degree, some flexibility incorporated into
their design, it is perceived by practitioners that this flexibility has declined in time. It would
therefore appear that a more agile and less prescriptive approach to address market constraints
and project design issues, as they are revealed during implementation, would improve
performance.
Another common factor of success in implementing OBA projects is the presence of an
implementing agency with a strong sense of dedication and ownership on the program, and
technical and management capability. It is essential t o have a credible implementing agency
capable to interface effectively with all other parties involved, promote innovative concepts
associated to the project and support service providers and local communities in targeting
beneficiaries in an efficient manner. In a low capacity environment, it is important to assess the
agency’s ability to manage the project and provide technical assistance accordingly.
Successful pilots of new approaches require considerable support in the form of Technical
Assistance. Given their innovative nature, OBA approaches require substantial technical
assistance, both for its design as well as for greater awareness of participants about the subsidy
scheme and in quality assurance: monitoring and verification phase. Regardless of the technology
involved –e.g. solar home systems or biogas plants– it was found that assistance was needed in
building capacity among private or public service providers.
GPOBA’s experience confirms that an OBA approach shifts risks to service providers and
incorporates a stronger focus on delivery and quality of service. Paying on outputs effectively
transfers an important component of project implementation risks, including technical compliance
and financial management, to service providers. However, the extent to which service providers
can bear additional risks should be assessed carefully since shifting excessive risks to providers
could hamper their ability to deliver outputs. In particular, issues to assess prudently are market
risks that could be beyond the control of the provider or, specific economic conditions, such as

                                           Page 32 of 36
exchange risks in financially unstable environments.
Access to financing to cover the up-front costs (pre-financing) of service providers and
connection costs of users, when relevant, is critical to OBA schemes and can become a serious
obstacle to the success of a project. There have been notable cases of success in addressing this
challenge, such as in Bangladesh, where well-established microfinance institutions were
instrumental in the functioning of the OBA model, and Armenia, where donor-supported credit
lines were allocated transparently and commercially determined. However, in countries with
limited or a weak microfinance environment it is necessary to undertake a thorough assessment of
the credit needs associated to the project and ensure that donor financing is made available
through a sound institutional setting that guarantees adequate financial management standards
and an efficient allocation of resources. Failure to do so could put undue burden on the provider
and/or result in tariffs unaffordable to users.
While an OBA approach offers tangible advantages in terms of quality assurance and a
stronger focus on output delivery, there is no evidence that it contributed towards greater
sustainability when compared to other approaches. A well-designed OBA approach to rural
electrification incorporates an independent monitoring and verification system that helps tracking
the performance of service providers, confirming payments and ensuring that benefits reach the
target population. Whereas an OBA scheme can include features that may offer some after sales
benefits – such as selling systems on credit that, indirectly, offers the opportunity to provide
maintenance services when collecting payments – achieving sustainability may require other
long-term approaches. For example, the sustainability of SHS is a challenge yet to be resolved
that warrants exploring formulas to ensure greater involvement of local communities and/or the
long-term involvement of a utility or electricity service provider.
Extensive public outreach activities help training customers in the use of the technologies as
well as in ensuring local commitment to electrification projects. Familiarizing customers in the
correct use and primary maintenance of photovoltaic equipment helped in achieving the full
benefits of electrification in Bolivia. Also, consumers’ awareness and training fostered trust in
new technologies in Armenia and Bangladesh and increased consumers’ demand. An early public
outreach can be paramount also in ensuring the active involvement of local governments in
improving projects design and contributing towards their financing.
Subsidy requirements may change within the lifetime of a project, hence, subsidy schemes
should incorporate enough flexibility to adapt to new conditions and, consequently, avoid
delays and costly formal amendments. Experience in implementing OBA project reveals that the
subsidy required to bridge the affordability gap could decrease either as a result of economies of
scale, rising rural incomes, the development of a market for electricity services and/or bidding
processes designed to maximize outcomes. Conversely, there are experiences, such as in India
and Ethiopia, where subsidies proved to be too small to incentivize utilities or service providers in
implemented projects as designed. Both cases point out the need of a flexible subsidy scheme
able to undertake agile adjustments to subsidy levels and expected outputs.
There is no evidence to support the view that an OBA approach helps achieving a greater
ownership among customers or provides better information on the actual costs for the
provision of infrastructure services. While an OBA subsidy scheme helps targeting poor
households, this does not imply a greater participatory process as compared to other approaches.
Furthermore, the ‘cost discovery’ benefit of implementing energy access projects in difficult
environments –such a rural and/or remote locations typical of poverty-oriented projects– is not
exclusive of an OBA approach.




                                            Page 33 of 36
THE WAY FORWARD
Besides incorporating into project design and implementation the lessons presented above, the
following recommendations are made for future GPOBA activities and mainstreaming OBA:
Explore a broader range of RBF mechanisms; focusing more on innovation and a systematic
learning process –from own and others’ experience– could enhance the program’s global
relevance and regain momentum of its early years. This effort could include the following:
 As global thinking has moved towards various RBF instruments, it is worth exploring other,
    more flexible, options such as disbursing the subsidy upon completion of intermediate targets
    or steps prior to the final output delivery (e.g. partial completion, resolution of specific
    hurdles, licenses) and/or seeking OBA ways to provide guarantees to winning bidders;
 A more flexible and less prescriptive approach to address market constraints and project
    design issues, as they are revealed during implementation. Such flexibility and real-time
    learning is especially important in pilot projects;
 To such end, it is recommended to consider the allocating an adequate amount of funds for
    developing new innovative approaches consistent with GPOBA’s mandate as well as also
    responsive to countries’ needs, donors’ interests and market conditions.
 GPOBA and partners should also extend piloting to related forms of RBF that may be
    applicable within sector-wide engagements and that make greater use of national systems. In
    particular, a promising option to consider working with other donors to develop output-based
    disbursement projects, given that it has been successfully adopted in other sectors (e.g. water
    project in Indonesia).
   Consider the use of a multi-tier framework – a more comprehensive approach that
    incorporates quality into the energy access definition – in articulating better a proposal and
    identifying efforts that are more cost effective.
Focus on the countries of Sub-Saharan Africa; while challenges are more difficult to overcome,
it is in this region where an OBA approach would provide more value added as delivery problems
are greater and, most importantly, where there is greater need: the share of population without
access to electricity is by far the lowest in the world.
Addressing the energy access is a long-term effort that, in low access countries, requires a
sustained effort and, ideally, an early success to gain momentum. Hence, there is merit in
prioritizing projects that are more likely to succeed. GPOBA’s energy experience confirms that
projects can achieve satisfactory outcomes even when country conditions are not favorable or
uneven. However, the following conditions should be sought:
 A strong and sustained Government commitment to a nationwide energy access program and
    implementation plan, backed by adequate resources and focused on the poor;
 A supportive policy framework for enabling energy access targets, including sound
    institutional and regulatory arrangements;
 When dealing with grid-connected projects, a well performing power sector where critical
    problems, such as power shortages and/or financial weaknesses, would not distract from the
    development and implementation objectives of the project;
 Overall, seek projects where there is a higher potential for value added, i.e. interventions
    where the main advantages of an OBA approach –a stronger delivery focus to serve the poor–
    are in greater need.
Seek opportunities to develop projects integrated into a larger (ideally multi-donor) and longer-
term energy access/services program. These projects are more likely to succeed as they are
consistent with the long-term nature of the electrification effort, and they benefit from the


                                           Page 34 of 36
strengthening of the required institutional and regulatory framework as well as from the existing
implementing capacity, more resources and a greater leverage in addressing the sector wide issues
mentioned in the previous bullet. Adding a long-term scope to OBA approaches enhances
sustainability.
GPOBA should intensify its dissemination and outreach activities with regard to the experience
and lessons of its energy portfolio to promote better understanding among stakeholders of the
potential for OBA.




                                          Page 35 of 36
                                FROM RIO+20 TO THE COMPREHENSIVE
ACCESS TO BASIC SERVICES AGENDA OF SDGs




                             Page 36 of 36
