    Report No: ACS17500
.




    Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
    Evaluation of MDGs Specific Purpose Grant
    to Regions

.
    March 17, 2016


.
    GGO25
    AFRICA
.




.




       Document of the World Bank
.
    Standard Disclaimer:

.
    This volume is a product of the staff/consultant of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
    Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the
    Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy
    of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
    work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
    or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:

.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
    may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
    encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
    Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
    World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                 Acronym
BOFED    Bureau of Finance and Economic Development
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GGODR    Governance Global Practice
MDG      Millennium Development Goal
MOFEC    Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation
NGO      Non-Governmental Organization
PBS      Protection of Basic Services
SDG      Sustainable Development Goal
SNG      Sub-National Government
SNNP/R   Southern Nation, Nationalities and Peoples’/Region
SPG      Special Purpose Grant
UN       United Nations
UNICEF   United Nations Children Fund
US$      United States Dollar
VAT      Value Added Tax
                            Acknowledgement
This evaluation report is a product of GGODR, Africa, World Bank. The
evaluation was led by Berhanu Legesse Ayane (Sr. Public Sector Specialist)
under the guidance of Renaud Seligmann (Practice Manager). This report is
written by Professor Rémy Prud’homme (lead author - consultant) assisted by
Worku Yehualashet (local consultant). The report is going to benefit from
valuable inputs and comments from a group of experts, including Qaiser M. Khan
(Program Leader), Serdar Yilmaz (Senior Economist), Rama Krishnan (Lead
Financial Management Specialist), and Lili Liu (Lead Economist).


This report would not have been possible without contributions from the Ministry
of Finance and Economic Cooperation and Regional Bureaus of Finance and
Economic Development as well as the concerned Federal Sector
Ministries/agencies and Regional Sector Bureaus who provided relevant inputs in
the document preparation. The author would also like to thank Hanna
Ketselamaryam Hailu (Team Assistant) for logistic support and report formatting.
Abstract – In Ethiopia, one of the most decentralized countries in the world, decentralized
expenditures are greater than decentralized revenues. The resulting mismatch is taken care of by
grants. In 2011, the government decided to complement the General Purpose Grant by a Specific
Purpose Grant. By and large, this new grant is a success. In spite of higher transaction costs, its
management was satisfactory. The grant achieved three things. It shifted significantly regional
expenditures towards capital investments. This contributed demonstrably to economic growth and
to social progress. Although, it could appear to have shifted some fiscal power from regional to
federal governments, it reinforced decentralization in Ethiopia because it strengthened sub-national
governments.
                                             Contents

I – Introduction ..................................................................................... 1

II – Policy Context ................................................................................ 3
    Politico-administrative context ........................................................ 3
    Geographical context ....................................................................... 4
    Public finance context ...................................................................... 6

III – Policy Content ............................................................................ 10
    Broad objectives of the policy ....................................................... 11
    Specific policy objectives: the MDGs ........................................... 11
    The policy instrument: the MDGs Grant ....................................... 12

IV – Policy Assessment ...................................................................... 15
   Is the MDGs Grant a Well-Functioning Process?.......................... 16
   Is the MDGs Grant Achieving MD Goals?.................................... 24
   Is the MDGs Grant Increasing Capital Expenditures? ................... 26
   Is the MDGs Grant Helping Growth and Poverty Reduction? ...... 28
   Is the MDGs Grant Favoring Decentralization? ............................ 32

V – Conclusions.................................................................................. 34
  Summary of Findings ..................................................................... 34
  Recommendations .......................................................................... 37

References........................................................................................... 41

Annexes .............................................................................................. 42
                                               List of Tables


Table II-1 – Regional Indicators, Recent Years ...................................................... 4
Table II-2 – Four Public Finance Ratios, Ethiopia, 2013/14 .................................. 6
Table II-3 – Capital Component of Public Expenditures, Ethiopia, 2013/14 ......... 8
Table II-4 – Growth Rates of Public Finance Magnitudes Considered,
            2005/6-2014/5 ...................................................................................... 9
Table IV-1 – From Framework to Questions ........................................................ 15
Table IV-1 – MDGs Grant Amount, 2011-2015................................................... 16
Table IV-2 – Block grant and MDG grant, 2011/12-2014/15 .............................. 18
Table IV-3 – MDGs Grant Allocation amongst Sectors, by Regions,
             2010-2015 ........................................................................................ 19
Table IV-3 – MDGs Grant, Allocated and Transferred, 2011/12-2014/15........... 22
Table IV-4 – MDGs Achievements in Ethiopia, 1990-2015 ................................ 24
Table IV-5 – Impact of the MDGs Grant Up on Sub-National Resources and
             Expenditures..................................................................................... 27
Table IV-6 – Capital expenditures, SNNPR, before and after MDGs Grant ........ 28
Table IV-7 – Allocation of MDGs Grant and of General Government
             Expenditures, 2011/12-2014/15 ....................................................... 30


                                              List of Figures


Figure I-1 – A Policy Evaluation Framework ......................................................... 2
Figure II-1 – Ethiopian Public Finance, A Simplified Diagram (2013/14) ........... 6
Figure IV-1 – Block Grant and MDG Grant (2006-2015) .................................... 17
Figure IV-2 – Growth and Poverty Reduction ..................................................... 29
I – Introduction

        Ethiopia is a highly decentralized country. Presently, sub-national
government taxes and revenues account for about 28% of general taxes and
revenues, and sub-national expenditures amount to 51% of general government
expenditures. The ensuing vertical mismatch is bridged by grants from the Federal
government to the regions. Presently, these grants account for 57% of sub-national
expenditures1. For many years, these grants consisted mostly of a block grant (the
Federal General Purpose Grant) given without any strings attached, which means
the regions could use it as they wished.

        In 2011 however, the country introduced an additional grant, called the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) Grant, allocated to all regions and
Diredawa City Administration by the Federal government. It is a specific purpose
grant, in the sense that its proceeds must be utilized for capital expenditures only,
and must contribute to achieve the eight United Nations Millennium Development
Goals. The amount of this specific grant is significant: about 15 billion Birr per
year. This is 0.7 billion US$, about 10% of general government2 income, and
around 28% of the block grant. This particular policy instrument, henceforward
called the specific purpose grant, or the MDGs grant, is the subject of this paper. 3

       At the end of four years of operation of the MDGs grant, the Ethiopian
Government has asked the World Bank to evaluate this policy. This note is a
contribution to this evaluation.

        Evaluation framework - To evaluate a policy is first to analyze its context
and its content, then to compare its outcomes with its objectives.

         Which outcomes? What is meaningful is not so much the gross outcomes,
what happened in the area concerned, but the net outcomes, net of the impacts of
all the changes alien to the policy studied. Consider a policy aiming at increase a
particular magnitude by 50% over a given period of time. Suppose that this
magnitude did increase by 50%. From this, we cannot conclude much on the
success of the policy. Many other factors can explain the 50% increase. It could be
that, in the absence of the policy studied, these other factors would have produced

1
  As discussed later, these numbers include Addis Ababa expenditures, which does not benefit
from these grants, so that ratios for regions other than Addis are in fact significantly higher.
2
  « General government » means federal plus sub-national governments.

3
  Beside the Federal block grant and MDGs grant, there are also other SPGs to sub-national level
of government which operate in the Ethiopian grant system context. The Public Sector Capacity
Building Project (PSCAP) with a resource of 400 Million USD had been an example of SPG from
Federal to the Region. Local Investment Grant had been another example of SPG from Federal to
the Local governments through the Region. The Urban Local Government Development Program
(an SPG from Federal to City Administrations) is another example. Some Regions also adapt the
ULGDP system and provide SPG to city administrations from their Regional resources. Others
include PSNP/food security allocations to regions; Community Investment Fund transfer under
Pastoral Community Development Project is transferred from federal level to selected
communities through the regions.




                                                 1
a 30% increase: in that case, the policy has been a partial success, explaining the
remaining 20% increase. It could even be that, in the absence of the policy studied,
these other factors would have produced a 70% increase: in such a case, the
apparent success of the policy (+50%) hides a real failure (-20%). Estimating the
net outcome is not always easy. It means constructing the virtual evolution, the
without-policy development, often called the “counterfactual”. This may be
difficult, but must be attempted.

        Also, outcomes must be evaluated in constant terms. Most time series are
available in current Birr. But in Ethiopia, in the past decade, the rate of inflation
has been substantial. A birr of 2008 is worth about 2.5 birr of 2015. To compare,
and to add, magnitudes over time, it is necessary to express them in constant birr
(for instance in 2015 birr). To do this, we used the GDP deflator rather than the
consumption price index.

       Which objectives? The objectives of a given policy are not always as
obvious as it seems. There may be several. Some are explicit; others are implicit;
some might even be hidden. Some are short-term; others may be long-term. A fairly
standard approach shows some light on the issue. It distinguishes between three
components of a policy: (i) its broad or indirect objectives (in our case poverty
reduction, for instance); (ii) its specific or direct objectives (here completion of the
Millennium Development Goals); (iii) the policy instrument put in place (here, the
MDGs grant). This is illustrated by the following Figure I-1.




        This diagram suggests that the outcomes of the policy can (and should) be
compared or related to three sets of information. First, to the instrument utilized,
and in particular to the processes utilized and managed: this is often called the
efficiency of the policy. Second, to the specific objectives targeted: this is referred
to as the effectiveness of the policy. Third, to the broad objectives envisaged: this
can be called the success of the policy. In addition, it is useful to question the
relationship between the broad and the specific objectives, that is their relevance;
and between the specific objective and the instrument utilized, that is their
coherence.




                                           2
       The methodology used to implement this evaluation framework has been
based on two pillars. First, we conducted about 20 interviews (often attended by
10-15 participants) in various ministries and agencies at the Federal level, different
bureaus at the regional and woreda levels, and even one at the kebele level (which
was not the least illuminating). Second, we collected and processed a significant
amount of statistical data, some of which are presented in Annexes.

        Structure of the report – The rest of the report is organized as follows.
Section II provides the policy context that is the information, data, evolutions, etc.
specific to Ethiopia, which are necessary to understand and interpret the MDGs
grant policy. Section III present and discusses the policy content that is the
components of the policy previously identified. Section IV is a policy assessment,
which utilizes the evaluation framework proposed above to analyze the
relationships between the various components of the policy, and discuss its
efficiency, its effectiveness and its success. Section V is a conclusion that
summarizes the analysis, and attempts – prudently and modestly - to outline some
potential avenues for future action.


II – Policy Context
       A few words on the institutional, geographic, and public finance contexts
are appropriate for the understanding of the problem at hand. A discussion of the
macro-economic context is less necessary, but it is nevertheless worth emphasizing
two key points.

       First, Ethiopia has enjoyed, over recent years, very high GDP growth rates.
Since 2003/4, annual growth rates have been above 10% (except for two years).
Over the past decade, since 2004/5, the GDP in constant terms, has been multiplied
by a factor of 2.7. Such East Asian growth rates create opportunities as well as
expectations and new demands in public policies.

        Second, Ethiopia is very equalitarian country. An important study of the
ministry of Finance (2013), based on a serious households consumption survey,
provides Gini coefficients4 for the country, for rural and urban areas, for each
region, and over time (ibidem, Tables 5.4 & 5.9) They can be summarized by one
number: 0.30. This is a very low Gini coefficient by international standards. It is
slightly higher in urban areas, particularly in Addis Ababa, but does not vary much
from one region to another, and it has been stable over the past two decades.


Politico-administrative context

        Ethiopia is a federal country. There are (at least) three tiers of government.


4
  The Gini coefficient is an indicator of income inequality in a group of persons; if every member
had the same income (perfect equality), the value of the Gini would be 0; if one member had all
the income (perfect inequality), the value would be 1.


                                                 3
        The first tier consists of the Federal or central government. The cabinet is
controlled by two assemblies: a House of representatives, elected directly by the
people, that prepares and vote laws and the budget; a House of Federation, that is a
Senate, which is composed of members designated by the regions, which is
particularly active for all matters relating to regions, such as Center-to-regions
grants.

       The second tier consists of eleven units: 9 regional governments, plus 2 city
administrations. Regional states have their own constitutions. Each unit is
controlled by an elected assembly (a council), and a cabinet, and an administration.
This administration mimics the central government administration structure, with
“bureaus” that have the same name as the federal “ministries” which are their
counterparts. For example, the Bureau of Finance and Economic Development
(BOFED) of each region is an echo of the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Cooperation (MOFEC) of the federal government, or the Regional Road Authority
of each region is the counterpart of the Ethiopian Road Authority.

      The third tier consists of about 716 woredas (or districts) and 99 City
Administrations, which also are governed by elected assemblies.

        In addition, some regions are also divided into “zones”. A zone regroups
about 10-20 woredas. The average population size of a woreda is about 120,000
inhabitants. Zones are to be found in the larger regions, like Oromiya; or in
diversified regions like SNNP (South Nations, Nationalities and People) where sub-
regional cultural and linguistic identities are strong. They serve as an intermediary
between regions (the second tier) and woredas (the third tier)5.

        The fourth tier consists of about 16,000 kebeles (or communes) A kebele is
usually a village or a community. It has an elected head, and can play an important
role in mobilizing resources.


Geographical context

       The reader not familiar with the administrative layout of Ethiopia will find
in Annex A a map showing the various regions of the country. Table II-1 presents
for each of these regions a few key indicators. Five points must be mentioned.




5
    In the SNNP region, they are constitutional entities


                                                    4
                        Table II-1 – Regional indicators, Recent Years
                         Pop. 2014           Area          Consumption             Rural/ Growth
                           (M)            (‘000 km2)                 (Birr)                 (%)
(%)
Tigray                           5.0               41              5084                76      +110
Afar                             1.7               72              4566                83       +55
Amhara                          20.0             155               4430                84       +30
Oromia                          32.8             284               4483                86       +26
Somali                           5.3               nd              4844                86       +16
Benshangul-Gumuz                 1.0               51              4580                81       +61
SNNP                            17.8             106               4039                85       +35
Gambela                          0.4               30              4607                69         na
Harrari                          0.2              0.3              5088                45       +58
Addis Ababa                      3.2              0.5              8707                 0       +99
Dire Dawa                        0.4              1.6              5885                37       +71
Ethiopia                        88.0             741               4626                81       +54
Sources and notes: Statistical Abstract for population (Table B-1) and area (Table B-3). For
consumption, Ministry of Finance. 2013. Development and Poverty in Ethiopia 1995/96 –
2010/11, based on a households survey; the numbers given have been adjusted to reflect regional
price index differentials. The growth rate given here is the growth rate in per adult consumption
over the period 1999/00-2010/11, calculated from the same source. M=million.

       First, regions are very unequal in terms of population size. The smallest one
has about 0.2 M. inhabitants, the largest one about 33 M.

        Second, by contrast, regions are rather similar in terms of income. There are
no estimates of regional GDP. The best proxy we found comes from the important
and reliable households survey mentioned above. This survey presents the per
capita consumption, estimated in physical quantities multiplied by standard prices;
this gives an estimate of standards of living, which happen to be very similar
throughout the country. However, the survey also offers a regional price index
showing substantial interregional differences. We multiplied the consumption at
national prices by this regional price index, to obtain a more meaningful estimate
of per capita income and a proxy for per capita output (given in column 3 or Table
II-1). As can be expected, income is significantly higher in the two city
Administrations (Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa). But the differences between the 9
other regions are relatively small: they range from 4039 Birr/capita to 5080 in
Tigray and Harari.

        Third, all regions develop, but some seem to be growing faster than others.
In the absence of regional products figures, we calculated (in the last column of
Table II-1) the rate of growth of per adult consumption, a proxy. As expected,
growth is highest in the two urban centers (Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa), and also
in Tigray.

       Fourth, regions are also very similar in rural to total population rates.
Leaving aside the two city Administration (Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa) which
are by definition very urbanized, all regions, with the exception of Harrari, a very
small urbanized place, are 69% to 86% rural. Economically and socially, they are
much alike. This explains the small dispersion of income per capita noted above.




                                                 5
        The fifth point (not shown in the numbers) is that regions have very strong
and diverse cultural, linguistic, ethnic and religious identities. As a matter of fact,
it is these identities that explain the regional map, which has been designed to
reflect and respect them.


Public finance context

        Fig II-1 presents a simplified picture of the main public finance flows as
they relate to the policy studied here. All the numbers are in Billion Birr (B Birr)6,
for fiscal year 2013/147, and have been rounded to render the diagram more
readable. The total amount of taxes and own revenues raised is equal to about 148
B Birr. About 70%, or 106 B Birr accrues to the Federal Government; the balance,
for about 41 B Birr, accrues to the regions and the woredas, and constitutes their
own revenues. In addition, the central government benefits from foreign grants, ear-
marked for specific investments in the country, for an amount of about 9 B Birr8.




Note: RoW = Rest of the world



6
  In what follows, B = billion = 109
7
  The Ethiopian fiscal year begins on July 8 and ends on July 7 (cf Annex B)
8
  It also benefits from domestic borrowing, for about 14 B Birr, and from non ear-marked foreign
loans, for about 16 B Birr ; these flows are not represented on Figure I-1 for the sake of simplicity,
and because they do not concern us much.


                                                  6
        The Federal Government makes expenditures on a number of public
services in the country, for 95 B Birr, on the one hand. On the other hand, it gives
two grants to regions, for 58 B Birr. The first, amounting to 43 B Birr is the
traditional block grant, which has existed for the past 20 years. The second, for
about 15 B Birr, is the so-called MDGs grant, introduced in 2010/11 and which is
the subject of this study. With their own income and their grants income, Regions
and woredas make expenditures on public services in the country, for 99 B Birr.
From this diagram, we can extract four significant ratios, given Table II-2.

                Table II-2 – Four Public Finance Ratios, Ethiopia, 2013/14

                 General public finance:
                  Tax to GDP ratio                                           14%
                  Public expenditures to GDP ratio                           18%

                 Decentralization (subnational to national):
                  Tax decentralization ratio                                 28%
                  Expenditures decentralization ratio                        51%

        By international standards, the general public finance ratios are low or very
low, and the decentralization ratios high or very high. In addition, and unlike what
happens in many countries, subnational taxes are genuinely subnational in the sense
that their rates are decided, their amounts assessed, and their proceeds collected by
the subnational governments, practically without interference from the federal
government. The same is true of subnational expenditures, which are decided freely
by the subnational governments. This makes Ethiopia one of the most decentralized
country in the world. In short, Ethiopia has a small government sector, which is
much decentralized. This in itself is neither good nor bad, but it is characteristic of
the country, and essential for the study of the new MDGs grant.

       This highly simplified picture can be enriched or qualified by several
important remarks.

        Double decentralization - First, in addition to the federal to regions
decentralization, there is an equally important decentralization from regions to
woredas. In many regions, it is the woredas, not the regions that collect the
subnational taxes. They hand over the money thus collected to the regions. The
regions, in turn, have a block grant system analogous the one they benefit from.
Each decides on the amount of its grant to woredas, and on the allocation formula
needed to distribute it. The important point to emphasize is that this region-to-
woreda transfer, which is the main source of income of woredas, comes without
strings attached. Woredas, under the control of their assemblies, can use it as they
think fit. The degree of decentralization of the second decentralization is as high as
that of the first. Ethiopia is characterized by what could be called a “double
decentralization”.

       Addis Ababa - Second, the treatment of Addis Ababa is specific. The city
does not benefit from the two grants shown on Figure II-1. Its own revenues (tax
and non-tax) are its only source of income. Grants per capita obtained by dividing
the total amount of grants by the total population of the country therefore


                                              7
underestimate grants per capita received by the receiving regions. To get a more
correct picture, one must divide the grants amount by the population excluding
Addis Ababa. Similarly, the ratio of regional grants to total regional income shown
on Figure II-1 (58%) underestimates the share of transfers to “ordinary” regions. It
is an average of 0% for Addis Ababa and as much as 79% for the 9 other regions
and Diredawa.

        Investments share - Third, a noteworthy characteristic not shown on Figure
II-1 refers to the capital vis. recurrent structure of public expenditures. It is
summarized in Table II-3.

         Table II-3 – Capital Component of Public Expenditures, Ethiopia, 2013/14
                                                   Total             Capital      Recurrent
                                                 (B Birr)        (% of total)   (% of total)

General government                                    197                57%           43%

Federal government                                     95               68%            32%
Regional governments, incl. Addis                      99               47%            53%
 Addis-Ababa                                           28               65%            35%
 10 other regions                                      71               39%            61%

Selected sectors (General Gov.)
 Agriculture                                             15              65%            35%
 Water                                                   13              83%            17%
 Roads                                                   41             100%               -
 Education                                               45              41%            59%
 Health                                                  15              55%            45%
Source: Calculated from: World Bank. 2015. Joint Budget and Aid Review PBS DPs Reflection
and, for Addis Ababa, from the City internet site.

        It appears that public expenditures in Ethiopia are highly capital-oriented.
Investments account for 57% of all public expenditures, in spite of the fact that by
nature some types of expenditures, e.g. defense or general administration, are
entirely recurrent. This is a high ratio by international standards. This high ratio,
however, owes more to the Federal Government and to Addis Ababa than to the
regional and woreda governments. Capital investments represent about two-thirds
of Federal government and Addis Ababa outlays, but less than 40% of regional
governments (excluding Addis).

        Evolutions - Fourth, the static picture of Figure II-1 can be enriched by a
quick look at the evolution of the various flows identified in this Figure, for the
period 2005/6 to 2014/15. This is done in Table II-4. Three points stand out. First,
total government taxes and revenues increased at about the same rate as GDP. The
elasticity of total taxes to GDP is close to one. To put it otherwise, the ratio of
taxation to GDP has remained at its low level. Second, there is a sharp distinction
between the behavior of federal and sub-national taxation. While the first increased
less than GDP (elasticity to GDP of 0.8), the second increased nearly twice as fast
as GDP (elasticity to GDP of 2.0). This buoyancy of sub-national taxation is rare:
in most countries, most of the time, sub-national taxation increases more slowly,
not faster, than central government taxation. Third, on average, transfers (block
grant alone, then block grant plus MDGs grant) increased at the rate of GDP, which


                                             8
is slightly faster than Federal taxes and revenues. In other words, the Federal
government has been generous in its grants policy, and devoted a growing share of
its own taxes and revenues to it. Fourth, sub-national government expenditures,
fueled by buoyant sub-national taxes and growing grants, increased very rapidly,
much faster than GDP.



    Table II-4 – Growth Rates of Public Finance Magnitudes Considered, 2005/6-2014/5
                                                                  (%)         Elasticity/
                                                                                   GDP

             GDP                                                              10.4                    -
             Federal taxes & revenues                                          8.0                  0.8
             Regional taxes & revenues                                        20.4                  2.0
             General government taxes & revenues                               9.9                  1.0
             Block grant                                                       7.5                  0.7
             Total grants                                                     10.4                  1.0
             Federal expenditures                                            10.7a                  1.0
             Sub-national gov expenditures                                   25.5b                  2.5
             General government expenditures                                  7.5c                  0.7
Note: The growth rate given is the arithmetic average of the yearly growth rates of the period
considered; all calculations are made in constant terms; afor the period 2005/6 to 2012/13 only;
b
  for the 9 past years; cfor the period 2005/6 to 2013/4; the growth rates for the last three items
must be compared prudently with those of the six other items, because they do not relate to the
same periods.

        The remarkable buoyancy of sub-national taxes deserves some comments.
An increase in tax yields can only come from four sources: the introduction of new
tax bases, the growth in tax bases, the increase in tax rates, and the increase in tax
collection efforts. Although we did not study the matter in depth, it seems that no
new taxes were introduced, and that tax rates were not much increased. Did tax
bases increase faster than GDP? Annex J presents the main sub-national
government taxes: a personal income tax, mostly on wages; a personal business
income tax, on small enterprises activity and profits; a value-added tax. These tax
bases probably increased faster than GDP in a predominantly rural country in which
a significant but declining share of GDP is associated with agricultural output. The
dominant share of Addis Ababa in the tax collection of two of these taxes would
support this hypothesis. We cannot give any estimate of the contribution of this
structural change (which will continue) to the high elasticity of SNG revenues to
GDP. The last possible explanation, increase in tax collection efforts and
efficiency, must also have played a key role, perhaps the dominant role. Regional
authorities had every incentive to collect taxes more effectively, because the money
raised was for them to spend, and because the initial efficiency was rather low. Tax
administration capacity was improved, new tools were introduced and public
education was developed.

        Informal taxation/contribution - Fifth, at the community level, kebeles levy
resources in cash and in kind for the provision of local public services. These
contributions, as they are called in Ethiopia, which are not registered in public
accounts, could be called informal taxation or quasi-public finance. They are
legally voluntary, and seem to be proportional or progressive. Their amount is


                                                   9
certainly not negligible. An internal document of the Ethiopian Road Authority
estimates at “more than 2.7 B Birr” the value of such “contributions” to rural road
construction (over a 4 years period). In one rural kebele we visited, they amounted
to about half the formal cost of construction of the 5 km long rural road that
connects the village to the rest of the world. Assuming (a very unscientific
assumption indeed) that this example could be generalized, this would represent
about 20% of the specific grant, or more than 3 B Birr (per year). What is true of
roads is also true of classrooms. The National Education Plan writes: “Although
thousands of additional classrooms and schools were constructed during the
[2010/11-2014/15 period], these were not financed by government capital
expenditures. Instead, the vast majority of expansion to local areas was led by
communities with support from woreda and Regional Education Bureau officers”
(Federal Ministry of Education 2015, p. 134).

        The practice seems to be widespread throughout the country. How voluntary
are these contributions? Responding to this legitimate question is difficult in the
absence of anthropological surveys. Our understanding is that the level of
“voluntariness” (as opposed to coercion) is high, for several reasons. First, the
benefits (of these contributions) are highly visible, immediate and appreciated: a
long-awaited rural road, a much needed school building, etc. Second, they mostly
take place in rural kebeles, which are quite small units (typically less than 2,000
people), where everybody knows everybody, with a strong sense of community,
and a very real social pressure. Third, in these rural areas, the opportunity cost of
labor is rather low; during a substantial part of the year, many farmers are not
overwhelmed with work, and for them spending some time building a road is done
at no economic cost; it might even be an occasion to socialize, particularly for the
young. We did see one such road being worked on: the level of merriment seemed
definitely higher than the level of productivity, although this is of course anecdotal.

III – Policy Content
        As mentioned above, three elements define a policy: (i) the broad objectives
it is supposed to pursue; (ii) the specific objectives which motivate the policy, in
our case the Millennium Development Goals; (iii) the instrument (or instruments)
selected to attain these objectives, here the MDGs Grant system. Each of these
components must be examined in turn.


Broad objectives of the policy

        It is important to try and identify the overall objectives of the Ethiopian
government relevant to an analysis of the specific grant policy. They are in fine the
yardsticks needed to appraise the policy outcomes. Four such objectives can be
singled out.

        The first is obviously economic development. In spite of its recent
progresses, Ethiopia remains a very poor country, and its leaders and people want
to see activity, income, amenities, public services, etc. continue to increase.



                                          10
       The second is poverty eradication. Economic development will contribute
automatically to reduce poverty, but more can be done, and poverty reduction can
be further accelerated by specific measures and policies. A 10% growth will
improve the lot of the poor, but a 10% growth with a declining Gini coefficient will
improve it much more than a 10% growth with an increasing Gini. The stated
national priority is poverty reduction or elimination. Any policy or policy
instrument must be evaluated relative to this priority.

       A third broad goal is decentralization strengthening. Decentralization, that
is power and money devolved to sub-national governments, is a key characteristic
of Ethiopia. It has (at least) two dimensions. It meets a socio-political demand of
regional empowerment and identity. Then it improves (potentially at least) the
delivery of local public services by reducing the distance between demand and
decision-making. Decentralization, however, is a fragile construct. In order to
function, and to function well, it must constantly be adapted, adjusted, improved,
and enriched. The MDGs grant is a case of such an adjustment.

        The fourth major government goal is inter-regional disparities reduction.
As mentioned above, Ethiopian regions are not very unequal in per capita income
terms (nothing to compare with what can be found in countries such as Brazil r
China). But they are very different. They have strong social and cultural and
linguistic identities. They do not benefit from similar levels of infrastructure and
public service provision. Eastern regions such as Somale and Afar, or smaller
regions such as Gambela or Benishangul, may have per capita income levels
comparable to average regional income levels, they are, and feel, different. This
could jeopardize the very coherence of the State. It is therefore very important that
a process of convergence between regions be introduced and maintained. Much has
already been done in the past decades, but more is required. All policies –
particularly those that impact directly regions such as the specific grand examined
here – must be looked at with this regional policy lenses.


Specific policy objectives: the MDGs

        There were two specific policy objectives: one explicit, and one semi-
explicit.

       The policy examined makes an explicit reference to the Millennium
Development Goals. What are they? In year 2000 (the Millennium), the United
Nations tried to give flesh to the overall notions of “development” and “poverty
reduction”, by identifying eight key dimensions, and setting targets (goals) for each
of them.

        These eight goals are as follows: (i) Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger;
(ii) Achieve universal primary education; (iii) Promote gender equality and
empower women; (iv) Reduce child mortality; (v) Improve maternal health; (vi)
Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis; (vii) Ensure environmental
sustainability; and (viii) Develop a global partnership for development. They call
for four comments.


                                         11
       These goals were merely goals. Every country was left free not to accept
them, and free to choose the policy instruments it thought most appropriate to reach
them. The only strength it carried was the strength of persuasion or publicity.

       The progresses aimed at were quantifiable, and quantified. For each goal,
several measurable indicators were identified, such as: halve the percentage of
people suffering from hunger, or reduce by 2/3 under-five-child mortality.

      The MDG set a target date: 2015. In other words, they covered the 2000-
2015 period.

        They have been systematically monitored, and it appears that in many cases
many countries met the stated goals, at least partially. This is very encouraging. Of
course, it does not prove that the MDGs program, which was purely rhetorical, and
not supported by any specific financial or technical means, was really instrumental
in the progresses achieved.

        The other specific policy objective was no so clearly stated, but no less
important: change the structure of subnational expenditures, and make it more
capital investment oriented. It was felt, in the Federal government, but also in the
regional governments, that woreda expenditures were overemphasizing recurrent
expenditures, at the expense of capital investment, jeopardizing the quality of
public services. Before 2011, the ratio of capital expenditures in total sub-national
expenditures was around 25% (for the grant-receiving regions). This is not a
particularly low ratio by international standards. But all the people we met
considered it too low. They argued that key investments, such as roads, or water
and irrigation projects, were evicted out by more immediate recurrent expenditures
concerns. They showed us that when there are more than 80 students in a classroom,
no teacher, however good and trained he/she is, can do a proper job.

The policy instrument: the MDGs Grant

        The so-called MDGs grant was introduced in fiscal year 2010/11, as a
supplement or complement to the block grant that has existed for two decades. It is
described in a 2010 MOFED document with a very explicit title: Guidelines for the
Execution of the Special Budget Support Allocated for National Regional States
and Dire Dawa City Administration to Assist the Achievement of MDGs (hereafter
referred to as the Guidelines).

        A brief detour via the presentation of the block grant will be useful to
understand and appreciate the characteristics of its complement, i.e. the MDGs
grant. The block grant is financed out of a pool of resources which includes
Treasury (domestic own taxes revenue of the Federal Government) and also
resources from foreign and international institutions for specific projects. The total
amount of the grant is proposed by the Federal government and approved by the
Parliament every year. It is discretionary, not pre-decided by a formula or a ratio.
This amount is then allocated to the various regions (except Addis Ababa) by means
of a formula that takes into expenditure needs, and revenue raising capacity. The
money is then sent to the regions without strings attached. Then, each region



                                         12
allocates it to the sectors, the woredas, and the type expenditures (capital v.
recurrent) as it pleases. Ex ante and ex post information and reporting to the
MOFEC is minimal. The freedom of regions in the utilization of the block grant
money is therefore extremely large9.

        The MDGs grant design exhibits six key characteristics: (i) its amount is
discretionary; (ii) its spatial allocation is formula-driven; (iii) its usage is partially
ear-marked; (iv) it is monitored by the Federal government on a project by project
basis; (v) it is accompanied by a rigorous reporting, and (vi) the key role is played
by regions, not woredas. Characteristics (iii), (iv) and (v) can be seen as
conditionalities10, which introduce a certain degree of discipline.

        Amount: discretionary -       The amount of the MDGs grant is decided
yearly by the National Assembly, on the proposition of the government, and in
particular of the MOFEC. Unlike the block grant, it is financed entirely out of the
domestic federal government taxes and revenues, excluding foreign project finance.
The MDGs grant is not dependent upon regional expenditures (as matching grants
are), and its amount is known at the beginning of the year.

         The reasons for excluding foreign assistance from the total amount of
MDGs grant are nowhere specified, and can only be speculated. The government
felt such an inclusion carried no benefits, but had potential costs. On the no benefits
side, there was no real need for it. Foreign assistance exists, and is welcome, and
the problems it raises (how to ensure it does not disturb the balance and the policies
relative to regional development) are treated, quite effectively, in the framework of
the block grant. A region that gets 100 from a foreign country, an international
institution, or a NGO, sees its block grant amount decrease by 100. This well
understood and widely accepted framework functions, and it can accommodate
more - or less - foreign assistance as needed. On the potential costs side, utilizing
this framework for the MDGs grant would unnecessarily complicate matters. Who,
on what criteria, would decide whether an additional foreign grant to/in a given
region is debited to the region block grant or to its MDGs grant? Such
complications could have jeopardized the understanding and the success of the
MDGs grant system.

        Spatial allocation: formula driven – The total amount is then allocated to
the various regions (excluding Addis Ababa). This allocation, like that of the block
grant, is not discretionary, but formula driven. As a matter of fact, the formula
utilized for the MDGs grant is the one already in place and utilized for the block
grant.

9
  There is a rather obvious exception, or quasi exception, in the case of foreign-funded projects.
Consider a region A that obtains 100 out of the spatial allocation of the pool of block grant
resources (which includes foreign project finance). Suppose foreign-funded projects, (which have
been negotiated by the Federal government, the regional government, and the foreign party)
amount to 10 in region A. Region A will receive 100 – 10 = 90 in cash to be used freely, but the
10 will obviously be ear-marked for the completion of the foreign-funded projects.
10
   The word that comes under the pen of an economist is constraints; however, this word connotes
badly in the Ethiopian administration, and the word conditionalities, which means basically the
same thing, will be used instead.


                                                13
        Ear-marking: partial – Unlike the block grant, the MDGs grant comes with
some ear-marking, in two ways. First, its beneficiaries must finance capital, not
recurrent, expenditures. To put it otherwise, the grant must finance well identified
physical projects. Indeed, in the eyes of many this was the raison d’être of the grant.
Second, these projects must take place in six sectors: rural roads, water (drinking
water and irrigation), health, education, agriculture, and small and medium
enterprise development. The grant guidelines provide a sanction (in the form of a
fine to be deducted from the block grant) in the case of non-observance of these
conditionalities.

        As a matter of fact, these constraints are not very binding. The MDGs grant
is indeed specific in the sense that it ear-marked for capital expenditures. But it is
not very specific in the sense that it is not ear-marked for specific projects selected
by the federal government, and that the list of sectors mentioned above covers a
large share of the sectors of activity of sub-national governments and is therefore
not very limitative. It can therefore be used by sub-national governments with a fair
amount of discretion, and does not constrain much their powers of decision. Cases
of fines for non-observance seem very rare: we did not identify any. This specific
grant would be better called a semi-specific grant.

         Reporting: rigorous – Capital expenditures financed by the MDGs grant are
subject to a rigorous and constraining reporting. This is a key difference with the
block grant. Every three months, woredas send a report to the region’s BOFED,
and regions to the federal MOFEC. These quarterly reports present physical and
financial information on MDGs grant financed projects. They are not mere
statistical documents. On the contrary, they command the disbursement by MOFEC
of payments to regions. No report, no money. In that sense, the grant is often
described as “performance-based”: funding is not released before the performance,
but after. This opens the possibility of a discrepancy between grant allocations and
grant disbursements. The allocation is a potential maximum (a right to utilize). The
disbursement is an effective transfer, conditional upon the production of timely and
satisfactory quarterly reports.

        Monitoring: project by project – At the beginning of every year, each region
presents to the MOFEC a list of the projects it intends to undertake during the year.
This list must include only new projects, not ongoing work (started with block grant
money for instance). It is approved by MOFEC. It commits the region. The region
cannot replace a project in a sector by another project in another sector. More
precisely, it needs the authorization of MOFEC to do so.

       Level: regional – The MDGs grant is basically a grant to the regions, not to
the woredas. Ethiopia has had in the past an experience with a direct Federal to
woredas investment grant (the Local Investment Grant), which was subsequently
discontinued; the MDGs grant is not a resurrection of this experiment. The key role
is played by the regional governments. It does not follow that regions ignore
woredas in the utilization of the grant proceeds, much to the contrary. Most of the
projects financed (for instance rural roads, or schools) are of woreda interest and
scope. At the planning stage, woreda governments are heavily consulted, and the
“regional” priorities largely reflect their demands. At the implementation stage,


                                          14
things vary according to sectors and regions. For rural roads, woredas are usually
the actual implementers (with the technical help of regional, and even national, road
agencies). In other sectors, such as health and education, it is the region – or the
zone – that is the implementer, but woredas are always involved, in the selection of
sites or the mobilization of resources – and will eventually bear the operating and
maintenance costs associated with the capital investment.


IV – Policy Assessment
        As mentioned in section I, the outcomes of the policy must be assessed in
relation to: the implementation of the instrument (efficiency), the achievement of
the specific policy objectives (effectiveness), and – above all – the broader
objectives of the policy (success). For the sake of simplicity, it is useful to reduce
this framework to a limited number of questions, as shown in Table IV-1 below,
which will be discussed in turn.


                      Table IV-1 – From Framework to Questions
Dimension           Relation to:              Questions
                                               Is the MDGs grant:

Efficiency          Policy instrument           A well-functioning process?

Effectiveness       Specific objectives         Achieving MD goals?
                                                Increasing capital expenditures?

Success             Broader objectives          Contributing to growth and poverty reduction?
                                                Favoring decentralization?


Is the MDGs Grant a Well-Functioning Process?

         The MDGs grant is a new instrument introduced in 2011 and briefly
described above. Is it efficient? Does it function as intended? What are its strengths,
and its weaknesses? Is it well accepted by the various stake-holders? Five issues
can be discussed here. They relate to: (i) the amount of the grant, (ii) the allocation
of the grant between regions and between sectors (iii) its impacts on regional tax
efforts, (iv) the administration challenges posed at both the sub-national and federal
levels, and finally (v) the flexibility displayed by the grant.

       (i) Amount – The amount of the MDGs grant raises two questions. How
predictable was it? Was it additional to the existing block grant?

       The relative unpredictability of the grant amount has been perceived a
serious issue. It has fluctuated very much over the past four years. As shown in
Table IV-1 below, in constant terms, be it in allocation or in disbursements, it
jumped in the second year, then declined in consecutive years. In the fourth year it
is about 10% below the amount of the first year. This is all the more remarkable
when one considers that, during the same period, the GDP of Ethiopia increased by
an impressive 34%. As shown in the table, the MDGs grant amount year on year


                                          15
movements are not easily explained by GDP changes or even Federal revenues
changes. In the period considered, GDP increased at a high and regular pace. The
rate of increase of federal revenues did slow down (from 9% to 6%) in 2012/13,
but this is a weak explanation of the 24% decrease of the MDGs grant.

                       Table IV-1 – MDGs Grant Amount, 2011-2015
                                          2011/12     2012/13    2013/14           2014/15

Grant allocated
 In current B Birr                                 15.0        20.0        15.0       15.0
 In constant 2015 Birr                             18.6        23.6        15.9       15.0
 Yearly change in constant terms                              +33%        -25%        -6%

Grant disbursed
 In current B Birr                                 12.8        17.3        14.7       14.8
 In constant B 2015 Birr                           15.9        20.4        15.6       14.8
 Yearly change in constant terms                              +28%        -24%        -5%

For reference
 GDP yearly change in constant terms                          +11%       +10%       +10%
 Federal revenue yearly change in constant terms                +9%        +6%      +11%
Source: MOFED. Note: To deflate the current Birr data, we used the GDP deflator.

       A -30% change in two years makes investment planning complicated. Such
impressive variations are probably dictated by legitimate macro-economic
considerations. But they are poorly understood by region and woreda officials.
Some compromise might be searched, between the right of Parliament to vote the
amount of grant on the one hand, and the desire of regions to be protected from
excessive variations in the amount of the grants they receive, on the other hand.

        A second question concerns the additionality of the MDGs grant: was it an
addition to the block grant, or was it in part compensated by a decrease of this block
grant? All of the people interviewed saw the MDGs grant as an addition to the block
grant. Is this view correct? To find out, we must first eliminate the impact of
inflation, i.e. operate at constant prices. We must compare the effective behavior of
the block grant in the 2011/12-2014/15 period, with what this behavior would have
been in the absence of the MDGs grant, i.e. estimate the “counterfactual” numbers.

        To do this, we note that in the years before 2011, the block grant was
increasing regularly, and linearly, by an amount of 2.9 B Birr (in constant 2015
Birr) per year. This is quite obvious on the graph below. This is shown by a simple
regression analysis. We then assume that in the absence of the MDGs grant, the
block grant would have increased as it increased before, and project it linearly for
the years 2011/12 to 2014/15. This is represented by the dotted line marked “block
grant (projected)”, which is our counterfactual.

       The graph also shows the behavior of the effective block grant. It is below
the projected block grant. The introduction of the MDGs grant coincides with a
lower than “usual” block grant.




                                              16
                 Figure IV – 1 – Block grant and MDGs grant, 2006-2015
 80.0

 70.0
                                                                    Block
 60.0
                                                                    MDG
 50.0
                                                                    Block (projected)
 40.0
                                                                    Block (effective)
 30.0
                                                                    MDG + Block
 20.0                                                               (effective)
                                                                    MDG + Block
 10.0                                                               (projected)


  0.0
        2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


        This of course does not prevent the effective total amount of the two grants
to be substantially higher than the single (projected) block grant. The introduction
of the MDGs grant did produce an important increase in total federal to regional
transfers.

       This increase, however, is not as high as it would have been if the two grants
had been additional, as shown by the dotted line entitled “MDG + Block
(projected)”, which is significantly higher than the “MDG + Block (projected)”
line.

        Table IV-2 presents the same data in another, more synthetic, form, by
adding the yearly numbers for the four years of the MDGs grant existence.
        Since the introduction of the MDGs grant, the effective amount of the block
grant has always been lower (by about 6 B Birr per year) than the counterfactual.
We must be careful not to transform a correlation into a causality. We cannot know
for sure that this difference is necessarily a consequence of the introduction of the
block grant. Other factors may explain it. But we did not identify any. There is
therefore a presumption, or a certain probability, that this difference be an estimate
of a negative impact of the MDGs grant upon the block grant, for a cumulative
amount of 23 B Birr.




                                          17
                  Table IV-2 – Block grant and MDG grant, 2011/12-2014/15
                               Block grant           MDG grant                         Total

Counterfactual                             199                        66                  265
Effective                                  176                        66                  242
Difference                                  -23                        0                  -23
Note: The calculations have been made for each year; only the sum of the 4 years is given here.
The counterfactual for the block grant is what the block grant would have been if it had increased
as it did in the five preceding years. All numbers are in constant 2015 billion Birrs.

        As shown by Figure IV-1, this obviously does not mean that the sum of the
two grants did not increase. It did increase, by a cumulative amount of 43 B Birr.
Without the MDGs grant, it would have reached about 200 billion Birr (assuming
that our counterfactual is correct); with it, the total amount of grants reached about
242 billion Birr.

       It seems therefore likely that the MDGs grant reduced the block grant by an
estimated 35% (of the MDGs grant). The MDGs grant has neither been a 100%
addition to the block grant nor a replacement of it. It has been a partial addition for
about 2/3 and a partial replacement for about 1/3. It should be seen as a change in
the type, as well as a change in the volume, of the grants allocated by the Federal
governments to the regions.

      (ii) Allocation – How is the total amount of the MDGs grant allocated
between regions and between sectors?

        The spatial allocation of the grant is done by means of an allocation formula
which has been utilized for decades to allocate the block grant. This formula, which
is regularly updated and upgraded by the House of Federation (or Senate), is a
function of three criteria: the “expenditure needs” of each region, the “revenue
raising capacity” of each region, and the cost of living index of each region. The
greater the expenditure needs, the lower the revenue raising capacity, and the higher
the cost of living, the higher the grant. This is theoretically quite a satisfying
formula. But it is difficult to implement in practice. Figuring out the “expenditure
needs”, or the “revenue raising capacity”, of a region is easier said than done, and
the procedures utilized to that effect are not always totally convincing.

        What is their outcome in terms of grants per capita, and how do they relate
to regional wealth (measured as consumption per capita, the only proxy available)?
Annex F discusses the issue. Two points stand out. First, the dispersion of grants
per capita is very large (from 1 to 5) whereas the dispersion of consumption per
capita is very narrow (1 to 1.15). Second, the correlation between consumption and
grant is very weak; it is slightly negative (richer regions get somewhat less in grants
per capita), but hardly significant. This is not surprising, since the formula utilized
does not take per capita income into consideration. And it is not very important
because, as mentioned supra, interregional income per capita disparities are not
large, and do not need to be compensated as much as in countries where they are
very large.




                                                18
       What about the inter-sectorial allocation of the MDGs grant income? In
each region, the grant is allocated, by regional governments in cooperation with
woreda governments), to different sectors, without any interference from the
Federal Government. The outcomes of these allocations are collected and published
by the ministry of Finance. Table IV-3 presents the resulting allocation. For the
sake of simplicity, data is given only for the four most important sectors
(representing 93% of the total at the country level). Table IV-3 underscores two
important features of the grant.

             Table IV-3 – MDGs Grant Allocation amongst Sectors, by Regions,
                                      2010-2015
                                  Roads           Water          Health      Education

Tigray (% of total)                       28              63               4                3
Afar (id)                                  0             100               0                0
Amhara (id)                               38              20              19               16
Oromyia (id)                              65              12              12               11
SNNP (id)                                 49              16              10                8
Benushangul-Gumuz (id)                    34              20              17               14
Gambella (id)                             20              18              23               19
Harari (id)                               37              20               8               22
Somali (id)                                0             100               0                0
Diredawa (id)                             21              26              13               26

Ethiopia                                  43               28              12               10
Source: MOFED. Note: the 28% at the intersection of « roads » and « Tigray » means that Tigray
allocated 28% of the MDGs grant to road investments in the period 2010-2015.

        First, one notes the great diversity of regional allocations. There is no
standard pattern. The share allocated to roads, for instance ranges from 0% to 65%;
that of water from 12% to 100%. This diversity is enhanced by the fact that two
regions, Somali and Afar, allocate all of their grant to water only. But even if we
discount this peculiarity, the variety of the choices made remains very large. The
MDGs grant has been allocated (to the various sectors) in a totally decentralized
fashion. Priorities and choices have not been made and imposed by the central
government. On the contrary, each sub-national government (that is the regional
government and the woreda governments) has had the opportunity to establish its
own priorities and make its own choices – and availed itself of this opportunity.

       Second, roads, or more exactly rural roads, have been the preferred
investment generated by the MDGs grant. Nearly half (43%) of the grant has been
used to build rural roads, with a view to connect by trucks or tricycles villages that
had been for centuries only connected by foot and mules. This focalization is a key
element of the MDGs grant, not to be forgotten in the assessment of this policy
instrument.

        (iii) Potential impact on regional tax efforts – Did the MDGs grant reduce
regional tax efforts? It is often argued, in theory, that grants negatively affect tax
efforts. A subnational government raises 100 in taxes, and spends 100. If it now
gets a grant of 200, rather than spending 300 with the same tax effort, it might well
prefer to reduce its tax effort, raise only 70, and spend only 270. In the presence of
grants, the marginal political gain of reducing taxes by one $ is greater than the


                                               19
marginal political gain of increasing expenditures by this one $. Prud’homme
(2001) found clear evidence of such a mechanism in a study of 300 Brazilian
municipalities: controlling for tax bases, tax effort per capita was inversely related
to the amount of grant per capita; the relationship was logistical: beyond a certain
threshold of grant/capita, tax effort nearly disappeared. Very high grant levels
produced very low tax efforts.

       This phenomenon did not take place in Ethiopia with the MDGs grant. First,
as seen above, the MDGs grant only brought about a change in total grants of half
its amount. The cause for a negative impact on tax revenues is therefore blunted.
Second, as shown in Table II-4, there was over the past decade a remarkable
increase in regional tax efforts that overruled the potential negative effect. GDP can
be taken as a proxy of tax bases, and regional tax laws seem not to have changed
much over that period. The ratio of regional tax proceeds to GDP is therefore an
indicator of tax effort. Over the 2006-2015, this ratio increased constantly and
considerably, from about 2% to 3% (for the 10 regions excluding Addis Ababa).

      (iv) Management – The governance and administration of the MDGs grant,
which was a fairly new instrument, was a real challenge for the Ethiopian
administration. This was true at both the sub-national level and the federal level.

        At the sub-national level, there appeared a number of capacity gaps. An
Ethiopian Road Authority document on the rural roads program details the
“challenges faced” in the implementation of this program. It describes in some
detail the “gap” between the managerial and administrative capacity of regions,
woredas, and kebele that would be desirable, and the capacity that is effectively in
place. This gap is found to exist in design review, contract management, project
management skills, and produces “projects deviating from the intended quality,
time, and cost”. This is aggravated by a frequent turnover of experienced and
trained employees at regional, zones, and woreda levels. This document also
mentions what it calls “rent seeking behavior” in the selection of consultants and
contractors, and in payments “not in par with the work done”. It also questions the
efficiency of community participation, presented as “not free from drawbacks”, and
offering a level of productivity of mobilized people described as “very low”. It also
notes that the relationships between consultants and contractors are not always
optimal, and explains it by the “lack of experience and the absence of skills of
organizational management”.

       In some cases, the capacity gap was recognized by the regions themselves.
In Somali, which had decided to focus on water investments, the region recognized
it did not quite have the capacity to implement its program, and delegated it,
temporarily, to the ministry of Agriculture. The ministry obliged. At the end of the
period, there had been enough expertise transferred, and the region had been
enabled to take things back in its own hands.

       This “capacity gap” - the extent of which is difficult to measure - is easy to
understand. Capital investments in sub-national governments increased nearly
overnight by more than 150%, and were to be conducted according to new
procedures. No wonder administrators had difficulties to cope with such a change.


                                         20
      The response of the federal government has, in part at least, been to utilize
the MDGs grant to strengthen sub-national governments’ capacities, in two ways.

        The MDGs grant facilitated intergovernmental technical cooperation. The
Federal government has not merely left regions do what they wanted with the
allocated grant money, nor the regional governments let woredas do as they could
with the allocated grant funds. They have instead developed special programs to
help lower levels governments, programs which have been well received by these
lower levels government. This is particularly remarkable in the case of rural roads.
The Ethiopian Road Authority created training centers (for the regional road
authorities that required it), providing standards and technical assistance. This was
made possible by the massive (about 6 B. Birr per year) rural road investment
produced by the grant.

         Also, in every region, this same bulky investment led to the creation or
strengthening of public works enterprises. In some cases, it took the form of a large
number of small-scale private construction companies which could be contracted
out by regions and woredas to undertake the investments. These companies have
acquired technical expertise, financial strength, management capabilities. Some
have expanded from their initial practice in road construction to school construction
(or vice versa). In some other cases, as in water in Somali and Afar, where private
initiative was too weak, regions preferred to create region-owned waterworks
companies sufficiently large to be efficient. The net result is the development and
in some cases the creation, thanks to the nature of grant, of a significant
“construction capacity” in the country.

        At the Federal level, the administrative challenge was equally considerable.
Managing a specific purpose grant like the MDGs grant is much more complicated
than managing a general purpose grant. Transaction costs are much higher.
MOFEC, the ministry in charge, had to monitor the standards and quality of the
reporting on projects and expenditures, ensure that reports were submitted timely,
verify that the required conditions were fulfilled, and coordinate the action of the
various ministries and agencies. This monumental task was entrusted to a very
small team (3 persons only) created within the Budget and Planning Directory of
the ministry. In view of the difficulties involved, it did an excellent job and
succeeded in making the system operational. Nevertheless, some problems remain.
Three are often mentioned by sub-national governments.

        One is the delays with which regions (and consequently woredas) are
actually credited of the grant income by the Federal Government. As mentioned
above in the description of the MDGs grant, woredas and regions Bureaus prepare
quarterly reports on investment progresses, which are consolidated by the Regions
Finance Bureaus (the BOFEDs) and sent to the Federal ministry of Finance
(MOFEC). Money is then sent from MOFEC to BOFEDs and in some cases from
BOFEDs to woredas Finance offices. In the regions with zones, an additional level
(the zone) is added to the process. All this necessarily takes time, and creates
liquidity problems for regions and woredas.



                                         21
        Another is the discrepancy between allocations and transfers. Actual
transfers often fall short of allocated transfers, as shown in Table IV-2 below. In
the first two years, the complex and time-taking MDGs grants procedures utilized
made it difficult to utilize 15% of the funds allocated. This problem however was
largely solved in the following years. A 100% effective/allocated transfer ratio is
probably not possible and not even desirable. It would suggest either that all
projects proposed are perfect (an unlikely occurrence), or that BOFEDs and
MOFEC do not exercise their scrutiny function (a non-desirable occurrence). The
high ratio achieved is remarkable. It means that the regional and federal
administrations worked hard and efficiently to manage a rather complex process.

          Table IV-3 – MDGs Grant, Allocated and Transferred, 2011/12-2014/15
                                         Allocated        Transferred           Ratio
                                          (B Birr)           (B Birr)            (%)

                2011/12                        15.0             12.8            85.1
                2012/13                        20.0             17.3            86.5
                2013/14                        15.0             14.7            98.3
                2014/15                        15.0             14.8            98.7
Source: MOFED. Money numbers are in current terms.

        Finally, there is a contradiction between the annual nature of the MDGs
grant and the multi-annual nature of many capital investments. Many, not to say
most, capital investments, must be planned over a two or three years period, either
because they take that amount of time to be completed, or because each of them is
part of a set that can only be completed over several years. As mentioned below,
this basic contradiction is in practice largely solved by the flexibility with which
carry-overs from one year to the next are authorized or practiced.

       (v) Flexibility – In practice, the MDGs grant process displays a significant
dose of flexibility. This seems to be due to the intelligent (or non-bureaucratic)
fashion with which it is implemented, more than to a built-in flexibility of the
process itself. We can give some examples of this flexibility.

        One concerns the inter-sectorial allocation of the grant resources. A top-
down bureaucratic approach would have prescribed a pattern, or at least a clear
relationship between proposed capital investment and Millennium Development
goals. This is not at all what happens. Regions and woredas are left free to select
the allocation they think most appropriate for them. As mentioned, there are two
regions (Somali and Afar) who chose to allocate all of their grant resources to just
one sector, water provision. This is indeed the spirit of decentralization, but it
results in a remarkable and welcome flexibility.

        Another example of flexibility concerns inter-sectorial and inter-temporal
adjustments in the use of MDGs grant money. In principle, BOFED and MOFED
approved allocations between sectors at regional and woreda levels are fixed. In
practice, they can be modified when this appears justified. The procedure is
complex and cumbersome, but it exists. Similarly, as mentioned, expenditures are
on a yearly basis, as if all projects started in one fiscal year could be completed




                                           22
before the end of this fiscal year. In reality, this very constraining rule is applied
with intelligence, and temporal “adjustments” are allowed.

        A third example relates to the prescribed capital only expenditures
obligation. In practice, in some cases at least, a small, but critical, share of the grant
has been allocated to maintenance and to management expenditures. Are
maintenance expenditure to be considered as capital or recurrent expenditures? In
certain cases, for some types of maintenance, the answer is not clear, and the rule
has been applied with flexibility. Similarly, some of the grant money has been
utilized to fund additional management costs caused by the grant system. A ceiling
of 5% has even been mentioned, although its status remains unclear, and its
application limited.

        A final example of flexibility refers to the project by project obligation. In
principle, according to the guidelines, planning, reporting, and monitoring must be
done by projects. In some cases, particularly for rural roads, projects are very small
(some km) and therefore very numerous, and usually very similar. The project by
project obligation then becomes cumbersome and time-consuming. At least one
region decided to consider its many rural roads projects as just one, region wide,
rural road project, defined by the number of km to be completed each year. This
minor, but highly simplifying, departure from the strict letter of the Guidelines was
accepted by the MOFEC

        To conclude, the MDGs grant as a process seems rather well accepted by
users, at the regional and woreda levels. Its weaknesses are not ignored, but they
appear to weight much less than its advantages. We systematically asked
interviewees whether they would prefer to receive and handle an additional transfer
(of a given amount) in the form of block grant, MDGs grant, foreign grant (e.g.
World Bank or UNICEF). The order of preference was in most cases the following:

                     MDGs Grant > Block grant > Foreign grant

It obviously does not mean that these interviewees would want the block grant to
disappear, or be replaced by the MDGs grant, but it means that the MDGs grant as
a process is well accepted. The interviewees gave two reasons for it. First, it
protects us from the pressure to spend grant income on recurrent rather than capital
expenditures. Second, the discipline associated with it forces us to do things in time.

       Overall, the MDGs grant process appears to have been rather efficient. The
problems it raises have been largely, if not entirely, corrected by the capacity
building and the flexibility of the process. Relative to the block grant, the MDGs
grant implies higher transaction costs and obligations. But this is a price worth
paying for the higher benefits it produces.


Is the MDGs Grant Achieving MD Goals?

    The first and obvious question about the effectiveness of a grant entitled
“MDGs grant” is: did it achieve the Millennium Development Goals? Table IV-4


                                           23
provides numbers to help answer this question, but, as we shall see (and contrary
to what is often assumed) the question is probably not a very meaningful one.

                    Table IV-4 – MDGs Achievements in Ethiopia, 1990-2015
Goal    Indicator                                                  1990     2010     2014

1        Pop living below poverty line (%)                               48   29        23
2        GERa in primary education (%)                                   32   96       101
         Primary education completion rate (%)                           34   79        na
3        Girls/boys ratio in primary educ (%)                            61   93        93
         Girls/boys ratio in secondary educ (%)                          61   80        85
         Girls/boys ratio in higher educ (%)                             24   29        na
4        Under-five mortality rate                                     190   101        63
         Measles immunization (%)                                        42   77        90
5        Maternal mortality ratio                                      871   590      420b
         Contraception prevalence rate (%)                                4   29        42
         Birth attended by skilled persons (%)                            9   10        15
6        Antenatal coverage (%)                                          20   34        40
         Overall HIV/AIDS prevalence (%)                                  7   2c         1
         Pop without access to safe water (%)                            81   32        32
7&8      No indicator
Source: for 1990 & 2010: MOFED. 2000. Ethiopia 2010 MDGs Report. For 2014 National
Planning Commission and UN in Ethiopia. 2015. Millennium Development Goals Report 2014;
60p. Notes: aGER = Gross Enrolment Rate. b2013. cThe source gives 1.4-2.8

        The table shows that over the past 25 years Ethiopia made impressive
progresses in relation to the Millennium Development Goals. The value of positive
indicators (such as enrollment in primary education) was multiplied by a factor of
2 or 3; the value of negative indicators (such as child mortality) was divided by a
similar magnitude. What role was played in this success by the MDGs grant?

        Analytical approach – From an analytic viewpoint, four points can be made.

       First, the grant contributed indirectly. As discussed below, it increased
growth and development. And economic growth has a positive impact upon a
number of the Millennium Development goals. This is obvious for poverty
reduction, which is automatically decreased by growth (when inequality remains
unchanged). But it is also true for MDG indicators such as progress towards gender
equality. We therefore have the following relationship:

                            MDGs grant —> Growth -> MDG

       Second, the grant must have contributed directly in three sectors for which
there are MDG indicators, namely education, health and water. These sectors
account for about half of MDGs grant expenditures.

       Third, this direct contribution must be seriously qualified by two
considerations. One is that the MDGs grant expenditures in rural roads, which
account for more than 40% of the grant usage, cannot have contributed directly,




                                             24
because no MD goal indicator refers to transport11. The other is that many of these
indicators can be reached by recurrent expenditures much more than by capital
expenditures. This would be the case of girls/boys ratios, measles immunization,
contraception prevalence rates, antenatal coverage, HIV/Aids, etc.

        Fourth, there are time issues that severely limit the potential contribution of
the grant to the MDG program. The program covered the period 2000-201512, and
the grant was therefore introduced in the 11th year of the program. A mere look at
Table IV-4 shows that several objectives had already been practically reached in
2010: the grant could not be expected to contribute much to them. Then, many
capital expenditures, when they have a direct effect, often have it after a certain lag.
Hospitals erected in 2014, for instance, will not reduce maternal mortality ratios
overnight.

       Empirical approach – The analytical approach therefore remains rather
inconclusive. Would an empirical approach comparing MDG outcomes with and
without the grant be more revealing? It can be attempted over time and over space.

        Over time, one can compare the rates of progress in achieving MDG before
2011, when the grant did not exist, with the rates of progress after 2011, when the
grant was in operation. If the latter are higher than the former, then it will suggest
that the grant was instrumental in accelerating performance. A look at table IV-4
shows that it is not what happened. For most indicators, progress decelerated in the
post 2011 period. Does it mean that the grant “slowed” perfo rmance? Obviously
not. The curve representing the indicator as a function of time is not linear. It is
asymptotic to 100% (or slightly less) for the positive indicators, or to 0% (or
slightly more) for the negative indicators. Consider gross enrollment rates in
primary education; it was 32% in 1990 and 96% in 2010; it increased rapidly
between these two dates, but can only improve very slowly between 2010 and now.
This makes it very difficult, not to say impossible, to construct the counterfactuals
for 201513 in order to compare them with the actual values of the indicators. In
short, the time comparison is a dead end.

        The comparison over space is not more conclusive. Somali and Afar provide
a potential test of the grant impact. In these two regions, the MDGs grant was
entirely allocated to water investments (for good reasons). None of it was utilized
to finance capital expenditures in health and education, the two main sectors of the
Millennium Development Goals. MDG indicators in these areas improving less in
Somali and Afar than in Ethiopia at large would suggest a positive contribution of
the MDGs grant. Yet, at least for Somali, for which (imperfect) data is available,
all health and education indicators progressed faster than in the rest of the country

11
    The attribution to MDGs indicators is not easily interpreted in construction projects like seed
cleaning, cold storage, medium scale irrigation dam construction in agriculture and water sectors
and rural hospital, technical and vocational school, SMEs sheds, etc.
12
   Most statistics, however, at the UN and in Ethiopia, report figures for 1990-2015;
13
   It would require, for each indicator identifying aq quadraqtic function on 1990-2010 data, in
order to project it for 2015. In practice, the number of observations available to do so is limited.
We cannot be sure that the function thus produced would be a robust counterfactual, i.e. a good
predictor of the business-as-usual trend of the indicator.


                                                 25
in the 2010-2015 period, as shown in Annex E. Here again, it does not mean that
the grant is counterproductive. It most probably reflects the fact that Somali was
starting from lower levels than most other regions.

       In short, the MDGs grant must have contributed to reach the MD goals, but
we cannot find evidence that this contribution was significant, and there are some
reasons to believe it was not.


Is the MDGs Grant Increasing Capital Expenditures?

         The second effectiveness-related question about the MDGs grant is: did it
increase capital expenditures in the public sector? The main direct objective of the
new grant was not so much to achieve the MD goals (as the grant’s name suggests),
but rather to increase the volume of sub-national capital expenditures. It was widely
felt that regions and woredas were allocating too large a share of their expenditures
to recurrent expenditures. The political pressure of woredas and regional councils
in favor of recurrent expenditures, it was argued, was such that they could not resist
it, and did not invest enough. Their preference for the present prevailed over the
demands of the future. This view was held not only by the Federal ministries
officials we interviewed, but also by the regional bureaus officials we interviewed.
Hence the idea of a semi-specific grant to sub-national governments, the proceeds
of which would necessarily be allocated to capital expenditures.

        The impact of a specific grant, that is a grant ear-marked for a specific
purpose, has been much discussed in public finance theory. A key finding is that it
cannot be assumed that expenditures on that specific purpose will increase by the
amount of the grant, with other types of expenditures remaining the same. This
naïve view cannot be taken for granted, mostly because money is fungible. Suppose
a region that gets 100 in block grant, and spends 40 on X and 60 on Y. It now gets
an additional 50 in the form of a specific grant that must be spent on X. The naïve
view is that the region will now spend 90 (40+50) on X and continue to spend 60
on Y. But the region may well prefer to spend only 70 (40+30) on X, and 80
(60+20) on Y. By doing so, it meets the specific grant constraint of spending at
least 50 on X, and might maximize the utility of its expenditures.

        To try and find out what happened in Ethiopian regions, we considered the
situation before and after the introduction of the MDGs grant. This is done in Table
IV-5 below. “Before” means the four fiscal years 2007/8, 2008/9, 2009/10,
2010/11. “After” the four years 2011/12, 2012/13, 20013/14, 2014/15. All values
are translated in constant 2015 prices, so that they can meaningfully be added. The
numbers relate to the 10 grants-receiving regions, thereby excluding Addis Ababa.
The comparison could be made between the effective “Before” values and the
effective “After values”. Such a comparison, however, would not give a good idea
of the changes brought by the introduction of the MDGs grant. It would ignore the
other massive economic changes that took place over the period, and in particular
the considerable increase in GDP that marked it. In constant terms, the cumulated
GDP of the four “After” years is 47% greater than the cumulated GDP of the four
“Before” years. One can expect most revenues and expenditures to increase at about


                                         26
that rate, even in the absence of the introduction of the MDGs grant. We use this
ratio to construct a counterfactual “After”. The values of this column are equal to
the values of the “Before” column, multiplied by 1.47. The counterfactual is an
estimate – admittedly a crude and questionable estimate - of what would have been
the picture in the “After” years in the absence of the introduction of the MDGs
grant. The comparison of the effective situation with this counterfactual gives us
an idea of the impact of the MDGs grant. What does it suggest?

 Table IV-5 – Impact of the MDGs Grant Up on Sub-National Resources and Expenditures
                             Before          After        After  Change      Change
                                    (counterfactual) (Effective) (value)         (%)

Resources:
 Own resources                         30            44              62           +18        +41%
 Block grant                         150            220            176             -44        -20%
 MDGs grant                             -             -              66           +66           +∞
 total resources                     180            265            304            +39        +15%
Expenditures:
 Recurrent                           136            200            190             -10         -5%
 Capital                               46            68            126            +58        +85%
 Total expenditures                  182            268            316            +48        +18%
 Capital/total                      25%            25%            40%
Sources and notes: All numbers are in billion constant 2015 Birrs, except for percentages. They
relate to the 10 regions benefitting from grants, excluding Addis Ababa. They refer to the total of
the 4 years before 2011/12 (« Before ») and to the total of the four years after 2011/12 (« After »).
The counterfactual is estimated as the « before » values multiplied by the increase in constant
GDP over the period (ie multiplied by 1.47). « Change » is the change between the effective
recorded values and the counterfactual values.

        First, we see that the own (mostly tax) resources of sub-national
governments increased faster than the GDP, as already noted supra. We also see
that the amount of block grant did not increase as fast as the GDP; relative to the
counterfactual, it declined (by 20%). There are reasons to think that this decline
was caused by the introduction of the MDGs grant. Part of what the ministry of
Finance was giving to the regions in the form of a new grant was offset by a decline
in the amount of the traditional block grant, as mentioned above. Overall, the total
amount of grants did increase (and increased faster than GDP); but it did not
increase by the full amount of the new grant.

        Second, the impact of the MDGs grant on the structure of regional
expenditures was clear and massive: regional expenditures were re-oriented from
recurrent to capital. Capital expenditures represented 25% of total expenditures
before the grant; they represent 40% after. Recurrent expenditures increased more
slowly than the GDP. Capital expenditures much faster14. This was one of the main
objective of the MDGs grant, and there is no doubt that it was reached.


14
  One could also see in the numbers that the increase in capital expenditures (+58 B Birrs) is
lower than the amount of the capital expenditure ear-marked MDGs grant (66 B Birrs), which
could indicate the existence of a modest « evasion effect », as suggested by theory. But the
weakness of our counterfactual, and also the (unexplained) fact that in recent years regional
expenditures are greater than regional resources, imply that we cannot make much of this potential
« evasion effect ».


                                                 27
        This impact is visible in the field. Table IV-8 provides the number of
projects undertaken by sub-national governments before and after the introduction
of the grant in one region, SNNP. It shows major increases.

         Table IV-6 – Capital expenditures, SNNPR, Before and After MDGs Grant
                                         Before          After        Change (%)

In number of projects:
 Agriculture                                   382               631                   +88
 Water                                         132               652                  +394
 Education                                     142               747                  +423
 Health                                        319               504                   +58
 Roads                                         123              2938                 +2288

In value (B. Birr):
 All sectors)                                  11.8            24.6                     +108
Source: Calculated from SNNPR BOFED. Notes: « Before » refers to the 4 fiscal years before the
introduction of the grant (2007/08, 2008/09, 2009/10 20010/11). « After » refers to the 4 following
years (2011/12, 2012/13, 2013/14, 2014/15). « Number » is the number of new and on-going
projects.

         This table must be taken with some caution. It relates to just one region, but
it is an important region, likely to be representative. Data in number of projects
refer to yearly “new and on-going projects”, and their addition over several years
involves some double-counting; but there are no reasons to believe that this alters
the comparison between the two periods. Data expressed in number of projects,
without regard to the importance or cost of the projects, vary from sector to sector
(this is why we refrain from adding a “total” line). There is also, within each of the
two periods considered, an upward trend independent of the grant, so that the
percentages of change given in the last column slightly exaggerate the impact of
the grant. Nevertheless, these percentages are so high that they leave absolutely no
doubt on this impact. The introduction of the MDGs grant resulted in a clear and
massive increase in sub-national investment projects. The numbers also confirm
that this increase, which concerned all sectors, was particularly impressive for the
road and water sectors.


Is the MDGs Grant Helping Growth and Poverty Reduction?

        What has been the contribution of the MDGs grant to the twin broad
objectives of growth and poverty reduction? These two objectives are important,
and related, yet distinct. Without growth, not much can happen, bar the worst. But
there can be growth with or without poverty reduction. The great merit of the
Millennium Development Goals initiative was precisely to put the emphasis on
poverty reduction - and associated qualitative dimensions of change - to convey the
idea that growth, however necessary, was not sufficient. The implied policy
implication was that growth policies had to be complemented by specific policies
in areas like poverty reduction, health, education, women empowerment, etc. As a
matter of fact, this had been known for a long while, and many governments
(including the Ethiopian government) or international agencies (such as the World
Bank) had not waited until year 2000 to feature poverty reduction, health,



                                                28
education, or women empowerment in their day-to-day action. But the MDGs
helped conceptualize and popularize the idea.

       The relationships between economic growth and social development
(including poverty reduction) are illustrated by the schematic Figure IV-1.
Economic growth and social development can be stimulated by ad hoc policies (in
addition to all sorts of technical, societal, cultural, forces). Growth will
automatically and in the short run contribute to social improvements. In the longer
term, social improvements, particularly in health and education, will accelerate
economic growth.




       Growth promoting expenditures – There is little doubt that MDGs grant
financed expenditures contributed to accelerate economic growth in Ethiopia, as
suggested by Table IV-7 below, for two reasons.

       First, they consisted entirely of capital expenditures. As such, they modified
the structure of public expenditures (general government) towards capital
investments. This is obvious and clearly indicated by line one of Table IV-7.
Capital expenditures represent 57% of general government expenditures, and 100%
of MDGs grant expenditures. It is generally recognized that capital investments
contribute more than recurrent expenditures to economic development.




                                         29
Table IV-7 – Allocation of MDGs Grant and of General Government Expenditures, 2011/12-
                                       2014/15
                                      MDGs Grant          General Govt MDGs G/Gl Gov
                                              (%)                  (%)            (+/-)
Total exp. by type:
 Capital expenditures                         100                   57            +++

Capital exp. by sector:
 Economic development                                  71                   68                 +
  Agriculture                                           5                    9                 --
  Water & natural resources                            28                   13                ++
  Urban development                                     -                    4                 --
  Roads                                                43                   37                 +
 Social development                                    22                   25                  -
  Education                                            10                   16                 --
  Health                                               12                    7                ++
Sources and notes: For the allocation of the MDGs grant, calculated from MOFED data for the
four years 2011/12 to 2014/15. For the allocation of general government expenditures: World
Bank. 2015. Joint Budget and Aid Review, for 2013/14 only.

        Second, the structure of MDGs financed capital expenditures is more pro-
growth than that of general government capital expenditures. The share of
economic, as opposed to social, investments is higher (admittedly only slightly
higher). More importantly, a greater emphasis is put on two sectors, roads and water
which are probably key contributors to economic growth: they account for 71% of
MDGs grant capital expenditures, as opposed to 50% for general government
capital expenditures. In addition many agricultural MDGs grant projects, such as a
seed improvement facility, or a horticultural storage facility (that we visited in
Amara) are directly and measurably output increasing.

        The contribution of roads to economic growth, or to put it differently the
high rates of return of road investments, are well documented. The World Bank
has, for decades, heavily contributed to the topic. Annex G provides a sample of
estimates of the marginal returns on investment in rural infrastructure, mostly rural
roads, in China and African countries. Marginal returns here mean the yearly output
increases generated by an investment of 1 $ in such infrastructure. For rural roads,
they range from 6 to 9, much higher than for irrigation or electricity. There is no
reason why such high rates would not prevail in Ethiopia with the MDGs grant
financed rural road expenditures.

       We tried to estimate this impact with data on 8 Ethiopian regions, with the
help of a regression analysis explaining economic growth over the past 4 years as
a function of the increase in kebele connectivity (Delta con) and the Initial
connectivity (Initial con):

                       Growth = α*Delta con + β*Initial con +

The analysis is detailed in Annex H. The coefficients have the expected signs: α is
positive, which means that a greater increase in connectivity contributes positively
to growth; and β is negative, which means that a higher initial level of connectivity
has a negative impact on growth (all other things equal). The knowledge of α,
combined with the GDP increase of the country over the period, makes it possible


                                              30
to evaluate the GDP increase that can be attributed to connectivity increases: about
60 B Birr. These connectivity increases costed about 30 B Birr. These numbers
must be taken with prudence: the number of regions is low, the quality of the data
questionable, the regression specifications uncertain. They nevertheless are in line
with theory and international experience, and suggest strongly that the MDGs grant
financed road investments did contribute significantly to economic growth.


        Poverty reduction expenditures – MDGs grant expenditures also
contributed to poverty reduction. They achieved this policy objective through two
distinct channels: an indirect channel, as a consequence of growth; and a direct
channel, because they are generally pro-poor.

        First, economic growth, all other things equal, necessarily reduces absolute
poverty. This is well documented on the case of Ethiopia. When poverty is defined
in absolute terms, as the situation of people or households living below a given
income or consumption level15, and when income distribution does not change, then
economic growth reduces the poverty ratio (share of people in poverty/total
population). This is exactly what has happened in Ethiopia, as excellently analyzed
in MOFED (2013). Inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient, remained
practically at the same level (0.30) over the 2000-2011 period. Per capita income
increased significantly over the same period. And the poverty rate declined
substantially, from 44% in 2000 to 29% in 2011. MOFED (2013, p. 66)) estimates
the elasticity of poverty to growth to be around -2.0: when GDP increases by 1%,
poverty declines by 2%. This is a high elasticity by international standards.
Inasmuch as it contributed to growth, the MDGs grant contributed to poverty
reduction.

        Second, a number of infrastructure investments do not merely contribute to
economic growth, they also contribute to social welfare and poverty reduction. This
is in particular the case of rural roads. Many World Bank reports have emphasized
this point. The increased access and connectivity made possible by rural roads
generates health, education, information benefits. Many of the millennium goals,
such as infant mortality or maternal mortality reduction, or antenatal coverage, or
measles immunization improvement, or HIV/AID prevention, for instance, are
directly facilitated by easier mobility. For a doctor to come or for a patient to go to
the doctor, the difference between a two-hour mountainous walk and a 15 minutes
bajaj or motorcycle trip is the difference between a visit and no visit. The same can
be said of water investments. These benefits are difficult to value, but nonetheless
important. It is quite obvious that they accrue primarily to the poor. The poor are
primarily locates in the remotest part of the country, which are nearly by definition,
the places where MDGs grant investments are undertaken.




15
  In some countries, the poverty line is relative (for instance 70% of median income); in this case,
with income distribution constant, growth has no impact upon the poverty ratio (share of people in
poverty, and, with worsening income distribution, growth can be accompanied by an increase in
the poverty ratio.


                                                31
Is the MDGs Grant Favoring Decentralization?

        Perhaps the most important question about the MDGs grant relates to its
contribution to decentralization. Since the 1994 Constitution, the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is, as its name indicates, a highly decentralized
country. This is all the more remarkable because until that time the country had
been highly centralized, under an absolutist monarchy (for centuries) followed by
a Marxist dictatorship (1975-1991). The jump into a federal system therefore
constituted an extraordinary bet, made even more challenging by the marked
heterogeneity (in terms of language, culture, religion, tradition) of the country. By
and large, the bet has been won and the challenge has been met. Ethiopia functions,
and functions reasonably well, as a federal country, with regions enjoying great tax
and expenditure powers, and a central government overseeing national matters and
inter-regional equilibrium (in particular by means of important grants). It is no
exaggeration to describe it as a sort of miracle, the Ethiopian miracle. This was
probably facilitated by the fact that Ethiopia has been a unified State for millennia.
In spite of border wars and civil disorders, this cannot but create a deep sense of
belonging, of commonness - which is missing in the rest of Africa (bar Morocco
perhaps) where only short-lived kingdoms have existed, to be later on erased by
colonialism. Nevertheless, the present “federal-regional balance” in Ethiopia (as
everywhere) remains fragile. The MDGs grant must be seen as a relatively
important modification in this balance. Hence the question: did it strengthen, or
weakened, decentralization in Ethiopia?

        The MDGs grant was introduced to remedy what was widely seen as a
decentralization challenge. To be more specific, as a double decentralization
challenge. It was felt that sub-national governments were (i) unable to spend
enough, for lack of financial resources, on the public services allocated to them
(education, health, roads, etc.) and (ii) overspending on recurrent expenditures and
under-spending on capital expenditures, and that, consequently the quality and
accessibility of these public services was sub-optimal. Interestingly, this view was
not only that of Federal government politicians and bureaucrats (which would not
be very surprising), but also that of sub-national politicians and bureaucrats. The
latter acknowledged that they were unable to resist pressures to allocate their taxes
and grant resources to recurrent expenditures, at the expense of capital
expenditures. The MDGs grant was a good and elegant answer to this problem. By
giving more money to regional governments, and giving it with capital strings
attached, the grant was remedying the two weaknesses identified.

        In theory, the introduction of this specific grant could be seen as a fiscal
decentralization retreat. Before, sub-national governments were entirely free to use
their income as they thought wisest: this is the true spirit of fiscal decentralization,
based on the premise that they know better (than the Federal government) what is
good for them. After, sub-national governments see their freedom altered, with
various obligations imposed upon them by the Federal government, in particular
the need to use their specific grant income on capital expenditures, and the
obligation to send detailed quarterly reports on their utilization of this grant money.
At first blush, it might appear as a step backwards on the fiscal decentralization
road.


                                          32
        In practice, however, the MDGs grant turned out to be a fiscal
decentralization advance. This is a paradox. But it is a reality. All the people
interviewed, including people at region and woreda levels, expressed satisfaction
about the new grant and the obligations that came with it. How explain this
paradox?

        A first explanation is that this apparent fiscal re-centralization was modest.
The specific grant introduced represented only about one-fourth of total grants
received. Above all the strings attached are not very tight. They only concern the
capital nature of expenditures. Within that obligation, regions and woredas remain
free to choose the sectors in which they wish to invest, and the locations where
these investments will take place. Their freedom, which is the essence of fiscal
decentralization, was indeed limited, but not much. The MDGs grant was in fact a
semi specific grant.

        A second explanation is that this apparent fiscal re-centralization was
adroitly and efficiently carried out by the Federal ministries and agencies. The
obligations were not solely constraints brutally introduced; they were part of a
“package” that included money and expertise.

        Money, since the grant was an additional source of income. Money with
obligations is more appealing than no money with no obligations; to put it
otherwise: the political cost of obligations was lower than the political gain of
additional resources. The fact that the net additional income was not as important
as the apparent additional income (the specific grant was accompanied by a
decrease in the block grant, as discussed supra) did not matter much, because most
people were subject to a sort of monetary illusion on this issue.

        Expertise and capacity building, above all. Federal ministries helped
regions and woredas do things they could hardly do without this help. Rural roads
investments are a case in point. The Ethiopian Road Autority did not take road
construction out of the hands of Regional Road Authorities, and even less so out of
the hands of elected councils. Roads were constructed where the councils wanted
and decided. But the Ethiopian Road Authority put its technical and managerial
expertise at the disposal of regional road Authorities. It organized training
seminars. It helped regions sponsor scores of regional construction companies,
which are now ready to build roads – and other types of structures – and to develop
in a competitive fashion. In part this was facilitated by the bulky amount of MDGs
grant-related road investments. There was an economy of scale effect. Left to
themselves, woredas could never have achieved the capacity building
improvements that have taken place. The benefits of the Federal government
intervention are thus double: not only did it help woredas and regions build roads
and schools and hospitals in the past four years, but it empowered them to build
more roads and schools and hospitals in the future. The dose of fiscal
recentralization operated very much like a catalyst. It was not massive, but it played
a key role.




                                         33
         A third explanation of this fiscal decentralization paradox (less means more)
is that the standard view (fiscal decentralization is always better because it brings
decisions closer to realities and to citizens) can be theoretical, naïve, simplistic, and
therefore erroneous. It assumes perfect information and perfect capacity at the
bottom. In reality, information and capacity were often imperfect at that level. In
the case of Ethiopia, regions and woredas were aware of such imperfections. They
actually demanded to be protected from themselves, and welcomed the (light)
obligations imposed by the top. Even the cumbersome reporting system was found
useful: several sub-national actors mentioned it: the quarterly deadlines force us to
be more efficient and more rapid. They knew this would increase the quantity and
quality of the public services delivered - by them - and therefore strengthen their
own role and credibility.

         This impact of the MDGs grant upon fiscal decentralization was not a
primary objective of the policy. The main objective, widely shared by everybody
at both federal and sub-national levels, was to reduce poverty and improve quality
of life. The positive impact on fiscal decentralization was a largely unexpected by-
product. But it helped local elites understand that the process of fiscal
decentralization must proceed at the same pace as the process of local capacity
building. They realized that in Ethiopia the first had occasionally gone faster that
the second. They concluded that slowing down fiscal decentralization and even
absorbing a small dose of fiscal recentralization was a desirable step; and that it
was the best way to ensure the future of effective decentralization.

       Such a strategy was difficult to conduct. Defining the magnitude and the
content of the “dose” of fiscal recentralization was particularly delicate. It required
awareness at the bottom and moderation at the top. Both were present in Ethiopia.
In the end, the MDGs grant strengthened sub-national governments, and
contributed positively to the on-going decentralization process in the country.

V – Conclusions
        In this contribution, we tried to evaluate the semi-specific grant called
MDGs grant introduced in Ethiopia in 2011. This new policy instrument has only
been in existence for four years. All of its effects have not yet had the time to be
felt. Conclusions, and a fortiori recommendations, that can be drawn must be
prudent and tentative.


Summary of Findings

        An analytic view – Here is a list of some of the findings arrived at about the
specific purpose grant called the MDGs grant (hereafter: “it”, or “the grant”):

    - It fluctuated greatly over the years, complicating prediction and planning;

    - It did increase the total amount of grants from the federal to the regional
      level, although (in constant terms) not by the amount of the MDGs grant
      amount; part of it was accompanied by a decline in the block grant;


                                           34
- Its allocation formula (which is the same as that of the block grant) is not
  redistributive in per capita terms: poorer regions (in per capita income) do
  not get more (in grant per capita) than richer regions; this is not surprising,
  since the formula does not include income per capita as a determinant; and
  it is not very important since interregional income per capita disparities are
  presently very modest;

- It did not affect regional and woreda tax efforts; the substitution effect
  (more grants, less taxes) did not take place;

- It comes with conditionalities on usage (capital investments only, specified
  sectors) and on processes (quarterly reports a prerequisite for
  disbursements, project by project monitoring) that are simultaneously felt
  cumbersome and useful;

- Its implementation led to higher transaction costs (than the implementation
  of the block grant) and to an additional burden for both the federal and the
  regional administrations, for which very little additional manpower was
  provided;

- It did increase considerably the amount of public capital expenditures in
  the targeted sectors, in particular in rural roads, which accounted for 40%
  of grant income; there was no associated negative effect on block grant-
  financed capital expenditures, as could have been feared;

- It favored resource mobilization, by leading to community participation in
  cash and labor, particularly in roads and school construction;

- It had to cope with technical and managerial “capacity gaps” at the regional
  and woreda levels; but important efforts were deployed to assist, educate,
  and at times temporarily replace, these sub-national administrations; these
  efforts have largely been successful, and have significantly contributed to
  capacity building;

- It contributed to the development of the construction industry, by leading
  to the creation, and the strengthening (technically as well as financially), of
  thousands of small scale enterprises in this sector, that constitute an asset
  for the country;

- It met with some implementation problems, such as delays in
  disbursements, or discrepancy between allocated funds and disbursed
  funds; but these problems appear to be relatively minor and to diminish
  over time;

- It was administered with flexibility, for instance in the inter-sectorial
  allocation of the grant (which differs greatly from one region to another),
  or in inter-sectorial or inter-temporal adjustments;

- It certainly contributed to economic growth and poverty reduction;
  investments made thanks to the grant in rural roads, water, agriculture (the


                                     35
        bulk of investments made) have demonstrably high rates of economic and
        social returns;

    - It did contribute indirectly to the UN Millennium Developments goals, and
      directly in some sectors (water, health, education), but this direct
      contribution was limited by the fact that the grant allocation (capital only,
      roads mostly) was not fully congruent with the requirement of many MDG
      indicators, and above all by the fact that the grant was introduced in the 11th
      year of the UN program, at a time when Ethiopia was well on the road of
      meeting its goals.

    - It also contributed to decentralization by making regions stronger and more
      effective.

       A synthetic view - Overall, the so-called MDGs grant appears to be a real
success.

        On the dark side, one can make two points. One is that, inevitably, there
were some administrative problems in the implementation of the grant (delays,
discrepancy between allocated and disbursed funds, etc.). But they were relatively
minor, and diminished over time. The other is that there is no evidence that the
grant was essential to the achievements of the UN Millennium Development goals,
and even some reasons to believe it did not. It was introduced in the 11th year of
this 15 years UN project, at a time when Ethiopia was already advancing rapidly
towards these goals, and continued to do so in the 2011-2015 period – and it is
obviously this success which is important.

        On the – much more important - bright side, the MDGs grant achieved
several of its explicit or implicit objectives.

        First, in spite of several difficulties, it functioned reasonably well. Although
it implied an additional burden for many stake-holders (federal ministries, regional
bureaus and councils, and woreda institutions) the processes put in place operated
smoothly. Practically everyone is satisfied with the MDGs grant as a transfer
instrument.

        Second, the MDGs grant contributed to the economic growth and social
development of the country. It did so by shifting the capital/recurrent ratio of sub-
national expenditures towards capital investments. This was because of the nature
of the grant, which had to be allocated to investment projects. It was also because
of the federal government involvement that made it possible to launch bulky
programs, particularly in rural roads construction and in water projects. Without
the grant, and the way it was administered, regions and woredas would not have
been able to undertake many of the projects that have been carried out in these two
sectors. There is little doubt that these projects have high benefits/costs ratios. They
did not cost much, in part because they mobilize kebele efforts in cash and kind
(not reported in official expenditure statistics), and in part because they were often
conducted by competing construction enterprises created for that purpose. They
produce important economic and social benefits because they help increase
agricultural output.


                                          36
        Third, the MDGs grant strengthened decentralization. Ethiopia is one of the
most decentralized country in the world, both at the level of regions, and within
each region at the level of woredas. This extreme decentralization met limits in the
area of productive and social expenditures. Politically and technically, some
woredas found it difficult to undertake the capital investments which were
necessary and desired. The MDGs grant was an elegant solution to this difficulty.
The federally-mandated conditionalities (spend it on investment) it contained could
have been - or could have been felt - as a step backwards in fiscal decentralization.
Paradoxically, it turns out to be - and to be seen as - a step forward. This is because
these conditionalities were applied to additional money, accompanied by
assistance, and respected the freedom of regions and woredas to choose
investments sectors and locations. Sub-national governments did useful things for
their people, increased their managerial capacities, and emerge stronger as a result.


Recommendations

        It is usual to conclude an evaluation report with some recommendations.
We will conform, although with a deep feeling of prudence. Some suggestions
relate to the short-term. Others are considerations for the medium term. Yet other
are more future-looking.

        Short term recommendations – Should the MDGs grant be continued? We
have no hesitation to answer: yes. It does not do any harm, economically nor
socially. It does not cost much. The annual 15 billion Birrs have, in the past years,
been accompanied by an estimated 5 or 6 billion Birr decrease in the block grant
(relative to the block grant trend in constant value) possibly as a consequence of
the MDGs grant. And, as mentioned above, it achieves a lot in terms of quantitative
and qualitative development. For the time being at least, it is a very useful and
desirable policy instrument. If, for macro-economic reasons, cuts in federal
expenditures had to be made, they should probably better target the block grant
than the MDGs grant.

        Can it be improved? Every policy instrument can. The name of this specific
grant could be changed. As we have seen, the relationship between grant and the
UN Millennium Goals cannot be proven. “MDGs grant” can be said to be a
misnomer. It will be even more so in the future, since the UN Millennium
Development Goals are presently being replaced by Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG), most of which are even more loosely related to the content of the
specific grant. On the other hand, the reference to the MDGs (or now to the SDG)
is a useful reminder of the importance of the qualitative dimensions of
development. And changing the name of an institution always has a cost. Aligning
names and realities is desirable, but in this case, is it really worth it?

        The fluctuations in the yearly amount of the grant certainly complicate
planning and implementation at regional and woreda levels. An additional dose of
stability would be much appreciated locally. On the other hand, one must
understand that the ministry of Finance has to adapt its budget to unpredictable



                                          37
macro-economic fluctuations and constraints, and cannot over-tie its hands. Some
mechanism that would restrict, not eliminate, the margin of fluctuation could
nevertheless be studied.

        MDGs grants allocation are on a yearly basis; the investments they finance
are often of a multi-year nature. Presently, this mismatch is partly remedied by
more or less formal carry-overs. Can and should it be institutionally eliminated?
This is not obvious. Such a formal mechanism would be on the side of logic, but it
would probably be complicated, bureaucratic, and burdensome. We would hesitate
to recommend it.

        The MDGs grant is allocated to the regions by means of the formula utilized
for the allocation of the block grant. This formula, which is theoretically excellent,
turns out in practice to be quite insensitive to regional income. Rich regions get, on
a per capita basis, nearly as much as poor regions. This is not surprising because
the formula has not been designed to be redistributive; and it is not essential because
inter-regional disparities are not large in Ethiopia. Should the formula be enriched,
to become more redistributive? Probably not. The quest for an ideal formula (in
principle and in practice) is illusive, the existing formula has the great advantage
of being well accepted (in addition to being theoretically well grounded), and
having one formula for the two types of grants has the virtue of simplicity. Opening
now the Pandora’s Box of a new allocation formula for the MDGs grant sounds
like a false good idea, although some fresh thinking and study on the issue might
be useful for the future.

        The MDGs grant has imposed a heavy administrative burden on all levels
of administration. This additional burden has not been much organized and even
less financed. The administrators have worked wonders at managing a new and
work-demanding mechanism. But they need and deserve additional help. Creating
MDGs grant steering committees at the regional level (as has been done
successfully in some regions) can be recommended. Appointing MDGs grant focal
persons in ministries and bureaus is also desirable. Expanding the team in charge
at MOFEC beyond its present size of 3 persons appears a reasonable
recommendation. All this will cost some money, but the improved management of
a 15 billion Birr key instrument of growth and poverty reduction and
decentralization promotion is worth a handful of additional civil servants.

        Medium-term recommendations – Three issues deserve consideration. One
relates to the optimal balance between capital and recurrent expenditures. Both
types of expenditures are needed. The question is: in what proportions? There is no
doubt that in recent years in Ethiopia’s sub-national governments expenditures, the
balance was too much on the side of recurrent expenditures, and that the lack of
public capital (in roads, or water, in particular, but also in schools or hospitals) was
an obstacle to growth and poverty reduction. The MDGs grant was created to
redress this balance, in favor of capital expenditures, and it succeeded in doing so.
The present balance is certainly more optimal now that it was five years ago. But it
cannot be assumed that the optimal balance will remain the same over the course
of time, for at least two reasons. Operations and maintenance costs (recurrent
expenditures) are a function of the stock of capital. The more schools are built, the


                                          38
more teachers are needed; the more irrigation canals, the more costly their
maintenance. To put it otherwise, capital expenditures to-day mean recurrent
expenditures to-morrow. Then, the law of diminishing returns applies particularly
to infrastructure investments. Creating a road that links previously not connected
areas has an extremely high rate of return; improving or enlarging this road has a
much lower rate of return (bar the existence of high congestion on the road). In
short, the optimal share of capital expenditure varies over time, it will probably
decline in the future, and therefore the present 100% characteristic of the MDGs
grant might become counter-productive, and need to be modified. When and how
is obviously difficult to appreciate, but the issue must be faced.

        The second issue is fee financing. At present, there is a very sharp
distinction between public services entirely financed by taxes, and private services
(and goods) entirely financed by users payments. Life is more complicated.
Consider a highly useful irrigation project that will greatly benefit 1,000 farmers
(but not thousands of other farmers); should it be entirely financed by taxpayers?
Should not the beneficiaries contribute? How much? How? Or consider a hospital;
at present, patients pay zero for the capital cost of the service they get, and 100%
of the medicine costs of that service; is this arrangement really optimal? These
questions, with their economic, ethical, and political dimensions, are indeed very
delicate. We are obviously not suggesting that fees are always an ideal answer. But
we are noting that the 100% tax financing embodied in a specific purpose grant is
not always ideal either, and recommending thinking and analyses of the issue, with
their implications on grant system design.

        A third issue, not unrelated to the fee financing issue, is borrowing
financing. It can be argued that a more urban and more spatially integrated Ethiopia
will need more large-scale public investments (in highways or airports, for
instance) for which debt financing might be desirable. As a matter of fact, tolled
highways recently constructed or under construction provide an example of this.
On the other hand, one must be prudent with sub-national borrowing. Latin
America provides many examples of dangerous excesses in this practice. Here
again, it is not too early to discuss the issue, weigh its advantages and drawbacks,
think about safeguards, and develop a doctrine.

       Longer-term recommendations – The MDGs grant appears well adapted to
the present situation of Ethiopia. Ethiopia is a predominantly rural, equalitarian,
poor, and decentralized country, which is developing rapidly. The MDGs grant
helps accelerate this development, and is therefore welcome. In the future,
however, and as a consequence of development, Ethiopia will become a different
country, that will no longer be served very well by the present MDGs grant – which
does not mean that ear-marked grants will no longer be desirable.

        Two major changes – and challenges - will most certainly occur. First, as
everywhere, population and economic growth will concentrate in cities: two or
three decades from now, there will be several Addis Ababa, and the present Addis
will be three times as large as it is presently. Second, inequalities, both interpersonal
and interregional, will increase; few, if any, countries have escaped this fate,




                                           39
illustrated by the Kuznets curve (as income per head increases, inequalities
increase, up to a certain point, then decrease).

        These two trends, or mechanisms, have to be managed. They call for
specific policies, and in decentralized countries for new or modified types of
transfers from the Federal government to sub-national governments. The present
MDGs grant, however useful as it is presently, will become inadequate to deal with
these challenges, and will have to be abandoned, or modified, or completed. This
is not an urgent task, but it is a heavy one and it is not too early to think about it.




                                          40
References

Central Statistical Agency [Ethiopia]. 2014. Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey 2014.

Ministry of Education. 2015. Education Sector Development Program V. 135p.

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 2013. Development and Poverty in Ethiopia
1995/16-2010/11. 111p.

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. A New Approach to the Distribution of Federal
Budget Grant to the Regional States. 77p.

Prud’homme, Rémy. 2003. “Fiscal Decentralization in Africa: A Framework for Considering
Reform”. Public Administration and Development. 23, pp. 17-27.




                                             41
Annexes
        Annex A : Administrative Map of Ethiopia ................................... 42
        Annex B – Ethiopian Fiscal Year .................................................. 43
        Annex C – Acronyms..................................................................... 43
        Annex D – Relevant time series..................................................... 44
        Annex E – MDG Achievements 2010-2014, Ethiopia and Somali
        Compared ....................................................................................... 45
        Annex F – Redistributive Impacts of the Grants Allocation
        Formula .......................................................................................... 46
        Annex G – Marginal Returns on Investments in Rural
        Infrastructure .................................................................................. 48
        Annex H – Economic Impact of Rural Road Investments ............. 49

Annex A: Administrative Map of Ethiopia




                                                      42
Annex B – Ethiopian Fiscal Year

         The Ethiopian fiscal year begins on June 8 and ends on July 7. I addition, there is a 7 and
a half years difference between the Ethiopian calendar and the Western calendar. Thus, the Ethiopia
fiscal year 2000 covers the period June 1, 2007 to May 31, 2008. We therefore have the
corresponding calendars:

EFY                       Western                    EPY               Western

1990                      1997/98                    2000              2007/08
1991                      1998/99                    2001              2008/09
1992                      1999/00                    2002              2009/10
1993                      2000/01                    2003              2010/11
1994                      2001/02                    2004              2011/12
1995                      2002/03                    2005              2012/13
1996                      2003/04                    2006              2013/14
1997                      2004/05                    2007              2014/15
1998                      2005/06                    2008              2015/16
1999                      2006/07



Annex C – Acronyms


EFY:             Ethiopian Financial Year
MOFED:           Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (later: MOFEC)
MOFEC:           Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (before: MOFED)
k:               Kilo = thousand = 103
M:               Million = 106
B:               Billion = 109
SNNP:            Southern Nation, Nationalities & People (region)




                                                43
Annex D – Relevant time series




                                 44
Annex E – MDG Achievements 2010-2014, Ethiopia and Somali Compared

          To find out whether the MDGs grant contributed to the achievement of MDGs goals, it is
interesting to compare the achievements over the 2010-14 period of Somali and of Ethiopia at large.
Somali decided to allocate all of the MDG grant money to water provision (so did Afar). Only one
of the MDGs indicators relates to water. For all the other indicators, progress in Somali cannot be
explained by (inexistent) MDGs grant-related capital expenditures, but only by other policies or
evolutions. The opposite is true for the rest of the country. If MDGs grant-related capital
expenditures contributed to MDGs achievement, progresses should be greater in Ethiopia than in
Somali.

          Table C-1 provides the data necessary to test this hypothesis. The data is not very good. It
is not available for all the indicators for the two areas. Some numbers are suspect (is it plausible that
maternal mortality rate in 2014 would be exactly the same in Somali as in Ethiopia) or unlikely (is
very hard to believe that infant mortality would have increased by 30% in Somali).

                Table E-1 – MDGs Indicators, 2010 & 2014, Ethiopia & Somali




        Table C-1 compares progresses (delta) in the two zones. It appears that for all the indicators
documented, Somali did better than Ethiopia at large over the 2010-14 period. This invalidates the
hypothesis tested.




                                                   45
Annex F – Redistributive Impacts of the Grants Allocation Formula

         The two federal to regions grants (the block grant and the MDGs grant) are allocated to the
various regions by means of a complex formula. What is the relationship between the amount of
grant received by one region and the GDP or income of that region? Table C-1 below provides the
data required to answer this question. The data is presented on a per capita basis, by dividing gross
numbers by population.

                    Table F-1 – Grants and Income, per region, around 2013




Sources and notes : MOFED for grants data are for 2012/13 ; Statistical Abstract for population
for 2014/15 ; The proxy used for GDP or income is the consumption per capita in 2011, as
estimated in MOFED. 2013. Development and Poverty 1995/96 – 2010/11, and corrected for price
differences with the price index calculated in the same source.

       Since there is no data available on regional GDP or income, we take the regional per capita
consumption estimated on the basis of an important household’s survey.

        It is easy to verify that the formula utilized for both grants is indeed the same: line 1 and 2
(and therefore 3) are indeed proportional. The three graphs plotting grants per capita versus
consumption per capita are basically similar (except for the vertical scale obviously).

         There appears a striking contrast between the distribution of regional consumption per
capita and the distribution of regional grants per capita. The former is highly concentrated, with a
minimum of 4326 (in Gambela) and a maximum of 4917 (in Tigray). The latter on the contrary is
highly dispersed, with (for the block grant) a minimum of 421 (in Oromia) to a maximum of 2150
(in Harari). This dispersion may well be justified, but it is nevertheless striking and counter intuitive.

          The data also shows that grants per capita are poorly correlated consumption per capita.
They suggest à negative relationship: the poorer regions seem to receive more in grants than the
richer regions. However, the relationship is weak, and the negative slope of the regression equation
is entirely due to Harari (0.2 M inh) and Gambela (0.4 M inh.) which account for less than 1% of
the population of the country. Basically, the grants appear to be relatively independent of income
(estimated as consumption per capita)




                                               800
                             MDGs graqnt/cap




                                               600
                                               400
                                               200
                                                 0
                                                  4000        4500         5000
                                                         Consumption/cap


         These findings are very much in line with the nature of inter-regional disparities in
Ethiopia. As mentioned in the text, disparities are at the same time small in terms of per capita
income but large in terms of specificities and public service levels. The grants allocation formula is
not designed to primarily reduce differences in income levels but differences in public service levels.
This is why Gambella, Harari, Beni-Gumuz and Afar, which are not necessarily the poorest regions


                                                            46
in terms of income, get much more in grant than the other regions (on a per capita basis). In that
sense, both grant contribute to the objective of reducing inter-regional disparities. The introduction
of the MDGs grant, which increased the total amount of grants, therefore contributed to the
achievement of this policy objective.




                                                 47
Annex G – Marginal Returns on Investments in Rural Infrastructure

        The following table is adapted from a 2009 survey article by Shimokawa.


           Table G-1 – Marginal Returns on Investments in Rural Infrastructure
Investment in :                           Place & date            Measure of               Effect
                                                                       return

Rural roads,                                   China, 1997               Rural GDP            8.8
Irrigation,                                             id                       id           1.9
Electricity,                                            id                       id           1.3
Telephone                                               id                       id           7.0

Feeder roads                              Uganga, 1992-99                Total GDP            7.1

Roads                                     Tanzania, 200-01              Total output          9.1

High quality roads                             China, 1982-99             Total GDP            1.5
Low quality roads                                          id                     id           6.4
Source: Shimokawa, Satoru. 2009. “Rural road investment, Agricultural Development and Poverty
Alleviation in China”, chapter 9 in: Pinstrup -Andersen, Per &Fuzhi Cheng, ed. Case Studies in
Food Policies for Developing Countries. vol 2. Cornell University Press, p. 119




                                               48
Annex H – Economic Impact of Rural Road Investments

         There are good theoretical reasons to expect a high socio-economic rate of return of rural
road investments. All other things equal, the more road investments in a region, the higher the rate
of growth in the region should be. The time period considered is the period 2011/12 to 2014/15.

         It is not easy to test this hypothesis on the case of MDGs grant-associated investments in
rural roads in Ethiopian regions. The number of regions is small (Dire Dawa, an urban region, and
Harari, for which there is no appropriate data, must be eliminated). And there is no data on regional
growth rate. But it is not entirely impossible to conduct the analysis, by utilizing proxies.

          For regional growth, or rather differences in growth rates, we can use regional tax revenues.
Regional tax revenues are the product of regional tax bases and of tax efforts. Regional tax bases,
which are numerous, are all related to economic activities, such as wages paid, value added, sales,
etc. We can assume that an increase in economic activity is reflected in an increase in tax bases. Tax
efforts, which have increased greatly in past years, are not know region by region. We will assume
it increased at the same rate in all regions. With these two assumptions, regional increases in tax
revenues are an acceptable proxy for increases in regional economic activity that is in regional
growth. Note that we are not interested in absolute, but in relative, magnitudes. Our explained
variable is therefore the percentage increase in regional tax revenues. Since we are interested in
relative numbers, we can use revenues in current Birr.

         Our main explanatory variable, the proxy for rural road investments, is the percentage
increase in the number of kebeles connected by all-weather roads (over the 2011/12-2014/15 period.
This number is available for all regions (except Harari and Dire Dawa). A second potential
explanatory variable is the percentage of kebele that were connected at the beginning of the period:
one could a priori postulate that the lower this percentage, the more important the economic impact
will be.

         The data utilized is given below:




        The figure below shows the change in tax revenues as a function of the change in
connectivity.




                                                  49
                              450%
                              400%
     change in tax revenues   350%
                              300%
                              250%
                              200%
                              150%
                              100%
                              50%
                               0%
                                     0%              50%            100%           150%                 200%
                                                            Change in connectivity



                              We can also run regressions of the form:

                                          Growth = a*Connectivity change + b*Initial connectivity + c

and obtain the following results:

                                                            Regressions Results
Explained var.                                          Explanatory
variables:                                                                        Constant              R2     Connecti
vity                                                          Initial
                                                             change           connectivity

Growth                                                          0.54                     -            2.07        0.067
                                                              (0.80)                                (1.08)

Growth                                     0.42                  -2.01           2.89          0.102
                                         (0.89)                 (4.58)
Notes: the proxy for growth is the % increase in regional tax revenues; The proxy for connectivity
change is the % increase of kebele connected by all-weather roads. The numbers are the
coefficients a and b of the explanatory variables. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.

         The coefficients have the expected signs. The greater the increase in the number of kebeles
connected in the region during the period considered, the greater the growth rate of the region in
this period. Also, the greater the initial level of connectivity, the lower the impact of additional
connectivity on growth.

          The results of a regression on only 8 points, with reasonable yet questionable proxies, are
of course to be taken with great prudence. They nevertheless make it possible to produce a – very
tentative - evaluation of the rate of return of the rural road investments. The cost of these investments
is about 30 B Birr (in 2015 prices)16. The 0.42 (or 42%) coefficient means that a 100% increase
in connectivity produced a 42% increase in tax revenues (in current terms).




16
  43% of the 66 B Birr MDGs grant expenditures, or 28 B Birr, plus about 2B B Birr of non
kebele contributions in cash and kind.


                                                                        50
          Over the period, thanks to the rural road investments financed by the MDGs grant, the
increase in connectivity was 91% in the country. If a 100% increase in connectivity produces a 42%
increase in tax revenues, the recorded 91% increase in connectivity produces a 38% increase in tax
revenues. Over the period, regional tax revenues effectively increased by 260%. The rural road-
related tax increase (of 38%) explains therefore about 15% of the regional tax revenues increase,
and a similar proportion of the national GDP increase.

         Over the period, the Ethiopian GDP increased by 45% in real terms, that is by 384 B Birr
(in 2014/15 Birrs terms). The road investment explains 15% of this increase, which is 58 B Birr. In
other words, in the absence of the 30 B Birr MDGs grant rural road investments, the present GDP
of Ethiopia would be smaller by as much as 58 Billion Birr. This is an effect ratio of about 2.

         The implied very high rate of return may be an overestimation, for several reasons. A
significant part of the GDP increase of the country is due to the development of Addis Aboba (and
Dire Dawa), which owes next to nothing to rural roads investments. Our 15% increase should
therefore not be applied to the GDP of Ethiopia, but to the GDP of Ethiopia minus the GDP of Addis
(and Dire Dawa) which is not known, but definitely lower. Second, the amount of money that
contributed to connectivity improvements is probably greater, perhaps much greater, that what has
been financed by the MDGs grant; the federal Road Authority also contributed to the rural road
program. Third, as mentioned, the results of a regression run on just 8 regions are necessarily fragile.

          Nevertheless, this tentative analysis suggests two important conclusions. The positive
coefficient of increased connectivity suggests that the massive improvement in connectivity made
possible by the MDGs grant increased agricultural markets and outputs, thereby contributing
significantly to GDP in a predominantly rural country. Second, the negative coefficient of the initial
level of connectivity suggests that the above mentioned positive contribution of rural roads is subject
to decreasing returns. As the percentage of kebeles connected increases, and nears 100%, the rate
of return of connecting kebeles will decline.




                                                  51
Annex I – Amhara Region Total and Capital Expenditures, 2007/8 to 2014/15

         In the case of Amhara region, we obtained (from Amhara BOFEC) yearly data for the
2007/8 to 2014/15 period, on regional expenditures, decomposed between capital and non-capital
(ie recurrent) expenditures, and between bureaus and woredas expenditures. Bureaus expenditures
are expenditures directly undertaken by the region through its bureaus.

         The data, given in current Birr was transformed into data in constant 2015 Birr by means
of the GDP deflator. In the period considered, inflation has been quite strong, and additions made
in current Birr can be rather misleading. Then, for each item, we took the average of the 4 first years
of the period (2007/8 to 2010/11 ) to represent the “Before” (MDGs grant) period; and proceeded
similarly to represent the “After” period. The outcome is presented in Table H-1 below.

   Table I-1 – Regional Expenditures, by Bureaus and Woredas, Capital and non-capital,
                          Amhara Region, Before and After 2011
                                                   Before         After       Change

Region:
 Total expenditure                                           10.8             18.2           +68%
 of which capital expenditures                                2.5              7.1          +188%
 Share of capital expenditures                               23%              39%          (+71%)

Bureaus:
 Total expenditures                                           3.7              8.9          +141%
 of which capital expenditures                                1.5              6.5          +310%
 Share of capital expenditures                               40%              69%          (+70%)

Woredas:
 Total expenditures                                           7.2              9.3           +31%
 of which capital expenditures                                1.0              1.0             +1%
 Share of capital expenditures                               14%              10%           (-23%)

Share of Bureaus in total exp.                             34%             49%         (+43%)
Share of Bureaus in capital exp.                           61%             86%         (+42%)
Sources & note: Calculated from Amhara BOFED data. Numbers are in constant 2015 Billion
Birr, or in %, and they are 4-years averages. Changes in percentages, which do not have the same
meaning as changes in values, are put between parentheses.

          The expenditures referred to in the table are obviously not entirely financed by the MDGs
grant (if it were the case, there would be nothing in the “Before” column), but also by the block
grant and by the sub-national governments. Changes cannot therefore entirely be attributed to the
MDGs grant. Nevertheless, it appears they have largely been triggered by it. This being said, three
points can be made.

         First, there was a massive increase in capital expenditures in the region. Such expenditures
were nearly multiplied by three (+188+) in constant terms. This was precisely the objective of the
MDGs grant, and it was reached. Other, i.e. recurrent, expenditures did increase also, fueled by
increases in tax and in the block grant, but at a much slower rate (+34%, not shown in the table). As
a consequence, the share of capital to total expenditures, which was 23% in the Before period nearly
doubled, reaching 39% in the After period.

         Second, the expenditure increase benefited bureaus, which is the regional government
(+141%) much more than the woredas governments (+31%). As a result, the relative importance or
bureaus was modified; it was about one-third “Before”, it is about half “After”. If the degree of
decentralization (between the second and the third tier of governments) is measured as the share of
the lower level in expenditures, the system is now less decentralized than before.




                                                  52
         Finally, the massive increase in capital expenditures was entirely generated by the regional
bureaus. In absolute constant terms, capital expenditures of woredas stagnated at their low level
(about 1 billion Birr per year). As a consequence, the share of bureaus in capital expenditures, which
was already high “Before” (61%) has become overwhelming (86%).

Annex J – Sub-National Revenues
          Sub-national revenues consist of tax revenues, non-tax revenues, and (in the available
statistics) municipalities’ revenues. Differences between Addis Ababa and the rest of the country
are so large that it is necessary to report numbers for the two types of sub-national governments. A
detailed analysis of sub-national revenues would deserve a full analysis. This Annex presents only
some of the main features of the issue. Table J-1 shows the most important magnitudes, for a recent
year (2014:15, or EFY 2007).


                 Table J-1 – Main Sub-National Taxes and Revenues, 2014/15
                                                10 regions      Addis                     Total
                                                  (B.Birr)    (B.Birr)                  (B.Birr)

Tax revenues
 Personal income tax                                        9.8            5.7              15.5
 Personal business income tax                               2.9            4.0               6.9
 VAT on goods and services                                  4.2            4.8               9.0
 Goods and services turnover tax                            1.2            0.7               1.8
 Other tax revenues (22 items)                              3.3            2.7               6.0
 Total tax revenues                                        21.4           17.8              39.2
Non-tax revenues
 Stamps sales & duties                                      0.6            0.2               0.7
 Charges & fees                                             0.8            0.1               0.9
 Sales of goods & services                                  1.9            0.2               2.1
 Other non-tax revenues (5 items)                           0.7            0.1               0.8
 Total non-tax revenues                                     4.0            0.5               4.5
Municipalities revenues                                     1.9            1.4               3.3
Total SNG own revenues                                     27.3           19.7              47.0
Source: MOFEC

          Four features of the system can be emphasized. The first is the dominance of three taxes:
(i) the personal income tax, which is a basically a wage tax, (ii) the business income tax, a tax on
small businesses, and (iii) a value-added tax , on goods and services which is mostly on services.
Together, these three taxes account for about 80% of tax revenues, and 67% of total revenues. A
second feature is the multiplicity of small (in terms of yield) taxes. The “other” category of tax
revenues concerns 22 items. Some of these, such as the excise taxes on local goods, have a negligible
yield. A third point is the relative importance, in the non-tax revenues, of the sales of goods and
services provided by sub-national governments: they account for more than 4% of total revenues in
Ethiopia, and of 7% in the 11 regions (excluding Addis). The most striking point is perhaps the great
difference between Addis revenues and rest of the SNGs revenues. Addis, with about 4% of the
population, collects about 42% of sub-national governments revenues. On a per capita basis, this is
nearly 20 times more. The difference is even greater if one considers only taxes.




                                                 53
