  Report No: ACS18813



  West Bank and Gaza
  Changing the Face of Tourism


  {6.15.2016}




  GSU05
  MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA




Document of the World Bank
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                                   2
Final Summary Report: Changing the Face of
Tourism
Summary
The training was divided into two parts: Practice and Theory. The theoretical part was divided into
trainings on four different topics: 1) Flora and Fauna , 2) First Aid , 3) Leadership, 4) History and
Geopolitics. The practical part involved five hiking trips where participants walked across the
Ibrahim Path and applied what they learned in the theoretical part.


Evaluation Method
This activity requires short-term and long-term evaluation. For the short-term, our team conducted
1) written questionnaire with all participants to assess motivation and views at the outset; 2)
one-on-one interviews; 3) focus group with families; and 4)open group discussion.

The long- term evaluation will be conducted in 4-6 months through emails and Skype interviews to
examine the long-term impact on the participants.


Impact
Outputs:
4 trainings courses
5 hiking trips
10 participants (5 female, 5 male)
Outcomes:

On project level:
As a pilot, this activity provided an opportunity for engaging youth from refugee camps in building
up their knowledge and capacity in the area of tourism and to build their interest in opportunities
offered in the tourism sector. Although the number of participants was small - 10 divided equally
between men and women - some are being selected to participate as tour assistants in the well
-established Ibrahim Path tours thereby increasing their marketability in the industry.
Of equal importance was to offer MIAK - the implementing agency - with the opportunity and the
means to employ youth from refugee camps with the likelihood that may start training and
employing youth from refugee camps as one of the modes of delivery of tours. More broadly,
disseminating knowledge about this small initiative will raise awareness on opportunities that may
exist for employment of refugees in countries hosting large numbers of them including Jordan and
Lebanon.

This Pilot project allows for integration of lessons learned on two important dimensions into the
WB lending project Abraham Path Initiative; 1) opportunities through involving refugees to
                                                                                                    3
enhance social cohesion within the Palestinian community and 2) ways to increase female
engagement.
On participant level:
    Participants reported better understanding of community and landscape.
    Participants reported higher appreciation for local tourism opportunities. Participants
     reported increased interest and better chances to enter tourism job market.
    Participants have been exposed to local tourism sector through courses, hikes as well a job
     market with other employers in the area.
    A number of participants will participate as tour guide assistants in Ibrahim Path tours
     thereby further increasing their marketability in tourism industry.
    Participants will be considered for the six months -long tourism course at Bethlehem
     University sponsored by the “Abraham Path Initiative? World Bank IPF project.
On community level:
Small group setting with participants from two refugee camps, Dahaisha and Aida, allowed for
high female participation due to strong community connection, paving the way for potentially
higher female engagement in tourism sector in the long term (for example in the WB Project
Abraham Path Initiative).
Youths were connected with their surroundings and across two different refugee camps.


What worked well

Our team joined the participants on a number of their hiking trips and courses. Observations on
best practices to be applied for potential future trainings and follow up include:
              Natural activities in fragile setting are a good venue for bringing young people
      together across different groups. For many of the participants, taking such walks was done for
      the first time but they all enjoyed the opportunity to be able to experience their surroundings
      in a new way. It connected them with their landscape and community while providing an
      opportunity to explore a new career path.
              The division of training into alternating theoretical and practical portions was highly
      beneficial for knowledge capture and retention. Being able to apply on a hike in nature what
      participants had learned previously in the classroom helped build a real foundation for
      becoming active tour guides.
              The trainers’ interpersonal skills had a big impact on how engaged participants were
      in the activity and feedback they provided for it.
              The relationships built within the group were very positive. Having two small groups
      from two refugee camps helped to create enough familiarity on the one hand to allow
      participants to engage freely as well as to connect with youths from a different camp openly.
      The sense of community created great dynamics within the group that helped in making the
      experience and the learning much better. Feedback provided by families suggests that at least
      some of the female participants were only allowed to attend because the family knew other
      participants and organizers. This is a very important lesson for future walks to be replicated.
              There was a great alignment with other existing World Bank projects including
      linking this activity to the Abraham Path project, and coordinating with its team. This offers a


                                                                                                    4
      good example of linkages between projects to allow sustainability and better opportunities
      for follow ups.


What can be improved

    It is essential to have the right timing for implementation. Almost all participants and the
     client organization MIAK stressed that the timing could have been better. These walks are
     best to be done in March/ early April as it was getting too hot, but also the participants
     would have been able to see more variety of the Flora and Fauna.
   The implementation should have been stretched out over a longer period of time. The days
     were long and tiring mainly and participants reported that theory trainings were long.
     Participants agreed that having theses trainings stretch over a longer period of months but
     with less hours would have been more beneficial.
   Participants thought they should have been provided with walking shoes, hats, etc. Many of
     them didn’t have the right shoes for such walks.
   There seems to be issue with commitment from participants with the activity. Some
     participants were not able to come to all the training sections. Reasons included:
    The short amount of time we had to select the participants which didn’t provide us with a
     chance to ensure their commitment to the activity and physical fitness for such walks.
    The lack of a professional certificate at the end of the course, which would have been a
     motivation for continued commitment.
    The intensity of the program being implemented in only one month.



Lessons Learned


1) It was very beneficial to have a project member who was able to visit and take part in some of
the activities. Due to her own background, she was able to create a great connection with
participants. This created a sense of community with the World Bank team which provided a basis
for an open discussion on motivations, positive and negative feedback as well as an exchange of
ideas for follow up. Especially for a small pilot activity such as this one it is essential to gain
in-depth knowledge of the participants motivations and plans. Most of the observations gathered
are to be attributed to the group and their families welcoming the team member as one of them,
enabling an open dialogue, rather than an outsider coming to implement yet another development
activity.

2) Pilot activities can increase female participation. From the one-on-one interviews and
discussions with participants’ families, it became clear that families and especially heads of
households were only comfortable with letting their daughters participate because they i) knew the
training organizers, ii) knew some of the other participants, and iii) were able to get accustomed to
letting their daughters leave on hikes by starting with relatively short lengths trips. Female
participants and their families are now more likely to consider the longer tourism course at
Bethlehem University as an option due to their previous positive experience through this pilot.
Therefore, shorter pilots might help provide a socializing environment for female participants and
                                                                                                      5
their families to become comfortable with tourism as a career option even when it takes them away
from home for longer periods of time.

3) Another area for exploration for the community tourism industry is fostering local demand.
Much of the marketing of hiking along the Abraham Path has been targeted at international tourists
who visit the West Bank. However, with ever present and once again increasing security concerns
international tourism continues to be instable, leaving the tourism sector vulnerable to upsets.
There might be an untapped opportunity in marketing the hikes to the local population. For many
Palestinians, hiking the Abraham Path provides an interesting leisure activity which at the same
time allows them to connect with their land and their history in a different way without the
limitation of security restrictions.

4) Ensuring that there is a clear path after these activities is important for the commitment from
participants. They are many activities and projects in the refugee camps and to ensure dedication
and commitment, it is essential to have a clear vision what participation in a project will lead to
eventually. In this pilot activity which was designed as a one-off on purpose a path for continued
engagement has been identified through i) connecting participants with existing tour guide
companies for opportunities and ii) providing a path to the WB-funded Bethlehem University
one-year tourism course.

5) Participants asked for opportunities to express themselves and talk about their experience with
local tourism. They walks have been well-documented and there already is Facebook group
connecting the participants with each other for further exchange. However, in the coming months,
the project team will follow up with participants in order to provide forums for participants to tell
their story more in depth.



Next Steps

As mentioned in the previous sections, there are three areas for next steps: 1) support for current
participants, 2) knowledge dissemination within the World Bank and beyond, and 3) integration of
lessons learned into future projects.

   1) Support for current participants:
As mentioned above, participants of the pilot activity are being provided with different ways of
pursuing community tourism as a career option. First, through a small tourism fair they were
exposed to other local businesses in the tourism sector which provides them with a better sense of
opportunities. Second, they are also being considered as tour guide assistants for hikes on the
Abraham Path. Third, they have the opportunity to be considered for the Bethlehem University 6
months-year tourism course. Finally, if more funds are made available for continuation of this pilot
or under a larger lending project, participants could be provided with a follow up course which
would have more of an internship quality and with a ‘train-the-trainer’ component.

   2) Knowledge dissemination with the World Bank and beyond
An important contribution of this pilot activity was to create lessons in the area of social cohesion
and gender balance for larger tourism project. Further, there are lessons for the Youth Innovation
                                                                                                        6
Fund community which sponsored this activity from the outset. For both knowledge dissemination
purposes there are activities planned to share face-to-face, such as through a BBL, and through
stories to be published internally and externally.

    3) Integration of lessons learned into future projects
Most importantly, this pilot activity should lead to actionable lessons for the WB Abraham Path
Initiative. For this purpose, the team has been in close contact with the Abraham Path Initiative’s
task team in order to tailor the project ideally and extract valuable lessons. This exchange will
continue in order to inform the lending project through what could be learned by engaging youths
from refugee camps.




                                                                                                      7
