EAP Gender
Photo: World Bank




                                                Gender and Pensions
                                                The “Gender Pension Gap”
                                                in the Aging Societies of
                                                East Asia
                                                A Policy Note from the East Asia and Pacific
                                                Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality
                            Photo: World Bank




Over the years pension systems have
been an essential policy tool for the           E    ast Asia and the Pacific (EAP) is aging faster than any other region in history.
                                                     The region is already home to 36 percent of the world’s population over
                                                     65 years old and, by 2040, the working-age population of countries such as
economic protection of older adults             China, Japan and Thailand will shrink by 10 percent. To address the challenges to
                                                development posed by these changes, more women will have to join the labor
across countries and regions. But in a
                                                force, and labor, health, and pensions systems must be reformed to protect pop-
context of widespread inequality, not           ular welfare and ensure economic growth.
everyone enjoys the same level of pro-          Gender equality is a challenge confronting pension systems around the world as
tection. Because women’s life courses           growing numbers of women enter, participate in, and exit the labor market, chal-
                                                lenging contributory pension systems to guarantee universal and adequate pension
are different from men’s, pension sys-          benefits for women. The issue has received insufficient attention in the develop-
tems often have different outcomes              ing world, including in East Asia, often for lack of gender-disaggregated data.

for women and men. With populations             This note presents findings from a World Bank review of pension policies and
                                                their gender dimensions in eight countries of the East Asia region where the aging
aging in East Asia, the gender pension
                                                of the population is already advanced or expected to accelerate in coming years.1
gap is affecting more and more women.           The review examined the labor force behavior of women aged 45 years and over
This note summarizes the results of a           in China, Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia, Mongolia, Republic of Korea, Malaysia,
                                                and the Philippines, investigating the key policy and behavioral drivers of their
study that examined pension policies            observed labor force participation and withdrawal. The review supplements
and their gender dimensions in several
                                                1. Agnieszka Chłoń-Domińczak, “Gender and Pensions in East Asia Pacific,” World Bank, Washington,
countries of East Asia.                         DC, forthcoming 2017.
2   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia




    empirical and policy analysis with qualitative insights from focus groups and individual inter-
    views with women in the focus countries who are nearing retirement age or have already
    withdrawn from the workforce.

    The results presented here fill important and policy-relevant knowledge gaps on pensions
    and retirement and on gender differentials in endowments, economic opportunities, and
    well-being at older ages.


    Pension systems
    Pension systems serve two main goals: consumption smoothing and poverty reduction in old
    age. In most pension systems, the individual’s employment and earning history is the basis
    for calculation of the benefit, thus serving the consumption-smoothing goal. The second
    goal—poverty reduction—is achieved through use of a variety of instruments, including
    redistribution in the benefit formula, guaranteed minimum benefits, and universal benefits
    in the form of a social pension (Palacios and Knox-Vydmanov 2014). Among the aspects of
    pension system design that have gender-differentiated effects are, in addition to retirement
    age, vesting periods, survivor benefits, maternity leave, and pension indexing.

    The gender pension gap, a cousin to the better-known gender pay gap, reflects gender
    differences in three areas: demographics, the realities of the labor market, and the design
    of pension systems. Women tend to live longer than men (figure 1), swelling the share of
    women among the elderly and stretching their pension benefits across more years. Women
    are paid less than men (table 1), so their pension contributions are lower. And they are less


    Figure 1.
    Life expectancy (LE) at birth and healthy life expectancy (HALE) at birth
    for both sexes in eight EAP countries in 2013
                                                                                       HALE   LE

                                     Female                                Male
    Korea, Rep.
          China
      Thailand
       Malaysia
      Vietnam
     Indonesia
    Philippines
     Mongolia
                 100         80     60        40   20   0     20      40          60     80        100


    Source: Murray et al. (2015).
                                        The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia   3




                    Table 1.
                    Gender wage gap in eight EAP countries,
                    latest available year
                                                                Gender pay gap
                                                                (% difference in
                                                              average wage earned
                    Country                                   by women and men)
                    China (2011)                                               30.0
                    Indonesia (2010)                                           30.4
                    Korea, Rep. (2006)                                         36.9
                    Mongolia (2011)                                            18.9
                    Vietnam (2010)                                              13.9
                    Malaysia (2013)                                              4.5
                    Thailand (2011)                                              3.5
                    Philippines (2013)                                         –6.1
                    Source: ILO (2016); for China, Li and Song (2011); for Indonesia, Taniguchi
                    and Tuwo (2014).




likely than men to work, particularly at jobs that offer pension benefits (table 2). Those who
do take formal jobs tend to have shorter careers than men, either because they start later (in
order to pursue additional education), because they interrupt their careers to raise children,
or because they retire earlier—to care for elderly relatives, for example, or simply because
the law in some countries permits them to do so.

Pension systems in the eight EAP countries covered in this note emerged at different times.
In four countries the pension system was introduced in the 1950s: China (1951), Malaysia (1951),
Mongolia, and the Philippines (1954). The other four introduced their systems more recently:
Korea (1988), Indonesia (1992), Thailand (1991), and Vietnam, where in 2005 the small system
for public sector workers (1961) was expanded to the private sector (Palacios 2014).

The eight systems also differ in their design (table 3). Six have mandatory defined-benefit
pensions, whereas three have defined-contribution schemes. The level of benefits is high in
three countries; in the rest it remains low. Seven countries also have noncontributory (social)
pensions, three of which are significant; the other four, less so. The degree of redistribution
is large in four countries, moderate in one, and small in three. Countries also differ with
respect to the degree of integration of the civil service into the pension system.
4                                The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia




                                  Table 2.
                                  Ratio of employed women to employed men in EAP countries, 1992–2012
                                                                       1992               1997              2002               2007              2012
                                  Vietnam                               93.8               94.9              94.0               93.8              93.5
                                  Mongolia                              87.2               87.1              87.4              86.6               84.9
                                  Thailand                              85.8              86.0               86.4              86.0               84.6
                                  China                                  81.8              81.8               81.5              79.7              78.6
                                  Korea, Rep.                           65.2              68.6               69.7               71.7               71.4
                                  Philippines                           56.5               58.4              63.2               62.9              65.1
                                  Malaysia                              52.1                  51.1           55.1              60.2               62.6
                                  Indonesia                             60.0               59.4              56.9               58.5              59.6
                                  Source: ILO (2015).
                                  Note: The overall ratio includes all forms of employment.




Table 3. Combined elements of pension systems in eight EAP countries
                                                        Mandated savings for pensions
                                     Type of                         Degree of                                                              Normal
                     Social          scheme             Target        redistri-                                           Civil           retirement
Country             pensions        DB       DC         benefit        bution                 Member risk               servants          age (M/W)
China              Significant       X         X          High          Large           Low returns on DC                 Parallel            60/55
Indonesia              None                    X          Low           Small           Low returns on DC;                Parallel            55/55
                                                                                          longevity risk
Korea, Rep. Significant              X                    Low           Large          Sponsor risk/default            Integrated             60/60
Malaysia               Small                   X          Low           Small           Low returns on DC;                Parallel            55/55
                                                                                          longevity risk
Mongolia               Small         X                    Low           Large          Inflation risk; sponsor Integrated                     60/55
                                                                                             risk/default
Philippines            Small         X                    High          Large          Inflation risk; sponsor            Parallel            65/65
                                                                                             risk/default
Thailand           Significant       X                    Low        Moderate          Inflation risk; sponsor            Parallel            55/55
                                                                                             risk/default
Vietnam                Small         X                    High          Small          Sponsor risk/default               Partly              60/55
                                                                                                                       integrated
Source: Palacios (2014).
Note: DB = defined benefit; DC = defined contribution. The “target benefit” expresses the share of the beneficiary’s former income that is to be replaced by
the pension.
                                    The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia    5




The level of benefits and the extent of coverage are particularly critical aspects of the
pension system. The gender pension gap created by demographic and labor-market differ-
ences between men and women can be mitigated by ensuring that pension systems pro-
vide broader coverage (i.e., through social pensions), greater redistribution, survivor benefits,
and regular indexing to maintain adequate income at older ages, thus taking into account
women’s longer life expectancy.


Coverage
The period between 2006 and 2010 was notable for the spread of noncontributory (social)
pensions in EAP countries (Palacios 2014). This major element in the 2007 reform in Korea
expanded coverage significantly in that country (Kim 2013). China and Thailand have fol-
lowed a policy of extending social pension coverage to the vast majority of those not eli-
gible for contributory pensions. Vietnam’s social pension, by contrast, was designed for a
narrow population and still covers only a very small proportion of the elderly. Coverage is
high in Mongolia among the elderly but shrinking for those of working age. In Indonesia the
coverage of the defined-contribution system is very low, and no social pension or other
broad form of social assistance addresses this challenge (Palacios 2014).

In the analyzed countries, the clear divide in coverage by gender is paralleled by an urban–
rural divide. Pension coverage for elderly women is lower than for men in China, Indonesia,
Korea, and Vietnam (figure 2). In absolute terms, older women’s access to pension benefits
is best in Thailand and urban areas of China. Their coverage is lowest in Indonesia, Korea,
Vietnam, and rural China.

The data do not allow us to make conclusive statements about the gender gap in cover-
age in Mongolia or the Philippines. But available evidence suggests that Filipino women are
discriminated against in terms of pension coverage, both as a result of the labor-market
structure and because of the policy governing inclusion in social insurance (Casals n.d.; Mesa-
Lago, Viaja, and Castillo 2011). On the other hand, Mongolia has relatively high overall pension
coverage, which, combined with small differences in men’s and women’s labor participation,
suggests that pension coverage for women in Mongolia does not differ significantly from
that for men.

In terms of pension system design, policies related to vesting periods and maternity leave
contribute to the lower coverage of women. The vesting periods in the EAP countries under
study are 10 years (Philippines), 15 years (China, Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam), and 20 years
(Korea and Mongolia). There is no vesting period in Malaysia. Considering the employment-
to-population ratio for women in various age groups, combined with the share of women in
wage employment, we can calculate the average expected years of wage employment for
women until the age of 60: in six of the countries (the exceptions being Malaysia and the
Philippines), the average expected years are not sufficient to meet the vesting period.
6   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia




    Figure 2.
    Pension coverage by gender in China, Korea, Indonesia, and Malaysia


                                  40
                                                                                           Women            Men
    aged 60+ receiving pensions


                                  35
    Percent of men and women




                                  30
                                  25
                                  20
                                  15
                                  10
                                   5
                                  0
                                       China      Korea, Rep.                  Malaysia                  Indonesia


    Source: Palacios (2014), based on CHARLS data; for Malaysia, Masud, Haron, Hamid, and Zainaluddin (2006).




    The result reveals a need for pension and labor policy coordination that would, on the one
    hand, encourage women to spend more time in wage employment and, on the other hand,
    adjust the vesting requirements to the existing labor-market patterns.

    Although women in EAP countries have access to maternity benefits, that access differs
    in duration, source of financing, coverage, and effective implementation (or enforcement).
    Coverage is lowest in Indonesia and highest in the Philippines. However, in no case are peri-
    ods of maternity counted as employment for purposes of computing pension levels. In
    developed OECD economies, by contrast, periods of childcare are counted in one way or
    another, depending on the structure of the country’s pension system (D’Addio 2013).


    Benefit level
    The second key dimension of the gender pension gap is the level of benefit. Overall, the
    benefit calculations practiced in the region do not contribute much to the size of the gen-
    der pension gap in the EAP countries under study. In countries where the gender gap is
    larger (China and Vietnam), the overall replacement rate is also larger.

    As noted, women receive lower pensions owing to shorter working careers and lower wages.
    These differences can be accentuated if retirement ages for women are lower and benefits
    are linked to lifetime contributions. On the other hand, they can be mitigated by universal
    social pensions or by redistribution in the pension formula (as often found in defined-ben-
    efit plans). Finally, because women tend to live longer (and spend more years in retirement),
    pension indexing can affect the gender pension gap. Ad hoc indexing and indexing to prices
    can put older women at risk of falling into poverty.
                    The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia   7




Photo: World Bank
8   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia




                                                                                      Photo: World Bank




    A key indicator of adequacy of the pension level is the replacement rate, that is, the value
    of an individual’s pension as a percentage of earnings when working. Men’s replacement
    rates in most EAP economies are not only roughly similar but also comparable to the level
    found in the 34 countries of the OECD, which, in 2012 was around 54 percent (OECD 2013).
    Replacement rates for women in the region tend to be lower than men’s, primarily because
    women take their pensions earlier. Differences in the mandatory retirement ages for men
    and women, or in the ages of pension eligibility (where retirement is not mandatory at a
    certain age), will obviously reinforce gender differences in participation in the workforce
    later in life, with important effects on relative pension wealth and financial security of older
    men and women.

    When women have access to pensions after a full working life they can expect benefits that
    are around the OECD average level—as in China and Vietnam. In other countries, as shown
    in figure 3, the target benefit level (implied in pension policy by the combination of accrual
    rates and assumed career history) is around 40 percent. The precise levels are artifacts of
    the design and targeting of individual pension systems. Korea relies on a combination of
    partial funding and modest benefit targets in order to ensure sustainability. Thailand’s main
    pension scheme aims at modest benefits, but even so, because of long retirements and low
                                                            The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia      9




Figure 3.
Target gross replacement rates for average wage earners in East Asia countries



                                   90
income to be replaced by pension
  Target share of preretirement




                                   80                                                                         Men
                                   70                                                                         Women
                                   60
           (in percent)




                                   50
                                   40
                                   30
                                   20
                                   10
                                    0
                                        Vietnam   China   Thailand   Mongolia   Korea,   Philippines   Malaysia   Indonesia
                                                                                 Rep.


Source: OECD (2013); Wiese (2006) for Mongolia.




contribution rates, is projected to run deficits in about two decades.2 Mongolia offers a
mix of social pension and non-defined-contribution benefits. The low replacement rate for
Indonesia reflects the small size of the mandatory contribution.

Comparing the level of target gross replacement rates for men and women, figure 3 reveals
three cases. There are no differences in projected replacement rates in Korea, the Philip-
pines, or Thailand, as the retirement age for men and women in these countries is the same.
In Mongolia, the expected replacement rate for women is higher than for men despite the
lower retirement age of women. This apparent anomaly reflects the presence of social pen-
sions and the rules of the non-defined-contribution system (Wiese 2006). In the third group
of countries—China, Indonesia, and Vietnam—one finds a gender gap in the expected pen-
sion level owing to the lower retirement age for women. The difference is greatest in China.

Only two of the analyzed countries offer systematic and regular adjustment of pension
benefits. Korea and Vietnam are the two exceptions (table 4), and the first is only partial:
Vietnam indexes benefits to prices in principle, but in practice indexing is subject to avail-
able budget and further adjusted each year by the legislature. In other countries index-
ing is based on governmental discretion or done only infrequently. In these countries,
women are exposed to the risk of inflation or declines in benefit levels (relative to prices).
These practices can exacerbate the pension gap between men and women, putting elderly
women at risk.

2. By contrast, the pensions of civil servants in Thailand are much higher than for private sector workers
(Palacios 2014).
10   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia




      Table 4.
      Pension indexing in EAP countries
      China              No formal indexation rule, though historically periodic adjustments have
                         kept pensions largely in line with price increases.
      Indonesia          The pension is a price-indexed annuity based on sex-specific mortality
                         rates.
      Korea, Rep.        Pensions are price-indexed.
      Malaysia           For civil servants benefits are not indexed to prices but are changed peri-
                         odically when salaries are revised.
      Mongolia           The scheme has no automatic indexing and historically had years of under-
                         indexing of benefits after retirement, reducing their real value.
      Philippines        Indexing is done periodically based on price inflation, wage growth, and
                         the financial state of the fund. The underlying assumption is that this ad
                         hoc adjustment will keep up with price inflation.
      Thailand           Indexing is discretionary.
      Vietnam            Pensions increase in line with prices, subject to budget availability and
                         annual action by the National Assembly.
      Source: OECD (2013); Park (2012) for Malaysia; national sources for Mongolia.




     Survivor benefits
     Derived pension rights for survivors (usually widows) can compensate for some of the pen-
     sion gap created by the higher participation of men in salaried employment and wider pen-
     sion coverage for men. In all the studied countries, some form of survivor benefit is provided.

     The level of benefits is set at different levels but usually ranges around 50 percent of the
     decedent’s pension amount—a bit lower than in the developed countries. In Malaysia and
     Philippines, full benefits are paid; in Korea and Mongolia, a fraction. In Vietnam the benefit
     is a fraction of the minimum wage. China, Indonesia, and Thailand offer lump-sum survivor
     benefits, which do not protect widows against poverty in later years.

     It is important to ensure that long-term provision of adequate benefits is provided to older
     women through survivor benefits, especially if they are not covered by a pension from their
     own economic activity.
                                   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia      11




Putting it all together: Ranking the pension systems
To assess the adequacy of the pension system and the gender pension gap in the eight EAP
countries studied, six indicators were combined: (i) pension system coverage (the share of
women receiving benefits); (ii) expected years in wage employment (that is, the average
period of contributing to the pension system); (iii) the projected pension benefit for female
average earners, which reflects the absolute level of pension provision in different countries;
(iv) the difference between the level of men’s and women’s pension benefits at average
wage levels; (v) the degree of redistribution toward retirees who earned lower wages (to
take into account the larger share of women at lower wage levels); and access to and level
of survivor benefits.




                                                                                 Photo: World Bank
12   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia




      Table 5.
      Ranking of the pension systems of eight EAP countries
                                              Indicator
                       (and weight accorded that indicator in the overall ranking)




                                                                                                       Difference between men’s




                                                                                                                                  toward those who earned
                       share of women receiving
                       Coverage, in terms of the




                                                                            Pension level for women
                                                                            earning average wage (2)




                                                                                                                                  Degree of redistribution
                                                                                                       and women’s benefits at
                                                   Expected years in wage




                                                                                                                                                             Survivor benefit (0.5)
                       pension benefits (2)




                                                                                                       average wage (1)
                                                   employment (1)




                                                                                                                                                                                      Overall ranking
                                                                                                                                  lower wages (1)
      Mongolia                    1                        7                         4                           1                          4                      3                       1
      China                      3                         3                         2                          6                           2                     8                       2
      Thailand                   2                         5                         3                           2                          5                     8                       3
      Vietnam                    4                         6                          1                          5                          5                      3                     4
      Korea, Rep.                5                         4                         5                           2                          1                      3                      5
      Philippines                7                         2                        6                            2                          3                       1                    6
      Malaysia                   6                          1                        7                           4                          5                       1                     7
      Indonesia                  8                         8                        8                            3                          5                     6                      8



     For each selected indicator, the countries are ranked in order from 1 (the highest or more
     equal value) to 8 (the lowest or least equal value). The overall indicator is calculated as the
     weighted average of ranking in the six areas. Two indicators (coverage and pension level) are
     given a weight of 2; survivor benefit is weighted at 0.5; the other three indicators have a
     weight of 1.

     Table 5 presents the results of the ranking. Overall, women are in a relatively good situation
     in Mongolia, China, Thailand, Vietnam, and Korea. Larger challenges are found in Indonesia,
     Malaysia, and the Philippines.

     The adequacy of a country’s pension system and the size of the gender pension gap must be
     understood in light of the country’s demographics and its labor market. In terms of demo-
     graphics, the key questions are these: How fast is the society aging? Are sufficient numbers
     of younger workers paying into the system to keep it solvent? How much longer than men
     are women living? In terms of the labor market, the questions are these: Are women as likely
     to be employed as men and for as long? Are they equally or differentially likely to work in
                                   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia                13




jobs that generate pension contributions? How close are their wages to men’s? Are women
being rewarded for their better education?

Taking all of these dimensions into account reveals significant diversity in the EAP coun-
tries. The situation of women in the labor market is most equal to that of men in Thailand,
the Philippines, and Vietnam; it is least equal in China, Indonesia, and Malaysia. In the last
two, inequality in the labor market interact with pension policies to create particularly large
gender pension gaps. The countries that offer the most equal pension policy for men and
women are Mongolia, Thailand, and China. The population is aging fastest in China, Thailand,
and Korea; most slowly in Indonesia and the Philippines. But in all eight countries the demo-
graphic challenge is becoming increasingly important.




                                                                                           Photo: World Bank
14   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia




     Policy recommendations
     Several overarching policy issues are apparent.

     •	 Social and labor market policies will have to adapt to population aging throughout the
        region.

     •	 Women are an underused asset for sustaining economic growth, especially given their
        growing tendency to become better educated. Their potential can be realized only if
        they have equal opportunities for employment as well as equal social protection.

     •	 To address poverty among elderly women, access to wage employment and pension
        benefits are critical.

     •	 Women have shorter working careers owing chiefly to family responsibilities (and sec-
        ondarily to longer periods of study). Policies to compensate these breaks in formal
        employment are an important and missing component of pension schemes.

     •	 Universal social pensions can shrink the gender pension gap and protect against poverty
        in old age.

     •	 Regular and predictable adjustment of pension benefits can prevent retirees from falling
        suddenly into poverty.

     Given these challenges, there is a need for further research and analytical work to support
     evidence-based policy reform in the region. The work to be done includes understanding
     women’s life courses and the interactions among employment, family activity, and future
     pension rights. Presently there is a dearth of information on the level of pension provision
     for women; in some countries, information on pension benefits is not broken down by
     gender. Increasing the availability of such statistics would enable a better understanding of
     current policy outcomes from the
     gender perspective.

     Future modeling work should
     explore the causes of the gender
     pension gap to determine which
     factors—labor market participation,
     wage gaps, retirement age, or longer
     life—contribute most to the gender
     pension gap. Further exploration of
     possible policy reforms in the area
                                                                                               Photo: World Bank




     of maternity leave and survivor ben-
     efits is also warranted.
                                          The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia                15




  Acknowledgments
  The review on which this note is based was prepared by the Social Protection and Labor
  Global Practice of the World Bank as part of the background for the EAP regional report
  entitled Live Long and Prosper: Aging in East Asia and Pacific (World Bank 2016). The
  review was led by Phillip O’Keefe, lead economist, and authored by Agnieszka Chłoń-
  Domińczak, consultant. It was funded by the East Asia and Pacific Umbrella Facility for
  Gender Equality (EAP UFGE), a multi-donor trust fund managed by the Social Develop-
  ment Team in East Asia and Pacific who also published this knowledge note as part of
  the EAP Gender Capacity Program.



References
Casals, C. No date. “Exploratory Study of Micro-Pensions in the Philippines.” Unpublished paper. http://www.pen-
   siondevelopment.org/documenten/Report%20Micro%20Pensions%20Philippines%20Camilo%20Casals.pdf.
D’Addio, A. C. 2013. “Pension Entitlements of Women with Children: The Role of Credit within Pension Systems
   in OECD and EU Countries.” In R. Holzmann, E. Palmer, D. Robalino (eds.), Nonfinancial Defined Contribution
   Pension Schemes in a Changing Pension World, Vol. 2: Gender, Politics and Financial Stability (pp. 75–110).
   Washington, DC: World Bank.
ILO (International Labour Office). 2016. Key Indicators of the Labour Market, 9th edition. Geneva: International
   Labour Organization. http://www.ilo.org/global/statistics-and-databases/research-and-databases/kilm/
   WCMS_498929/lang--en/index.htm.
———. 2015. Key Indicators of the Labour Market, 8th edition. Geneva: International Labour Organization.
   http://www.ilo.org/global/statistics-and-databases/research-and-databases/kilm/WCMS_498929/lang-
   -en/index.htm.
Kim, S. S. 2013. “Pension Reform Options in Korea.” Paper presented at IMF Conference on Designing Fiscally
   Sustainable and Equitable Pension Systems in Asia in the Post-Crisis World, January. https://www.imf.org/
   external/np/seminars/eng/2013/oapfad/pdf/kim_ppr.pdf.
Li, Shi, and Jin Song. 2011. “Changes in Gender Wage Gap in Urban China During 1996–2007.” CIBC Working Paper
   2011-20, University of Western Ontario, Department of Economics, London, Ontario.
Masud, J., S. A. Haron, A. T. A. Hamid, and Z. Zainaluddin. 2006. “Economic Well-Being of the Elderly : Gender
   Differences.” Consumer Interest Annual 52 (1995): 456–461.
Mesa-Lago, C., V. Viajar, and R. Castillo. 2011. “Pensions in the Philippines: Challenges and Ways Forward.” Fried-
   rich-Eber-Stiftung, Philippines.
Murray, Christopher J. L., and many others. 2015. “Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted life years
   (DALYs) for 306 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 188 countries, 1990–2013: quanti-
   fying the epidemiological transition.” The Lancet 386 (10009): 2145–2191.
16   The “Gender Pension Gap” in the Aging Societies of East Asia




     OECD. 2013. “Pensions at a Glance: Asia/Pacific 2013.” OECD Publishing: Paris. http://www.oecd.org/publications/
        pensions-at-a-glance-asia-pacific-23090766.htm.
     Palacios, Robert. 2014. “Pensions in an Aging East Asia.” Unpublished background paper for EAP regional aging
        report. World Bank, Washington, DC.
     Palacios, Robert., and Charles. Knox-Vydmanov. 2014. “The Growing Role of Social Pensions: History, Taxonomy
        and Key Performance Indicators.” Public Administration and Development 34: 251–264.
     Park, Donghyun. 2012. “Pension Systems in East and Southeast Asia: Promoting Fairness and Sustainability.” Asian
        Development Bank, Manila.
     Taniguchi, K., and A. Tuwo, A. 2014. “New Evidence on the Gender Wage Gap in Indonesia.” ADB Economics
        Working Paper Series 404, Asian Development Bank, Manila.
     Wiese, Patrick. 2006. “An Evaluation of Pension Reform Options for Mongolia.” December 25. Unpublished paper.
     World Bank. 2016. Live Long and Prosper: Aging in East Asia and Pacific. World Bank East Asia and Pacific Regional
        Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.




       Copyright © 2017
       The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank Group
       1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433 USA

       All rights reserved.

       The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report are entirely those of the authors and
       should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, or its affiliated organizations, or to members
       of its board of executive directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee
       the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any
       consequence of their use.


       The UFGE aims to strengthen awareness, knowledge, and capacity for gender-informed policy making.
       It supports the priorities identified in the East Asia and Pacific Regional Gender action Plan as well as in the
       EAP Country Gender Action Plans.

       For additional information, please contact:
       Lourdes Anducta, Program Assistant, GSURR, landucta@worldbank.org
