              Knowledge Sharing on Global Good Practice on
           Community-Driven Approach to Housing Reconstruction1



           Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Housing Reconstruction
The magnitude of the needed reconstruction – in infrastructure and housing, among many –
following the devastation brought about by Typhoon Yolanda (international name, Haiyan) demands
an approach that will hasten the rebuilding o f homes, and of people’s lives and communities.
The extent of the damage has been assessed and the needs, identifie d.2 Nearly a year after
Typhoon Yolanda struck, the government and its international and local partners are poised to
“build back better, faster, and safer” in an unprecedented scale. As also declared in his opening
remarks by Secretary Panfilo M. Lacson, Presidential Assistant for Rehabilitation and Recovery,
the objective is “not only to restore the pre -Haiyan economic demographics but to surpass the
quality of life associated with the pre-Haiyan status quo. . . . I also recognize that improving
the economic and sociopolitical conditions of Haiyan-affected communities is key to reducing
vulnerability to disaster risks.”
      In her welcome remarks, t he World Bank’s acting country director, Ms. Chiyo Kanda,
framed the knowledge-sharing discussions by indicating that the “challenge of reaching scale”
could be met by learning from the experiences of other countries as well as local projects, and
moving away from “business as usual.” In particular, the major decision making and work on the
rebuilding of homes should be placed in the hands of their owners and their communities, with
the government providing the “platform” for this type of support and making available the
needed resources and technical and other assistance. “O nce this paradigm shift is realized, the
success of scale is in our hand. I hope the paradigm shift starts today. ”
      While the focus of the government’s housing reconstruction efforts has been the 205,128
units needed to be built in safe and sustainable resettlement sites, the participants cautioned that
attention should not also be taken away from the rest of the nearly 1 million affected house-
holds. These households and their communities would likewise benefit from a community-driven
______________________________________________________________________________________
       1
         The one-day session was held on 5 September 2014 at The World Bank Manila Office, One Global Place,
Bonifacio Global City, Taguig City, and facilitated by Maria Anna de Rosas Ignacio, who also put together and
provided the contexts of this summary of the proceedings (see Annex A for the program and Annex B for the list
of participants.)
       2
       In December 2013, the National Economic and Development Authority published the document,
Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda , which details a preliminary assessment of the damage in affected areas,
the economic and social impact, and initial plan for recovery and reconstruction. In July 2014, the Office of the
Presidential Assistant for Rehabilitation and Recovery, which was created in December 2013, put out a
consolidated summary of further post-disaster assessment as well as the status of the work being done and the
plans and expected deliverables for the months ahead. OPARR submitted to the President the final Yolanda
Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan (CRRP) in August 2014.
                                                           Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Reconstruction | 2


approach which should be adopted in the housing and other reconstruction efforts. At the same
time, any post-Yolanda work should incorporate knowledge management, codification, and
institutionalization of policies and processes as many other “Yolandas” would likely come this
way. The country’s post-disaster efforts should veer away from ad hoc arrangements and fuse
the loop between immediate disaster response and recovery.

Community-Driven Approach
      Indonesia’s “REKOMPAK” (community-based approach for rebuilding houses and community
infrastructure in Aceh, Yogyakarta, and West and Central Java) and Pakistan’s ERRA (Earthquake
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority) provide inspiring models and benchmarks for the
reconstruction of homes following massive natural disasters. Both experiences involved a
community-driven approach in undertaking the rebuilding of homes – over 600,000 housing units
in the case of the Pakistan earthquake of 2005; and a total of more than 300,000 units in
Indonesia’s Aceh and North Sumatra tsunami of 2004,
Yogyakarta and Central Java earthquake and West
Java tsunami of 2005, the West Sumatra earthquake          Community-driven development
of 2009, and the Merapi Volcano eruption of 2010. In                 is an approach that gives control
Pakistan as well as in Indonesia, households were given              over planning decisions and invest-
cash grants (about US$3,000), which were considered                  ment resources for local devel-
                                                                     opment projects to community
as incentives and assistance for core shelter con-
                                                                     groups. CDD programs operate on
struction. The grants were released after extensive
                                                                     the principles of local empowerment,
social preparation and technical training on housing
                                                                     participatory governance, demand-
construction carried out by government agencies
                                                                     responsiveness, administrative
and their civil society partners. In both cases, the
                                                                     autonomy, greater downward
reconstruction of an annual average of more than
                                                                     accountability, and enhanced local
100,000 housing units was achieved, with the bulk
                                                                     capacity.
completed in the initial years of the program. The
                                                                     www.worldbank.org/topic/community
household-beneficiaries have already begun to incre-
                                                                     drivendevelopment
mentally improve their homes so that these could
match their situations and needs.
      As highlighted in the presentation by Mr. Ekita Arsita Rizki of REKOMPAK, through the
words of a community beneficiary, by employing a community-driven approach “. . . people
become aware and capable. We can maintain the quality of our homes. If construction is done
by a third-party (contractor), we only can accept it as it is, and do not have authority to
determine” (see Annex D). 3 A delegation from Philippine national agencies involved in post-
Yolanda reconstruction traveled to Indonesia in early 2014 for an onsite understanding of the
REKOMPAK experience and affirmed the value of a community-driven approach. In answering
the question whether or not there could be a “window for community-based shelter construction
in the implementation of the Yolanda Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Pla n,”
______________________________________________________________________________________
       3
       The Indonesian experience is a well-documented case; see, among many, “REKOMPAK: Rebuilding
Indonesia’s Communities After Disasters, 2012, published by the Secretariat of the Multi Donor Fund for Aceh and
Nias and the Java Reconstruction Fund.
                                                    Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Reconstruction | 3


Undersecretary Lesley Cordero of OPARR, who was a member of the delegation, enumerated the
government’s commitment under the CRRP, which paralleled the scale of the work done in
Indonesia (see Annex F). She also cited KALAHI CIDSS-NCDDP (Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan-
Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services-National Community-Driven Development
Program) of the Department of Social Welfare and Development and CMP (Community Mortgage
Program) of the Social Housing Finance Corporation as examples of local experiences in
community-driven development, and could likewise serve as models for the field implementation
of a realistic and grounded CRRP.
      Lt. Gen. Nadeem Ahmed of ERRA (via teleconferencing) said that with the scale of his
country’s post-earthquake problem “conventional approach would not help, strategic errors cannot
be undone by tactical brilliance ” (see Annex F). As narrated by Lt. Gen. Nadeem, the ERRA
experience reiterated that through a community-driven approach the targeted scale and speed
of the housing reconstruction had not only been achieved but had produced many other value
added, including reduced costs, enhancement of social capital, improvement in the beneficiaries’
technical skills, and sustainability and continued improvement of the services provided. The
approach also allowed a more focused and inclusive targeting, particularly with regard to more
vulnerable households and individuals.

Local Community-Driven Initiatives
      Three national government agencies – SHFC, DSWD, and NHA – shared their work that had
already been started in some areas affected by Typhoon Yolanda (see Annex G, Annex H, and
Annex I). The initiatives were part of regular programs and undertakings of these agencies,
which were modified to incorporate special needs and situations related to Yolanda-affected
households. A common component of these programs has been community or beneficiary partici-
pation, which may need to be fined-tuned to become more embracing of a community-driven
approach in the post-Yolanda housing reconstruction.
       In the case of SHFC, its CMP, a housing finance program, supports community-managed
housing projects for both voluntary relocation and onsite development in safe areas. While the
program recognizes partnerships for community support in the area of community organizing,
settlement planning and management, construction, and financial management, its incentives
are limited only to the organizing work. In its post-Yolanda CMP work, SHFC has likewise
partnered with international and local donor organizations for the house construction and
repair works in order to make the loan affordable as it is able to extend financial assistance only
for the land acquisition and site development. SHFC will seek a policy directive from its Board of
Directors so that it could incorporate a grant component for technical assistance, which would
facilitate the project development and management work of the communities. Additional grants
may likewise be considered for house repairs and construction.
      For its part, DSWD already has its regular shelter assistance for disaster-affected families.
Involving three types, depending on the situation of the beneficiary-family, the shelter assistance
is designed as a financial grant that can cover partial or core housing construction in
resettlement sites or in original locations if these are determined to be compliant with safety
                                                     Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Reconstruction | 4


requirements. DSWD works with organized neighborhood associations and LGUs in the imple-
mentation of this program, including in the release of funds to beneficiaries and the procurement
of materials.
       NHA, the key shelter agency tasked with housing production, works with Local Interagency
Committees (LIAC) and the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC)
in its work toward the provision of permanent shelter, as well as community facilities, for disaster-
affected families. It makes available various design options for disaster-resilient homes, with
corresponding cost estimates. While it has worked with such NGOs as Gawad Kalinga and
Habitat for Humanity, NHA has yet to fully operationalize a community-driven approach and
make it a routine part of its work mode. It cites the limited availability of public or LGU-owned
lands and delays in the processing of documentary requisites (e.g., clearance from the Mines
and Geosciences Bureau and topographic survey map) as among the key challenges in fast-
tracking the implementation of its resettlement program for disaster-affected families. More
important, NHA is also constrained by the absence of a definitive or clear legal framework with
regard to the downloading of government funds to nongovernment and people’s organizations .
      A presentation by the Environmental Science for Social Change, a Jesuit research institute,
of the key results of its study on post-disaster housing approaches support many of the major
challenges cited by SHFC, DSWD, and NHA. ESSC’s s tudy was carried out in selected project sites
of the three agencies. The sites, which were affected by devastating typhoons prior to Typhoon
Yolanda, were assessed in terms of disaster resilience, community participation, timeliness,
affordability, and sustainability (see Annex J). On the basis of its findings, ESSC called for a
national strategy on post-disaster housing reconstruction to be established soonest. It
recommended the integration of resilience measures in site selection, site development, housing
designs, materials and standards, and post-occupation estate management. It also highlighted
the need for more substantive engagement of the beneficiary community in NHA’s resettlement
program and for all housing agencies and DSWD to increase their technical monitoring capability
and, together with LGUs, “offer engagement opportunities beyond funding and technical support”
to communities as well as to improve coordination at the community and LGU levels.

Arena for Further Action
      Engaging the active participation of communities
                                                              An unequivocal policy statement,
and civil society organizations in nation building is
                                                              from the highest level, regarding
enshrined in Philippine laws and a centerpiece of the
                                                              the adoption of a community-
present Administration (as stated in the Constitution,
                                                              driven approach in post-Yolanda
the President’s “Social Contract with the Filipino
People,” and the Philippine Development Plan, 2011-           housing reconstruction is
2016, among others). Nonetheless, an unequivocal              essential toward hastening the
policy statement, coming from the highest level, on           process of consensus building
the adoption of a community-driven approach in post-          while the operational mechanics
Yolanda housing reconstruction in addressing not              and details are being crafted at
only the resettlement of communities to safe areas            various levels.
but also the rebuilding of homes in locations which
                                                           Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Reconstruction | 5


are not hazard-prone – is essential toward hastening the process of consensus building while the
operational mechanics and details are being formulated and put in place. This should come with an
emphatic stance, and reiteration at various levels of the implementation structure , that the
government’s provision of housing in disaster-affected areas is not an expense but an
investment that could also serve as a further economic growth driver. Subsequently, a firm
declaration concerning the use of a community-driven approach should bring about directed
efforts toward harmonizing policies, or even modifying some agency rules and procedures, so that
the government could truly become an enabler and not simply a regulator in the development
process.
       In her closing remarks, Ms. Celia Alba, Secretary General of the Housing and Urban
Development Coordinating Council, emphasized that NHA and HUDCC are committed to employing
a community-driven approach in addressing the mandate of providing over 200,000 shelters as
indicated in the CRRP. She echoed the information shared by OPARR that the community-driven
approach had been discussed with a number of agency principals as well as at the cabinet level.
She indicated that the concept was well received and generally accepted as the approach to be
used for moving forward but the challenge would be its operationalization. She admitted that
the mechanisms and details that this approach entailed had yet to be defined and more
discussions between and among HUDCC, NHA, OPARR and other agencies in the resettlement
cluster were needed. Nonetheless, there had already been initial discussions about the iden-
tification of a pilot site that would use a community-driven approach.
      Among the key national-level operational and implementation issues with regard to the
adoption of a community-driven approach are institutional arrangements for policy setting and
implementation oversight, funds flow arrangements, and government support mechanisms. At
the community level, the key a priori issues focus on community mobilization, quality assurance,
and accountability.4

       Institutional Arrangements
      OPARR is mandated to provide the planning,
coordinating, and oversight functions in addressing
                                                                    Designating a national-level
post-Yolanda rehabilitation and recovery requirements.
It has established five cabinet-level clusters for                  institutional home, vested with
specific needs and, at the local level, works with local            appropriate powers, as well as
government units, civil society organizations, private              identifying layers of structures
sector groups, and other development partners and                   from the regional to community
stakeholders. These groups have all been involved in                levels is a key initial task in
a “bottom-up” approach in crafting the CRRP. As                     adopting a community-driven
the reconstruction efforts move toward local and                    approach.
community-level work, the various layers of the inter-
agency coordinating committees (from the national
______________________________________________________________________________________
       4
       The publication, Safer Homes, Stronger Communities: A Handbook for Reconstructing after Natural Disaster,
2010, Abhas K. Jha and others, Washington, DC: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The
World Bank, will be a useful guide in the preparation of manuals and related materials.
                                                    Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Reconstruction | 6


or NIAC, to the local, that is, provincial or city and municipal LIAC) may need to be tapped and
involved more actively. More important, designating an institutional home for orchestrating a
community-driven approach in housing reconstruction, along with vesting this institution with
the needed authority, is a fundamental and immediate decision making point.
      The LIAC at the city or municipality level is a structure that NHA has engaged in many of its
projects and, in most cases, the arrangement has worked well. In the case of the current need
for massive housing reconstruction, a review of the functions (including decision-making
parameters) and subsequent expansion of the LIAC may be necessary so that its responsibilities
and composition could become more appropriate for a community-driven approach. Moreover,
while the replication of roles and functions at every level has to be achieved, the formation of
community-level structures needs to take into consideration the uniqueness of various
conditions and settings. Enough flexibility has to be installed in keeping with the principles of a
community-driven approach.

      Community Mobilization: Finding Local Partners
      A major requisite of the community-driven approach is the presence of community
organizers or facilitators who would help ensure the preparedness of beneficiary-households
and communities for the implementation process. In ongoing NHA post-disaster reconstruction
projects, DSWD serves the social preparation needs. Its KALAHI CIDSS-NCDDP experience
provides an existing local model that can be utilized. The magnitude, however, of the shelter
reconstruction yet to be carried out demands expanded arrangements for community
mobilization, which may be beyond DSWD’s existing capacity .
      The identification of NGOs, POs, PO and NGO networks, and other civil society groups that
would address the need for community mobilization is thus an urgent task. At the same time,
there should likewise be a search for local partners
from the private sector (including land and housing
                                                        DSWD’s KALAHI CIDSS-NCDDP
developers or contractors, architects, and engineers)
                                                        experience can provide the core
that can provide technical assistance in the settlement
                                                        of the community mobilization
planning and construction management phase. A
directory of these groups has to be generated at the    resource. This should be twinned
community level so that the identification of groups    and complemented with an
working on the ground could be facilitated. Moreover,   immediate on-the-ground listing
a system of vetting and accreditation of organizations, of potential community mobi-
with inputs from civil society and private sector       lization partners and workers.
groups and LGUs, has to be put in place.
      Training modules for trainors and for those who will be involved directly in community
organizing and facilitation will also have to be prepared so that consistency in message and action
could be achieved. And, certainly, the training of at least the trainors needs to be carried out in
earnest as soon as possible. As pointed out above, DSWD’s KALAHI CIDSS-NCDDP could provide
the core of this training and community facilitation needs.
                                                    Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Reconstruction | 7


      Land Acquisition
      Another urgent task is the identification of land for resettlement sites, an assignment that
has generally been given to LGUs. While land acquisition in itself is a major undertaking, this has
to be carried out with consideration not only for disaster resilience but livelihood opportunities
and basic services availability as well. OPARR has made it a requirement that certifications from
MGB and DOST (Department of Science and Technology) be secured prior to land acquisition to
ensure that the property being purchased is in a safe area. MGB geohazard maps (1:5,000) and
DOST maps should be made readily accessible to facilitate the identification of safe areas as well
as mitigating measures for areas with some risks.
      Policy decision on land tenure arrangements is also an area of concern. In both Indonesia
and Pakistan, for instance, one modality was allowing households to identify the land that they
could purchase and assisting the households in the negotiation and other legal processes ,
through a one-stop operation. The SHFC experience in Tacloban City entailed an off-site CMP
assistance involving a piece of land offered voluntarily by its owners.
      Significant finds may be produced in a systematic land identification process carried out
from the barangay to the provincial level, and involving the local implementation structures and
even the beneficiary-communities themselves. Private sector groups, such as banks and private
land owners, could be gathered in a forum to hasten land identification. Moreover, bank-
foreclosed properties and those in real estate tax delinquency lists could become sources of
much-needed resettlement sites.
      In some areas, the Department of Agrarian Reform may need to be involved in the local
implementation structure to facilitate, when needed, the conversion of identified land from
agricultural to residential use. LGUs would also need to complete their land use plans and
actively engage the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the Registry of
Deeds so land registration or titling concerns could be addressed promptly.

      Funds Flow Arrangement: The “Fear Factor”
       A major constraint in engaging NGOs and other civil society groups in government
programs and projects is the absence of a clear policy on the transfer of funds. While some
agencies are currently able to effect fund transfers (such as SHFC in its CMP and DSWD in its
partnership with the Neighborhood Association for Shelter Assistance or NASA) , the officials
concerned are threatened by what many jokingly refer to as the “fear factor” in government
service, that is, receiving adverse post-audit findings (such as expense disallowance and technical
malversation charges) by the Commission on Audit and thus jeopardizing tenure or even
retirement. On the one hand, the participation of COA
in national-level planning and decision making may be          Policy and procedural inputs and
required so that clear directives on funds flow could          commitments from COA would be
be put in place. SHFC’s accreditation process of CMP           needed to facilitate fund flow,
mobilizers may serve as a model in coming up with a list       utilization, and reporting as well as
of local partners to be involved in fund management.           procurement.
On the other hand, NGOs and other civil society
                                                   Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Reconstruction | 8


groups need to also be engaged concerning policing their ranks and capability building with
regard to fund management and controls as well as financial liquidation and reporting.
      Another potential constraint would be the application of the Government Procurement
Reform Act, which could limit the pursuit of scale and speed in housing reconstruction. Like the
need for clarification on COA rules, a policy pertaining to procurement relevant to a community-
driven approach may be necessary.

      Accountability and Transparency
      The goal of achieving accountability and transparency in all aspects of implementing a
program using a community-driven approach subsumes community involvement in the process
of beneficiary identification and deciding on grant assistance allocation. It should likewise
incorporate mechanisms and structures in which grievance and complaints are to be
handled at all levels. Moreover, the grievance mechanism should include a feedback and
documentation system, particularly as regards how complaints or issues have been handled.
All these may be formulated to dovetail with plans of OPARR for its Electronic Management
Platform: Accountability and Transparency Hub for Yolanda or EMPATHY.

      Quality Assurance
      As indicated in the ESSC presentation, disaster resilience should be viewed from various
dimensions, not only in the housing unit construction itself but as early as the site selection
phase. There is thus a need for MGB to be involved at the highest level and in technical aspects
of decision making. In addition, universities and other local groups can be invited to contribute
to design, quality testing, and other technical requirements. As households will be involved in
housing construction – as part of their counterpart – technical training has to be carried out.
This will improve the pool of trained artisans and other workers at the local levels and at the
same time generate additional cash income opportunities for the beneficiaries.
      Concern for quality assurance must be coupled with flexibility in interior layout design and
exterior style of housing units. This will ensure that homes would be appropriate for their users’
needs and conditions and, more important, engender a strong sense of ownership and
accomplishment for their owners. The allowance for flexibility should be communicated at the
outset and put in motion as housing construction is ongoing – a condition that may be untenable
under a contractor-driven development. (Both the Indonesian and Pakistan experiences cited
that the incremental housing improvement brought about by the provision of assistance for
core shelter construction also addressed government funding constraint without sacrificing
structural soundness.)

Some Final Notes
     As value chain planning and decision making is made to bear on the adoption of a
community-driven approach to housing reconstruction, the existing and tested building blocks
must be acknowledged and harnessed. At the same time, the limitations in resources and
capabilities of national government agencies, local government units, and civil society groups
                                                      Paradigm Shift in Post-Yolanda Reconstruction | 9


must be recognized and addressed. A final policy directive concerning the application of the
approach, and the designation of a national implementation structure, will stimulate the
corresponding modification or fine-tuning of “sub-systems” at agency levels. All these must be
communicated clearly and repeatedly to all in all levels.
       Putting in place a well-articulated system for addressing housing reconstruction and
demonstrating its evident initial results could attract more assistance for the country’s efforts to
rise from the unprecedented devastation brought about by Typhoon Yolanda. The government
can leverage what it does well and with good outcomes with increased local and international
support. And in the years ahead, the current experience should be able to count many other
benefits – strengthened multisectoral partnerships, improved policies and systems from disaster
response to recovery, and, more important, empowered households and communities able to
address their other needs and hopes.




             Photo: http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/15/typhoon-haiyan-how-rebuild-philippines
