Report No: ACS10270



World
Expanding Access to Early Childhood Development
Using Interactive Audio Instruction
Innovation Challenge 2014


September 2014




GTCDR
OTHER




                            1
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
             INNOVATION CHALLENGE 2014:
EXPANDING ACCESS TO EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT
      USING INTERACTIVE AUDIO INSTRUCTION



GUIDELINES FOR PROGRAM DESIGN AND REPORTBACK ON PROTOTYPING
             IN THE DEMOCRATIC REUPUBLIC OF CONGO




                       September, 2014
                                                   Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................ 6
Introduction to IAI for ECD ..................................................................................................... 9
The ECD IAI Programming Cycle:.......................................................................................... 11
   PHASE 1: PREPARATION ................................................................................................... 12
   PHASE 2: DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................................. 17
   PHASE 3: PRODUCTION .................................................................................................... 20
   PHASE 4: DELIVERY ........................................................................................................... 21
   MONITORING AND EVALUATION ..................................................................................... 23
   SUSTAINABILITY................................................................................................................ 24
DRC Case Study .................................................................................................................... 26
   Context ............................................................................................................................. 26
   Summary of the Pilot ....................................................................................................... 26
   RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SCALE UP ............................................................................... 34
Appendices ........................................................................................................................... 35




                                                                  5
                                     Executive Summary

The returns to investments in ECD are manifold and can include improved school readiness,
reduced drop-out rates, higher labor force productivity and greater social cohesion. Despite
these high returns, enrollment in early childhood education is just 18% across Africa, with
disproportionately high enrollment from children in urban areas and from wealthier families.

The Early Learning Partnership (ELP) provides targeted technical assistance and funding to
support Early Childhood Development (ECD) and early learning across Sub-Saharan Africa.
The ELP aims to catalyze change in countries to promote high-quality ECD and early learning
opportunities for young children.

In December 2013, the ELP was awarded a grant through the World Bank Innovation
Challenge for a proposal entitled “Expanding Access to Early Childhood Development Using
Interactive Audio Instruction.?

Interactive Audio Instruction (IAI) is a distance learning technology that can deliver low-cost,
culturally appropriate education via radio or MP3. It is a highly effective tool to reach
children who can be hard to reach through conventional programs, including the rural poor
and children with disabilities. IAI can also be an effective form of service delivery in unstable
and conflict-affected regions.

IAI has been shown to dramatically improve the quality of teaching and learning in a range of
contexts across subject matter, age, gender and location. However, despite the strong
evidence base supporting IAI programs, scale up from pilot phase to long-run permanent
phase is rare.

As part of its work in developing low-cost models to expand access to quality early childhood
education throughout the region, the ELP decided to work with EDC, a global leader in
production of IAI programs to outline a replicable process for scaling up IAI programs for
ECD. The project site for this Challenge was the Democratic Republic of Congo.

The attached report is divided into two parts. Part 1 outlines the process for scaling up an
IAI program – from initial start-up in a given community, to large scale expansion in a
country. It highlights the main steps in the production cycle, the roles and responsibilities of
government and communities, and provides useful tips for practitioners at each stage of the
process. Part 2 provides a summary of how this process was followed in DRC and lessons
learned.

It should be noted that this report is a summary document. A fuller version of this report –
meant to be a user friendly toolkit for project managers is still under production. This report
includes much of the content which will be included in the formal toolkit.


                                                6
Summary of Part 1: General guidelines for implementing an IAI program at scale

This section of the toolkit outlines the four phases in the IAI program cycle as they pertain to
ECD programming for a facilitated group setting (early childhood classrooms, informal
community learning centers, or adult-led group childcare settings). These phases are
summarized as follows:

       Phase 1: Preparation- Introduction and engagement with stakeholders. This stage
        involves audience research, analysis of the educational context, assessment of
        technology options and program design. The end product of this stage is a program
        design document.

       Phase 2: Development- This stage involves scriptwriter training; scriptwriting, and
        formative evaluation that prepare for the production of final use-ready episodes and
        supporting materials.

       Phase 3: Production- This stage involves local production of audio episodes and
        preparation of supplementary learning materials for the program.

       Phase 4: Delivery- This stage involves training teachers/ caregivers in the use of IAI
        and delivering the program via radio, MP3 or other technology.


Part 2- Case Study: Assessing the potential for a large scale IAI program in the DRC

The ECD IAI pilot in DRC was a small-scale effort undertaken to determine the potential
feasibility of a large-scale IAI program for kindergarten in that country and to inform any
future efforts to roll out IAI for ECD in other countries. The contractor, EDC, was already
implementing a primary-grade IAI program in DRC, and was tasked with:

   Engagement with government stakeholders around IAI as a means of delivering high-
    quality ECD, and identification of target communities for a pilot of such programming
   In-country program organization and community engagement
   Curriculum review and program development
   IAI episode prototyping and feedback generation
   Process documentation and recommendations for scale up

The pilot took place over the course of five months. The feasibility of the program for scale
up was tested in a number of ways:
   Ministry of Education personnel were introduced to the concept of the pilot and
    endorsed it
   Communities and schools were identified for the testing of the pilot IAI episodes
   A local market study was undertaken to identify appropriate and within-reach
    technology for distribution of programs
   A scope and sequence, master plan, and set of six scripts were developed, translated,
    produced, and validated by the Ministry of Education; community sensitization
   Meetings and facilitator trainings were conducted
   The IAI series and supporting materials were field tested in four ECD centers in July 2014
   Modifications identified from the testing were integrated into the IAI programs and the
    accompanying materials
   Interviews with individuals participating in the testing groups—children, parents, and
    teachers—were conducted to better understand their needs and interests relative to the
    pilot. Overall, feedback from these stakeholders was positive and they were hopeful for a
    continuation of programming.
                                          Introduction to IAI for ECD

A large body of solid evidence demonstrates the significant effects of early childhood
education and development (ECED) interventions1 on children’s success in school, long-term
social integration, and improved life chances2. Short-term and longitudinal studies on
program effects and research on the impact of early education on human brain development
provide strong support for increased investments in high-quality ECED programming. Indeed,
good early childhood education can be a key contributor to narrowing social and economic
gaps and driving development, particularly in low-resource, disadvantaged communities.

Governments, private sector entities, and civil society organizations in most developed
economies have responded to evidence of the importance of early childhood experiences by
increasing access to high-quality programs, particularly for low-income families with the
greatest need. Resources in lower-performing economies have been harder to redirect to
early childhood, however, and the numbers of children who lack access to high-quality
programs remains vast. In the poorest and most challenging contexts, citizens’ opportunities
for success are thus further limited by this early exclusion from stimulating, learning-
promoting programming.

Interactive Audio Instruction (IAI) provides one solution to the challenge of providing high-
quality early childhood education at scale and at reasonable costs. The IAI medium allows
for the development and delivery of both teacher and caregiver training and direct
instruction, using best practices in early childhood education, and has demonstrated
powerful results in contexts as diverse as Honduras, Nepal, El Salvador, Indonesia, Zanzibar,
Malawi, and Paraguay. As a low-cost, high-reach, renewable and reusable teaching and
learning medium, IAI provides an ideal mechanism for early childhood programming. IAI
packages for early childhood include lessons designed to promote comprehensive child
development and school readiness in a logical, research-based scope and sequence. Content
is delivered through CD, MP3, or radio, with the assistance of a classroom teacher of group
facilitator, who is coached by the recorded “teacher facilitator? to implement active, child -
centered instruction that is highly relevant to the daily lives of the young participants. Songs,
stories, and dramatic themes provide an engaging framework for literacy, math, life skills or
1
  ECED interventions are defined for the purposes of this document as programs with a specific educational purpose
delivered to children below grade 1 of primary school. While we touch on the potential of IAI as a medium for providing
early childhood programming that is not explicitly focused on child learning and development (for instance, IAI dramas for
parents), we do not present a model for those activities.
2
  See, for example, Christina, R. (2011). First Principles: Designing Effective Education Programs for Early Childhood
Development (Compendium). Washington, DC: EQUIP1/American Institutes for Research; Heckman, J. (2006, January 10).
Investing in disadvantaged young children is an economically efficient policy.
http://www.ced.org/images/library/reports/education/early_education/report_2006prek_heckman.pdf; and Nores, M., &
Barnett, W. S. (2010). Benefits of early childhood interventions across the world: (Under) investing in the very young.
Economics of Education Review, 29(2), 271–282.




                                                            9
other learning content. The participatory nature of the guided lessons engages students in
multiple ways -- cognitively, physically, creatively and socially.

IAI’s recorded audio programs, accompanying teacher guides, student materials, and
training for teachers and caregivers provide a dual-pronged program of high-quality
instructional content for children and guided-practice professional development for teachers
and caregivers, transforming classrooms and centers and promoting strong early childhood
development. Audio content, particularly when delivered over radio, also makes learning
more transparent for families and community members, who may otherwise not understand
what their children are learning if they themselves cannot read. This transparency is a
particular advantage in contexts where ECED is newly available, as parent support and buy-in
is critical to increasing ECED access.

This document was commissioned by the World Bank’s Early Learning Partnership to provide
a resource for staff and counterparts who support the expansion of ECED efforts in low-
resource contexts, particularly but not necessarily exclusively in Africa. It builds on and
supplements the 2005 publication that EDC prepared for the World Bank, “Improving
Educational Quality through Interactive Radio Instruction,? by integrating lessons learned
from the past decade’s IAI efforts, focusing specifically on IAI programming for ECD, and
providing evidence and resources from a 2014 World Bank Innovation Challenge pilot of IAI
ECD programming in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

The document outlines a general approach to high-quality IAI production for ECD, and uses
the DRC case study to detail the development process. It also provides technical
recommendations for how to scale-up production and delivery in the DRC and
considerations for program adaptation in other similar contexts, including an outline of
necessary steps and components, estimated costs of a program with broad reach and
content depth (including a financial model for production and program implementation),
and a results monitoring and evaluation framework.
                                             Part 1


                         The ECD IAI Programming Cycle:
     Preparation, Development, Production, Delivery, Evaluation, Sustainability


This section of the report outlines the steps in the IAI program cycle as they pertain to ECD
programming for a facilitated group setting (early childhood classrooms, informal
community learning centers, or adult-led group childcare settings), building on the general
IAI development model articulated by Anzalone and Bosch (2005). Inputs and processes are
described, and cost considerations are highlighted for each phase.

                  Figure A: Four phases of the ECD IAI programming cycle



                                      Preparation




                        Delivery                        Development




                                      Production




Phase 1: Preparation- Introduction and engagement with stakeholders. This stage involves
audience research, analysis of the educational context, assessment of technology options
and program design. The end product of this stage is a program design document.

Phase 2: Development- This stage involves scriptwriter training; scriptwriting, and
formative evaluation that prepare for the production of final use-ready episodes and
supporting materials.

Phase 3: Production- This stage involves local production of audio episodes and preparation
of supplementary learning materials for the program.

Phase 4: Delivery- This stage involves training teachers/ caregivers in the use of IAI and
delivering the program via radio/ MP3.


                                                   11
                                     PHASE 1: PREPARATION

Preparing for an ECD IAI program in a new context involves the following steps:

   a. Audience research- a study of the social context into which an IAI ECD program will
      be infused;
   b. Analysis of the educational context, to ensure that the program is targeted at an
      appropriate population and that the content of the programs is appropriate and not
      in opposition to any existing curricula and teacher training programs or to national
      policies on early childhood education;
   c. Assessment of technology options, which ensures that the program will be cost-
      effective and implementable;
   d. Program design, which integrates the contextual research findings with curricular
      planning to map out the desired IAI development process and learning results. At the
      end of the preparation phase, design documents for each subject and grade level of
      instruction will have been created, including a scope and sequence and master plans
      for the programs, along with guidelines for evaluation of program quality.

Preparation for an IAI program should be highly participatory, engaging a range of
stakeholders and building the capacity of host country counterparts in the theories and
methods underpinning IAI in general and in the specific ECD domains that will be covered by
the program. In contexts where early childhood education has not been as well resourced as
other segments of the education and social service system, engaging in IAI program
preparation provides both a professional development opportunity for participating
government staff and a platform for broader discussion of the importance of ECD for
individual and social development.

Sufficient resources need to be dedicated to the preparation phase to ensure that
appropriate data are collected and conclusions and design decisions can be fully justified.
Technical experts in participatory research for IAI program development should facilitate
sample selection, protocol design, and data collection, alongside counterparts from
whichever government agency will be leading and ultimately sustaining the ECD IAI program
effort. Development of the design document, in particular, requires specialized technical
expertise in instructional design for interactive audio, but it should be done in partnership
with designated counterpart staff to build their capacity through supervised practice.

   a. Audience research for ECD IAI

High-quality IAI programming links not only to national curricula but also to community
contexts and resources, to ensure that it is meaningful for and appealing to users (both
adults and children). Policies, structures, resources, and practices related to ECD vary
widely across countries, and in many cases the aspirations of policy makers and early
childhood activists, even if reflected in policy, are far from the practical reality of services for
children and families. Audience research for an ECD IAI program provides an opportunity to
better understand current contexts and to begin and/or facilitate a dialogue among families,
communities, and system actors about what good ECD in a particular context looks like and
what the desired early childhood outcomes for children in that context are.

ECD IAI audience research should include information collection from:
    early childhood providers (including teachers/facilitators/caregivers);
    families and community members; and,
    young children themselves.

Surveys and focus groups with selected informants can provide important information on
what these groups typically do in an ECD setting, and on the kinds of local resources
available to inform the development of engaging and enriching IAI programming.

Questions in the research program should provide a social and cultural map of the
opportunities and challenges that will be faced when implementing high-quality research-
based ECD programming through an audio medium in a particular context.

Issues to consider may include:

      Language patterns and preferences: What languages are usually used for ECD
       programming? Are these languages with which children are usually familiar before
       entering ECD programs? What languages do families prefer to have used? Why? Are
       they languages in which early childhood teachers are comfortable and confident
       themselves? How much variation is there among dialects within the same language,
       and what is the relative perceived importance and credence of the dialects?

      Character development resources: Who are the role models for children in this age
       group? Are they different for boys and girls? What are their primary positive
       characteristics?

      Physical and cultural resources: What types of resources are readily available in ECD
       program centers (books or other types of materials, slates, chalk, etc.)? What local
       natural and reusable resources (such as sticks, stones, leaves, bottle caps, sacks or
       boxes) can be used in ECD games and learning activities? What songs or cultural
       activities would be well-received if integrated into the programs? What are the
       expectations about gender interactions in early childhood? Which activities are
       gender-neutral and which are gendered?

As scale is often a goal of IAI programming, it is important to use the audience research
phase as a foundation for “discovering ways to reach [a] large and diverse audience without
perpetuating negative stereotypes, while achieving a feel that the radio program is local?
and for “integrat[ing] social and cultural connection points in ways that appeal to the diverse
audience.?(Anzalone and Bosch, 2005: p.77) Early childhood experiences frame children’s
expectations for social interaction among people who are different from each other, and the
pro-social messaging in an IAI program can be a strong contributor to a tone of tolerance
and mutual respect among varied individuals and groups.

   b. Educational context analysis for ECD IAI

ECD programming in developing country contexts is often a diffuse and complicated web of
options, offered by multiple types of providers, overseen by multiple ministries, and
responding to multiple sets of standards (or to none at all). Design of an IAI program for ECD
needs to consider the existing framework and expectations and identify points of best
alignment and integration with the system. Educational context analysis helps with this
process through document review and analysis and qualitative interviews and focus groups
that consider:

      Curricula: For what levels of early childhood programs are there established curricula
       (for example, is there an officially-endorsed kindergarten or nursery program?)? Are
       these levels of education the appropriate target for the IAI program? To what extent
       can the proposed IAI program complement and enrich the existing curriculum?

      Teacher preparation, training, and practice: How are teachers for the target level
       prepared to work with young children? What kinds (if any) ongoing training do they
       receive? Do they use the official curriculum in their programs and/or are there other
       packages or resources that are more likely to be implemented? How do they perceive
       themselves within the education system? How are they perceived?

      Non-curricular objectives for ECD programming: What are the access goals for early
       childhood programs? Is there an explicit or implicit focus on gender issues that is
       being addressed by increasing ECD programming through IAI? Are there particular
       groups of children/communities that are priorities for investment through the IAI
       program? Why?

      Parent ability and willingness to pay: In what ways do families currently support ECD
       programming? Do they pay for services? If so, how much do they pay, on average?
       If not, do they contribute to center operation in any way? How much might they be
       willing to pay or contribute in order to obtain quality services?

   c. Technology options assessment for ECD IAI

The development of low-cost digital technology and the increasing penetration of mobile
phones in Africa provide an opportunity to consider options for program delivery that
supplement, extend beyond or replace radio (the traditional vector for IAI program delivery).
However, radio broadcast should not be dismissed out of hand simply because it is old
fashioned. Different modes of technology have different benefits, some of which are
outlined below.
                              Technology Options for ECD IAI
                 Radio             Mp3 or CD         Mobile phone           Mobile phone
                                                                            using IVR
                                                                            technology
                 Programs are      Programs are        Programs are         Users call in to a
                 broadcast over    recorded on         recorded on SD       call center to
                 radio at a        reusable media      cards for            access pre-
                 certain time.     for playback on     playback on          recorded
                 Listeners tune    a specific device   mobile phones        programs on their
Description      in to the live    at the initiative   with or without      own schedule.
                 programs.         of the teacher.     speakers at the      Playback is over
                                                       initiative of the    mobile phones
                                                       teacher.             with or without
                                                                            speakers.

                 Broadcast         Costs of            Costs of mobile      Costs of mobile
                 costs; costs of   playback            phones and of        phones and of
                 radios for        devices and of      SD card              toll-free line (if
Costs (not
                 users;            digital media       recording and        IVR is funded by
including
                 electricity or    recording and       distribution;        the government)
development of
                 battery           distribution;       battery charging     or of telecom use
programming)
                 charging costs    electricity or      costs                (if users must pay
                                   battery                                  costs); battery
                                   charging costs                           charging costs
                 Radios are        CD/Mp3 players      High level of        High level of
                 widely            can be              mobile phone         mobile phone
                 accessible        procured fairly     availability; less   availability; not
                                   easily; not tied    bulky than           tied to a
                                   to a broadcast      radios/playback      broadcast
Convenience                        schedule            devices (some        schedule
                                                       phones may
                                                       include radios);
                                                       not tied to a
                                                       broadcast
                                                       schedule
                 Limited to        Limited by          Limited by           Limited by mobile
                 number of         device              device               phone network
                 hours of          availability and    availability and     coverage, device
Coverage         broadcast that    electricity         electricity          availability, and
                 can be            availability (for   availability (for    availability of
                 secured/paid      charging, if not    charging, if not     electricity for
                 for; limited by   for playback)       for playback)        charging.
                  radio network
                  coverage and
                  the availability
                  of radios.
                  Difficult to       Difficult to      Programs built in   Easy to monitor
                  monitor usage      monitor usage     some software       usage through
                                                       can track usage     call logs; SMS
                                                       on the SD cards     addition can
                                                       in phones. If       easily collect data
                                                       SMS is available,   on retention of
Monitoring                                             can also use        information,
                                                       phones to collect   impact and user
                                                       data on usage,      satisfaction.
                                                       retention of
                                                       information,
                                                       impact and user
                                                       satisfaction.
                  Engages a          Crank and         Reach and           Reach and
                  potentially        solar-charging    volume may be       volume may be
                  large              devices are       limited without     limited without
                  shadow/second      available.        speakers, but       speakers, but
                  ary audience                         recording can       recording can
                  when                                 partially address   partially address
                  broadcasts are                       these               these challenges.
                  on-air, thus                         challenges.
                  raising
Other
                  awareness of
considerations
                  ECD issues and
                  of what high-
                  quality ECD
                  sounds like;
                  crank and solar-
                  charging radios
                  are available.



Technology options assessment for an ECD IAI program should consider the pros and cons of
the various possible technology configurations and collect data on the relative costs of
implementing those that are most favorable in a given context. Existing household survey
data may provide information on the availability of radios and mobile phones in targeted
communities. If such data are not available, a scan of radio and mobile technology in the
local market should be conducted, to ensure that the devices used to deliver the IAI
programs will be cost-effective and rational for sustained use and capable of delivering the
desired content. Assuming that governments will not be able to assume recurrent costs of
equipment for IAI programming, device selection should ensure that devices are locally-
available and within the purchasing power of the average ECD provider.

   d. ECD IAI design document generation

The design document pulls together the findings of the audience research, the educational
context assessment, and the technology assessment; serves as the point of reference for
all project activities; and ensures that the many moving pieces of an IRI program are
coherently related and smoothly engaged. The design document guides every aspect of
program development and maps out the learning process for the students and teachers. It
plots the curriculum, the characteristics of the programs that are designed to engage
participants, the evaluation process, the connections of the I[A]I program to other
instructional materials, and teacher training. – Anzalone and Bosch (2005)

Design documents should outline the pedagogical foundations for the programs and the
local contextual factors that will make them engaging and relevant. They should include a
scope and sequence and master plans for the IAI programs and guidelines for evaluation of
program quality, along with training strategies for teachers and identification of
supplemental materials that are to be integrated with the IAI programs.

Similar to many early primary grade programs, an ECD IAI program is typically one full year
of instruction, covering multiple subjects in a single daily lesson of around 30 minutes in
duration. Usually, ECD IAI program content includes early literacy, early numeracy, and
lifeskills such as health, safety, and hygiene; but additional subject matter such as social
studies, science, and religious studies may be included if it is appropriate and can be feasibly
delivered over audio in the available timeframe.

Design document generation should be a highly collaborative process that engages ECD
experts and curriculum development experts, IAI specialists, production personnel, and
evaluators. The process can take several months, and should not be rushed, as it provides
the critical foundation for the production and use of the IAI programs themselves and sets
the work up to be evaluable and to succeed. In contexts where investment in ECD has not
been a government priority, capacity of government staff to contribute to design may be
limited. Therefore, resources from the private and/or nonprofit sectors may also need to be
engaged. However, it is essential to include government personnel in a learning-by-doing
process of professional development to support IAI design, as sustainable local programming
will need to be a government responsibility.


                                   PHASE 2: DEVELOPMENT

Once the design document has been developed, ECD IAI program development includes the
following processes:
   a. Scriptwriter training;
   b. Scriptwriting, and
   c. Formative evaluation that prepare for the production of final use-ready episodes and
      supporting materials.

   a. Scriptwriter training for EDC IAI

The quality of ECD IAI programming depends heavily on the quality of the program’s
scriptwriters. Ideally, scriptwriters should have a background in early childhood or lower
primary education, to ensure that they understand the populations they will write for. Even
with this background, however, intensive training of scriptwriters will be required to
guarantee a quality end product. This training should be led by an experienced technical
advisor who has produced IAI programs in the past.

The training should last from five to seven days and cover the following objectives:

      Gaining understanding of the concept of IAI and its application in an ECD classroom.
       Most writers arrive at the training with little (if any) prior knowledge of IAI. They may
       understand the concept of radio but will probably not have been exposed to an
       interactive audio program, especially not one designed for early childhood
       classrooms. To help them gain this understanding, it is advised that they experience
       ECD IAI through direct participation in an actual IAI program or by watching a video
       of it being applied in a classroom.

      Establishing a common understanding of quality ECD. Reviewing literature on best
       practices in ECD serves as a basis for drawing up collective profiles of the ideal ECD
       teacher and an average pre-primary student. These activities help scriptwriters
       develop an understanding of the population the programs will serve and the skills
       and competencies the programs will aim to build. These profiles, mapped against the
       national curriculum, will become the basis for program objectives. A typical pre-
       primary classroom setting in the target country should also be described in detail,
       including the materials that are readily available and used, typical classroom layout,
       average class size, etc. Scriptwriters need to understand a pre-primary classroom
       setting, and understand how it is different from (and often under-resourced in
       comparison to) primary classrooms. This shared understanding will also contribute to
       the development of the series’ context and characters.

      Experiencing interactive activities to build learning and teaching objectives . The key
       to good scriptwriting is visualization -- when a scriptwriter is able to visualize what an
       activity looks like in the pre-primary classroom, it becomes easier to write down the
       steps it takes to guide the teacher to smooth execution of that activity. A good way
       to help writers develop this capacity to visualize is by having them experiencing the
       same activities they will thereafter learn to represent in scripts.
      Understanding the production cycle. Writers need to understand the process of
       program production from beginning to end, because scriptwriters often end up doing
       much more than just scriptwriting. In most cases, writers draft scripts, listen to
       programs for quality control, formatively evaluate the programs in actual early
       childhood centers and incorporate modifications to the scripts post-testing.
       Therefore, it is essential they familiarize themselves with the process.

      Learning to write scripts and practice writing and acting out scripts from master
       plans. Learning to write scripts is straightforward when quality examples and
       templates are provided. After writers have familiarized themselves with the
       production cycle, a 2-day writer’s workshop using script templates and pre-
       developed master plans for an IAI ECD series should be undertaken. Writers should
       each produce at least one script during this portion of the workshop. After their
       scripts have been written, they should practice reading them aloud with a partner
       who will execute the instructions provided. This is to ensure that the instructions are
       clear, the necessary pauses are integrated, that interactivity is present in every
       segment, and that activities and language used are appropriate and engaging for this
       age level.

   b. Scriptwriting

IAI scripts for an ECD program provide all of the information that will be needed for a studio
to produce and record the programs. Dialogue, music, sound effects, and pauses needed for
user response are detailed and timed, and represented in written form.

   c. Formative evaluation of ECD IAI scripts

Formative evaluation of IAI scripts is an essential quality control element of the development
process. Each script must be tested with actual potential users (teachers and children) to
determine the following:
    whether the content is clear and at the right level of difficulty for the targeted users;
    whether the characters, music, sound effects, and story lines are engaging and
       understood as intended;
    whether the timing of the script (including pauses for listener response and activity)
       is effective;
    whether there is enough physical and oral activity and interactivity;
    whether the teacher is able to prepare and manage the resources and materials
       needed for the lesson;
    whether the teacher and students enjoy the program; and
    whether the teacher and students learned from the program.

Formative evaluation can be conducted by a range of actors, including program designers,
scriptwriters, local government counterparts, and/or an external research team. All
evaluators should be trained by an IAI evaluation specialist in the research methods
(observation, interview, focus group, skills assessment) used for formative evaluation prior
to engaging in the process. For an ECD application of IAI, it will be important for the
training to include information on child development and best-practice ECD, as well as
data from audience research and educational context assessment, to provide evaluators
with a framework of appropriate expectations for teacher and student performance when
using the IAI programs.

Timelines for scriptwriting and formative evaluation for a year-long ECD IAI program can
range from three to six months, depending on the skills and previous experience of the
scriptwriters (and their availability, if they are government staff), the overall number of
scripts to be produced, and the extent of changes required after formative evaluation.

                                    PHASE 3: PRODUCTION

Production includes the following aspects:
   a. Audio production
   b. Supplementary materials production

   a. Audio production

Local production of IAI programs in a studio that has been built for the purpose, leveraged
from the government’s media system, or obtained from a private or non-profit source will
both build local capacity and allow for intensive quality assurance on site during
production. However, recent advances in digital transmission technology make it more
possible to outsource editing if local costs are excessive, local capacity is limited, or timelines
are short.

Performers with both appropriate vocal skills and the requisite accents of the language
used in the IAI programs are much more likely to be available locally. Local musicians can
ensure that the music used is appropriate for the context. The number and type of
performers depends on the design of the scripts and is affected by the number of characters
included in the program and the extent to which music is incorporated.

In any scenario, selection of a production facility and staff (producer, editors, and
technicians) should be based on their ability to provide highest-quality audio product. If
listeners cannot hear or understand the programs due to production quality issues, they will
simply stop listening, and the value of the program will be lost.

Programs may go through at least two rounds of recording to accommodate changes due to
formative evaluation, so appropriate budget for re-recording must be allocated in advance
to ensure quality. Depending on program length and complexity, an average of 1 to 2
production days per episode should be budgeted.

   b. Supplementary materials production
National teaching and learning materials for ECD are often in sparse supply, so additional
resources can be produced to enhance and complement the IAI programs if budget allows.
Supplementary materials may include a teacher’s guide and supplementary activities packet;
printed posters; and manuals for the development of learning resources using locally
available low-cost or no-cost resources (such as manipulatives made from bottle caps and
natural materials like sticks, stones, and leaves; and charts and games made from old sacks,
boxes or other packaging). These can be produced at the same time that scripts are being
written, to ensure close alignment between scripts and materials.

                                     PHASE 4: DELIVERY

Delivery includes the following aspects:
   a. Teacher/caregiver training
   b. Delivery
   c. Delivery can be through a number of different mechanisms, including:
           o Radio
           o CD or MP3
           o Mobile Phone IAI
   d. Marketing and engaging audiences

   a. Teacher/caregiver training

IAI programming is by design a dual-channel intervention, providing teachers with
professional development while also providing children with high-quality instruction.
Nevertheless, program effects are greatly increased when teachers are oriented to the
content, the pedagogy, and the technology in advance. The length of training should depend
on an assessment of the extent of teachers’ prior training in best-practice ECD and their
familiarity with the technology selected for the IAI intervention. In many contexts, ECD
teachers have relatively little training when compared to primary teachers – some may have
no training at all in education or in early childhood development. Depending on the profile
of the teachers who will be using the programs, two to four days of training may be needed.

Training should provide teachers with an introduction to and explanation of the value of the
active learning methods through which they will be guided by the programs; guidance on
setting up early childhood environments to make best use of the IAI programs; initial training
on creating no-cost/low-cost learning materials, as they will be asked to do in the programs;
and experience operating the technology, to ensure that they will be able to effectively
implement the programs. The latter point is particularly important when using a non-
broadcast vector, as the delivery of content from a mobile phone, for instance, is different
from simply making a phone call.

If teachers are unable to access a face to face training, guidance and orientation can also be
provided by radio or another digital medium. Face to face training is preferable, but the
same principles of active learning and engagement that are reflected in the IAI instructional
series can be used to create a distance-learning training package.

   b. Delivery (possible through varying devices and technology)

Delivery of ECD IAI by radio

Radio delivery of IAI is the most traditional approach. If radio is selected as the desired
technology, based on the technology assessment described above, program delivery will
need to be coordinated to ensure adequate range of broadcast coverage; an appropriate
broadcast schedule; and consistent delivery in line with that schedule. Regular programming
depends on good radio station organization (scheduling and logistics), and a well-functioning
intermediary (the radio station) is key to program distribution. If the government has an
educational radio service through the Ministry of Education or an alternative national public
broadcast network, these can be engaged to provide broadcast time at low or no cost as part
of ongoing public service programming. If public radio is not an option, private and/or
community radio stations will need to be used. Every effort should be made to ensure that
the smallest possible number of stations required to provide adequate coverage is used –
engaging with a large number of broadcasters significantly complicates broadcast
scheduling, cost control becomes challenging, and it becomes increasingly difficult to
monitor actual delivery. Ideally, no more than 5 stations should be broadcasting an IAI series
at once. If it is impossible to achieve the desired coverage without significantly increasing
the number of participating stations, alternative means of delivery should be explored.
Distribution of supplementary materials can be coordinated during teacher training prior to
initial broadcast.

Delivery of ECD IAI by CD or Mp3

CD or Mp3 files for use in a playback device are an alternative to radio broadcasts that
allows for sharing of materials and for repeated use of programs by teachers on their own
initiative. Distribution of audio files (and, if funded, playback equipment and supplementary
materials) can be accomplished in coordination with Ministry officials who supervise early
childhood facilities, at teacher training/orientation, or through designation of a central
pickup point (such as a selected preschool, a clinic, a food distribution depot, or another
commonly-accessed location) for teachers in regions where programming is being used.

Delivery of ECD IAI by mobile phone

Mobile phone delivery makes IAI programming much more portable, and content creation
tools like Stepping Stone allow for the integration of teacher guides with audio programming
on the same device, and (like CD or Mp3 delivery) allows teachers to reuse programs as they
need or desire. Loading programs and supporting materials onto SD cards for insertion into
phones is fairly simple, and the cards can be delivered directly to teachers during training or
distributed through mobile phone providers that also provide access to phone credits and
equipment. Mobile phone volume may be increased with the use of portable speakers, if
desired, but recording at high volume can also largely compensate for the noise interference
that may be encountered in ECD settings.

   c. Marketing and engaging audiences

An IAI program should draw listeners to it, not be imposed upon them (indeed, the power of
listeners to simply tune out if not satisfied cannot be overestimated). Planning for the
marketing of a program is therefore an important part of its development. While primary
school IAI may be easily marketed to potential users, given the established status of formal
schooling and a desire to improve its quality in many contexts, early childhood IAI programs
can require particularly nuanced and careful approaches. Where ECD programs are not part
of the established educational landscape, or in contexts where early education is narrow in
scope (for instance, focused on religious education), concerns about the purpose of the
programs, the content, and their appropriateness for young children may be encountered.
Marketing efforts should be developed with local advisors and draw carefully on the
audience research of the program preparation stage, in order to allay concerns, highlight the
advantages of the programming, and encourage interest in both the IAI intervention and
ECD more broadly. Where possible, marketing should engage local champions (community
and religious leaders, entertainers and public figures) to help convey the positive messages
about the programs and encourage families to allow their children to participate.

                               MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Monitoring and evaluation of an ECD IAI program supports quality, ensures appropriate use
of funds, and provides evidence for adaptation and/or expansion.

Monitoring of the fidelity of program implementation can occur through broadcast and
listener logs (and for mobile phone users, usage tracking data) and periodic classroom
observations that document whether the programs are being listened to as scheduled and
whether teachers are using them as intended and directed. Monitoring visits should ideally
be conducted by government ECD personnel, as part of a routine cycle of support to early
childhood institutions. Training on fidelity monitoring will build the capacity of these staff to
support their assigned schools. If government personnel are not available, community
monitors from within the communities that house preschools can be trained, or outside
contractors can be engaged to conduct site visits.

Evaluation of an ECD IAI intervention includes both the formative evaluation process that
informs the development of the actual audio programs and supporting materials, and more
summative assessments that track the effects of the intervention over time. The design of an
evaluation framework for an intervention should reflect its particular context and goals, but
potential measures of performance may include the following:

Student-level, teacher-level, and parent-level outcomes:

      Positive changes in student enrollment and attendance as compared to baseline
      Student and teacher retention and comprehension of IAI content (based on cohort
       pre and post assessment)

      Increase over time in student and teacher behavior that is consistent with IAI’s active
       learning methodology, pro-social interaction modeling, and life skills messaging
       (observational data)

      Parent and teacher satisfaction

System-level outcomes:

      Accurate replication of process after piloting for uptake in other regions of the target
       country

      Government willingness to expand the program

      Generation of public and private resources for expansion

      Confirmation of low operating costs and high rate of return on investment
       (demonstration of value for cost relative to other possible interventions).

Costs for monitoring and evaluation activities will vary depending on the responsible parties,
the scope of the intervention, and the size of the evaluation sample. Ideally, government
counterparts should be involved from the start in the development and implementation of
the monitoring and evaluation plan, to ensure their long-term commitment to the process of
results documentation and quality control.

                                      SUSTAINABILITY

The sustainability of an IAI initiative depends upon a number of factors, most important
among which is the extent to which the program engages and pleases its users (as Anzalone
and Bosch put it, “a quality I[A]I program will generate a following or constituency that
expects the programs to continue.? [2005, p. 29]).

Sound pedagogical design; engaging and relevant characters, story lines and activities; and
high-quality production set up a program for success and help it to build an audience that
wants more of the same. In an ECD application, where not only the IAI methodology but also
the principles and structures of early childhood education may be unfamiliar to many,
quality of production and sensitivity to local needs and norms are particularly important.
Careful audience research, thoughtful and engaging marketing to communities and families,
and enlistment of program champions and advocates to encourage participation and help
share positive results will support buy-in, use, and sustainability.
Indeed, engagement of stakeholders from the very start of an ECD IAI initiative is critical.
Government and community counterparts and partners who are part of the development
and implementation process and understand and support the concept of IAI for ECD will be
better able to advocate for and sustain it moving forward. Training government
counterparts through learning by doing throughout the project cycle builds their capacity to
continue programming after external funding ends, promotes a supportive and enabling
environment, and supports effective planning for long-term ownership and cost
management.
                                            Part 2

                                       DRC Case Study

                                           Context

Enrollment rates for pre-primary education in DRC country are currently very low (at 4.3%,
according to the UNESCO Institute for Statistics), but the government has taken a number of
steps to increase attention to early childhood development over the past 8 years, and is
interested in expanding services and increasing their quality.

The country’s most recent national education law (2014) guarantees preschool education for
children aged 3-5, but does not fund its provision or mandate enrollment. Most preprimary
education is still administered and provided by the non-state sector. Three ECD education
interventions are implemented by the government, but they are neither mandatory nor free
and they do not provide universal coverage. Clear learning standards and a coherent
curriculum for three years of pre-primary education have been established, and professional
requirements for teachers are in place. In the few existing pre-primary institutions, teachers
generally meet the requirements for education and training, but the quality of training is
variable.

In general, children from disadvantaged social status and rural areas typically do not have
access to high-quality pre-primary education due to the high cost of private services and lack
of nearby schools. IAI for ECD is a potentially transformative intervention in such a context,
offering a mechanism for significantly increasing student access and supporting teacher
professional development and high-quality instruction in community-supported preschools.

                                    Summary of the Pilot

The ECD IAI pilot in DRC was a small-scale effort undertaken to determine the potential
feasibility of a large-scale IAI program for kindergarten in DRC and to inform decisions in
other countries. The contractor, which was already implementing a primary-grade IAI
program in DRC, was tasked with:

       1. Engagement with government stakeholders around IAI as a means of delivering
          high-quality ECD, and identification of target communities for a pilot of such
          programming
       2. In-country program organization and community engagement
       3. Curriculum review and program development
       4. IAI episode prototyping and feedback generation
       5. Process documentation and recommendations for scale up

The contractor, EDC, worked with World Bank staff to undertake the following activities:

                                              26
      Ministry personnel were introduced to the concept of the pilot and endorsed it;
      Communities and schools were identified for the testing of the pilot IAI episodes;
      A local market study was undertaken to identify appropriate and within-reach
       technology for distribution of programs;
      A scope and sequence, master plan, and set of 6 scripts were developed, translated,
       produced, and validated by the Ministry of Education;
      Community sensitization meetings and facilitator trainings were conducted;
      The IAI series and supporting materials were field tested in 4 ECD centers in July
       2014;
      Modifications identified from the testing were integrated into the IAI programs and
       the accompanying materials; and,
      Interviews with individuals participating in the testing groups—children, parents, and
       teachers—were conducted to better understand their needs and interests relative to
       the pilot. Overall, feedback from these stakeholders was positive and they were
       hopeful for a continuation of programming.

The entire scope of work was completed in five months, due to the minimal scale of
production and the skipping of some key steps in the production process because contractor
personnel were already highly-trained. Recommendations for scale-up of a program in DRC
include the incorporation of those skipped steps, to ensure the development of government
capacity and the sustainability of the program.


                                   PHASE 1: PREPARATION

   1. Engagement with government stakeholders and identification of target
      communities for the IAI program (audience research and educational context
      analysis)

From the beginning of the project, government stakeholders were engaged to ensure that
they understood and agreed with the purposes of the proposed IAI pilot and the selection of
communities in which the programs would be piloted. Meetings were held with Ministry of
Education personnel responsible for early childhood programming and educational media.
The responsible counterparts expressed enthusiasm and appreciation for the partnership
and commitment to providing support and authorization as it moved forward.

Educational context analysis confirmed the initial selection of Equateur province and
Kinshasa as the pilot sites and Lingala as the pilot language for program development.
Equateur is the Ministry’s designated pilot province for many of its current initiatives and the
focus of GPE interventions, so establishing a profile for ECD in this context builds on other
momentum for education development and will ensure attention to the work. Lingala, the
regional language of Equateur, is also the language of the capital, Kinshasa, and is closely
related (and thus easily translatable to) another national language, Kikongo. A program at
scale in Lingala and Kikongo would provide significant coverage to children in both urban
centers and rural areas of disadvantage who are currently not served by existing programs.
Using Lingala (a familiar language/mother tongue) rather than French (a national language)
is also consistent with good practice for early childhood, in which instruction should
preferably occur in a language that children already understand and speak.

Criteria for school site selection, including a balance between rural and urban sites and the
use of Lingala as a formal or informal language of instruction (or willingness to explore doing
so as part of a revised preschool program), were shared with the Ministry and a set of
possible sites that met those criteria developed.

This step of the process was successful in beginning a dialogue with government
counterparts about the benefits of investment in ECED in general, sensitizing them to the
potential of IAI as a delivery mechanism, and gaining their initial buy-in for a longer-term
ECED IAI initiative as a follow-on to the pilot.

Lessons learned and considerations for replication:
    Government counterparts were excited about interest in and support for ECD, and
       appreciated their inclusion in school selection and program design.
    They also affirmed the great potential of IAI for providing high quality ECD
       programming across the DRC.



   2. In-country program organization and community engagement (audience research,
      educational context analysis, technology analysis, design)

Based on the agreements with the Ministry described in Step 1, above, sites for the testing
of the prototypes were identified. Participating schools were:

In Mbandaka (Equateur):
    a) Bon Depart Community School (Peri-Urban Area)
    b) Buprof Pre-School (Downtown Area)

In Kinshasa:
    a) Les Rachetes School (Mikonga Commune)
    b) Ecole Maternelle Kibunzi (Ndjili Commune [Peri-Urban])

A scan of mobile technology in the local market was also conducted, to ensure that the
devices used to deliver the IAI programs would be cost-effective and rational in long-term
implementation and capable of delivering the desired content. While devices were provided
to schools as part of the pilot, this may not be an option when moving to scale. Therefore,
device selection was designed to ensure that devices were locally-available and within the
purchasing power of the average Congolese.
Devices selected for the pilot included:
    Telephone: Nokia 112
    Speaker: GOgroove SonaVERSE BX Rechargeable Portable 3.5mm Stereo Speaker
    Charging source: FatCat FC-SOLII Solstice Portable Solar Battery Pack

Lessons learned and considerations for replication:
    The technology, albeit local, required more training than originally anticipated.
    Therefore, more time should be allocated to training on use of technology in the
       initial training on IAI.


                    PHASE 2 DEVELOPMENT AND PHASE 3 PRODUCTION

       1. Curriculum review and development (educational context analysis, design, and
          scriptwriting)

The contractor reviewed the existing maternelle curriculum for the DRC and developed a
scope and sequence and master plan for the IAI programs that align with, and enhance, this
pre-existing government-approved content. The scope and sequence focuses on the basics
of play-based early childhood programming, through coverage of selected concepts in early
literacy, numeracy and lifeskills (health and safety) that are particularly effectively delivered
through IAI. This combination of content and pedagogy demonstrates the power of the
medium for delivering curriculum and improving instruction.

Six scripts based on the IAI master plan were written in French and translated into Lingala
with local validation and review. Teacher guides and simple instructional materials and
manipulatives linked to the lessons were also developed in line with the scope and sequence
and master plans.

The scope and sequence, master plans, and scripts were reviewed and validated by the early
childhood education staff of the Ministry of Education in a collaborative process that
ensured that curricular concerns and priorities were identified and addressed and that the
pedagogical principles of IAI were clearly incorporated.

Lessons learned and consideration for replication:

    Because EDC already had well-trained scriptwriters in DRC, as well as high-level
     technical personnel with significant experience in the design and supervision of IAI,
     no scriptwriter training was needed within this pilot. Ordinarily, program
     development would include this type of training.
    For scale-up, thorough and careful scriptwriter training will be needed to ensure an
     appropriate number of high-quality scriptwriters for a full-length IAI curriculum for
     ECD.
         2. Prototyping and feedback generation (production, teacher training, and formative
         evaluation)

Performers (actors and musicians) for the IAI episodes were identified, and production of the
episodes took place from June 2 to June 20.

The IAI programs were tested in the selected schools according to the schedule below:

               Site            Kinshasa                        Mbandaka
Activity
Parent sensitization           July 18                         July 20
Training of teachers           July 19                         July 21
Testing of 6 programs          July 21 to 26                   July 22 to 29

Participants in pilot sessions were as follows:

School             # Children         # Teachers        # Parents/             # Other
                   (male/female)      (male/female)     Community              (Ministry)
                                                        Members                (male/female)
                                                        (male/female)
Mbandaka
    Bon Depart     7 girls            2 women          15 parents (no sex      1 woman
    Community      12 boys            1 man (director) disaggregation)
         School
         Buprof    5 girls            3 women           15 parents (no sex     1 woman
      Preschool    10 boys                              disaggregation)
Kinshasa
   Les Rachetes    13 girls           3 women           18 women               2 women
         School    7 boys                               3 men
          Ecole    8 girls            3 women           10 women               2 women
     Maternelle    12 boys                              3 men
        Kibunzi

Teachers selected for the pilot were oriented to the IAI methodology, to the technology
being used, and to the ECD principles and content covered in the prototype episodes in a
one-day training. They were also trained in the creation of simple instructional materials like
counters and name cards and in how to set up an effective early childhood classroom.
 Teachers being trained on how to use                           Teachers being trained on how to use the
            the IAI guide                                                     technology


Community members and parents were provided with an orientation session to explain the
purpose and goals of the pilot, share some examples of the IAI content, and provide answers
to any questions that attendees might have.

Parents’ concerns largely revolved around the language employed in the IAI programs
(Lingala) because many desired their children to learn in French, which is perceived as the
“language of success.? To address this concern, Ministry personnel accompanying the team
responded by presenting research on the importance of children’s early learning in a
language they understand and how this contributes to school success later on. Parents
seemed satisfied with this response.




                                    Parents gathered to learn about IAI


Some parents also brought up the cost of preschool. As preschool in the DRC is optional and
cost-prohibitive, many parents do not send their children. Parents wanted to understand
whether or not this type of preschool would be cheaper or what they would have to
contribute. The question was turned back on them in order to better understand what
parents would be willing to pay or contribute. Many said they would provide the learning
materials and be willing to contribute around $5 per month.
                              Ministry representatives talking to parents about
                                             the potential of IAI


The episodes were then tested in the selected classrooms with groups of 4-5 year old
preschool children and their teachers. Testing for each program was followed by a group
interview with the children to understand what they liked about the program and what they
learned. Teachers were also interviewed to obtain their feedback on each lesson, to
integrate into the modifications made to the
program post-testing.




   Children using manipulatives during IAI                    Children responding during IAI program
                   piloting                                                   activity

During each of the steps of this formative evaluation process, EDC staff recorded
observations on the implementation of the programs and collected stakeholder feedback.
These data were analyzed and incorporated into episode revision. Adjustments based on
the feedback were made to the scripts and a final version of the series was re-recorded.

Lessons learned and consideration for replication:

    Studio quality and availability- Due to difficulties completing the work at the
     government recording studio, the project was compelled to requisition studio time at
     an alternative site to ensure that the recording was accomplished to an acceptable
     standard of quality.
 Language selection- Lingala as spoken in Kinshasa and as spoken in Equateur are
  slightly different. Production of the IAI episodes was done in the Equateur dialect
  because it is recognized as the “authentic? version of the national language that is
  used for education. Some concerns were raised about the use of Lingala as a medium
  of instruction, especially by those parents whose children speak French at home. This
  was mostly the case in Kinshasa where the Lingala dialect is largely interposed with
  French words. Indeed, many children and teachers in Kinshasa learned new Lingala
  terms through the pilot IAI programs. Careful linguistic analysis and assessment of
  the potential advantages and risks of selecting particular languages/dialects for IAI
  production will need to be done when taking this initiative to scale.

 Teacher training- The brief initial face-to-face training for teachers on the basics of
  child development, on appropriate early learning environment configuration and
  management, and on active learning was a valuable springboard for this program.
  However, the content of the training program was necessarily limited to the episodes
  being piloted. Full program development should include the development of a
  teacher guide for use with all episodes; accompanying low-cost, locally-sourced
  materials to be used as student stimuli and manipulatives; and a teacher training
  package that provides a more comprehensive orientation to the principles and
  practice of ECED and IAI instruction.

 Teacher training on use of technology- Technology will also need additional focus in
  the training if programming is rolled out at scale. Teachers grew more familiar with
  the technology as they used it during the pilot testing, but some experienced
  significant challenges at the beginning, even after the one-day training. Scaled-up
  implementation of an IAI program would benefit from more guided training time for
  teachers to experiment with using the phones to deliver the programs.

 Importance of Ministry involvement- The presence of Ministry representatives
  during the pilot provided a strong positive statement of support and engagement
  with the pilot. Parents, community members and teachers were pleased to see
  Ministry personnel engaged. For scale-up, it is suggested that local preschool
  (maternelle) Ministry representatives (i.e. IPAM) be involved in the initial training or
  sensitization activities.

 Parental willingness to pay- World Bank staff had requested information on parents’
  willingness to pay for a preschool program delivered through IAI, but project staff felt
  that this question was difficult to ask in a context where no clear guarantee of an
  actual program was present. Parents in some sensitization groups were willing to
  talk about payment, as described above, and proxies for willingness to pay were also
  developed from responses by program staff who have children and from analysis of
  for-fee preschool programs offered by UNICEF (in which communities contribute
  resources and pay a small fee). Prospectively, communities might be predicted to be
       willing to pay about $5 per month as well as contributing locally-available materials
       such as bottle caps for materials production. However, this issue will need to be
       explored further with government stakeholders and a broader sample of potential
       parent beneficiaries prior to scale up.

                            RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SCALE UP

Because this was a small-scale pilot, community preschools through which IAI programming
would be offered were not established as part of the project (the pilot programs were tested
in existing schools). In order to provide wider access to preschool, IAI interventions need to
be embedded in a more accessible context. Community preschools provide an inexpensive
and proven method of reaching increased numbers of children, particularly in marginalized
communities, and our general recommendation is that any scale-up include their
establishment and support as a “home? for a full year of IAI-based ECED programming.

To support such a community IAI preschool program at scale, the following points need to be
considered:
        A private studio with local actors needs to be contracted to ensure high quality
          IAI program production.
        Local scriptwriters need to be trained to develop the IAI programs at a high level
          of quality that is pedagogically sound for ECED implementation, integrated with
          and supportive of the Ministry curriculum, entertaining, and locally-relevant.
        Local personnel need to be trained in the formative evaluation methodology that
          will ensure high quality and utility of the IAI programming.
        A planning calendar needs to be drawn up and validated by the Ministry for the
          integration of the expanded set of IAI programs into the daily lesson activities of
          the maternelle curriculum.
        A linguistic analysis by province needs to be undertaken in order to appropriately
          target IAI programming to the provincial contexts.
        An official liaison mechanism needs to be created between community
          preschools and the formal system in order for community teachers to be
          recognized by the system.
        Communities need to identify safe spaces within walking distance of the
          children’s homes in which preschool activities can be held.
        Communities need to identify appropriate teachers to lead these activities and
          negotiate how to support their work. It is important to recognize that these
          supports may vary according to contexts.
        Intense start-up support will be required in order to ensure community preschool
          set-up. This support can begin to be reduced as communities and teachers
          become accustomed to their roles and responsibilities. This support can be
          provided by local Ministry officials responsible for preschool and other local
          organizations.
                            Appendices (in French)

   DRC Pilot Master Plan and Scope and Sequence
   DRC Scripts (final versions in French and Lingala)
   Teacher guides for DRC episodes
   Piloting (formative evaluation) documents: protocols and Q+A document
   Criteria for establishing community preschools




                                       35
