    Report No: AUS7462

.




    Nepal
    Nepal Trade Facilitation & Competitiveness
    Nepal’s Trade of Agriculture and Food Products
    SPS-related Issues and Proposed Solutions

.
    January 2015



.
    GTI06

    SOUTH ASIA

.




                                                     1
.

    Standard Disclaimer:

    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
    findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
    Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
    data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
    not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
    acceptance of such boundaries.

.

    Copyright Statement:

    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
    may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
    encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.
    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
    Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.
    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
    World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                              2
     Nepal’s Trade of Agriculture and Food Products:
            SPS-related Issues and Proposed Solutions

                                                      By
                                        Kees van der Meer1
                             SPS and Trade Facilitation Specialist
                                   World Bank consultant


                                              Supported by
                             Mr. Murari Prasad Gautam Upadhya
                   Project Manager/Technical Advisor NIRTTP/PCO
                                          and other PCO staff


                                            January 2015




1
 This report is based on information of many persons and sources. The interpretation and conclusions are the sole
responsibility of the Consultant.

                                                                                                                3
Table of Contents
 Acknowledgement .................................................................................................................................... 5
 Abbreviations and Connotations ............................................................................................................... 6
 Executive summary ................................................................................................................................... 7
 I.         Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 10
 II.        Exports and imports subject to SPS measures ............................................................................ 11
 III.       Export market access .................................................................................................................. 12
   A.       Formal market access in India .................................................................................................... 12
   B.       Formal market access in China ................................................................................................... 12
   C.       Formal market access in other countries ..................................................................................... 13
   D.       Requirements of private buyers .................................................................................................. 13
 IV.        Nepal’s SPS system: critical policy issues .................................................................................. 13
    A. SPS system not risk-based .......................................................................................................... 14
    B. Food control system mainly based on quality requirements ....................................................... 14
    C. Inability to retain specialist staff ................................................................................................. 14
 V.    Basic capacity for SPS management ........................................................................................... 14
   A.       Insufficient capacity in plant pest surveillance and diagnostics ................................................. 14
   B.       No capacity to control pesticides ................................................................................................ 14
   C.       SPS import inspection ................................................................................................................. 15
   D.       Capacity for food safety surveillance and testing ....................................................................... 15
 VI.        Sustainability of SPS laboratories ............................................................................................... 15
   A.       Cost of laboratories is generally high ......................................................................................... 15
   B.       Staff requirement ........................................................................................................................ 16
   C.       Crucial factors for sustainability of laboratories ......................................................................... 16
   D.       Co-location of laboratories.......................................................................................................... 16
 VII.       Demand for SPS laboratory services .......................................................................................... 17
   A.       Regulatory laboratories ............................................................................................................... 17
   B.       Private laboratories ..................................................................................................................... 17
   C.       Geographic spread of regulatory laboratory services .................................................................. 17
   D.       Is a laboratory for pest-free analysis (PFA) reports at the border checkpoint desirable? ........... 19
   E.       Customs laboratory ..................................................................................................................... 19
   F.       Should SPS support be focused on products? ............................................................................. 19
 VIII.      Conclusions and recommendations ............................................................................................. 20
  A. SPS policy priorities ................................................................................................................... 20
  B. Donor support for SPS ................................................................................................................ 20
  C. SPS laboratory priorities ............................................................................................................. 21
  D. Proposed next steps ..................................................................................................................... 22
  E. Outline TOR for two consultants for designing the investment plans ........................................ 23
 ANNEXES .............................................................................................................................................. 26


                                                                                                                                                           4
     Annex 1 Visit Schedule ...................................................................................................................... 26
     Annex II Nepal Export and Import 2013 ............................................................................................ 28
     Annex III Regional spread of DFTQC, DLS, PQO, DPR .................................................................. 35


Acknowledgement
The Consultant is very grateful for the support received from government agencies, private sector entities
and development partners. Special thanks go to the excellent support from the NIRTTP Project
Coordination Office, in particular Mr. Mahesh Timsina, Project Coordinator and Mr. Murari P. Gautam
Upadhya, Project Manager/Technical Advisor. World Bank staff Ms. Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte and Mr.
Gerard McLinden provided helpful comments.




                                                                                                                                                   5
Abbreviations and Connotations
AEC        Agro-Enterprise Center
CIQ        China Inspection and Quarantine
DFTQC      Department of Food Technology and Quality Control
DOA        Department of Agriculture
DOC        Department of Customs
DOLS       Department of Livestock Services
DPR        Department of Plant Resources
EU         European Union
FAO        Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FNCCI      Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce and Industry
GAP        Good agricultural practice
GHP        Good hygiene practice
GMP        Good manufacturing practice
HACCP      Hazard analysis and critical control point
HMF        5-hydroxymethylfurfural
ICD        Inland containers depot
ICP        Integrated checkpoint
IPPC       International Plant Protection Convention
ISO        International Organization for Standardization
ISPM       International standards for phytosanitary measures
MAPs       Medicinal and aromatic products
MOAD       Ministry of Agricultural Development
MOCS       Ministry of Commerce and Supplies
MRA        Mutual recognition agreement
MRL        Maximum Residue Limit
NBSM       National Bureau of Standards and Metrology
NIRTTP     Nepal-India Regional Trade and Transport Project
NPPO       National Plant Protection Office
NTIS       Nepal Trade Integration Study
PACT       Project for Agriculture Commercialization and Trade
PC         Phytosanitary certificate
PCO        Project coordination office
PFA        Pest-free analysis
PRIP       Policy Reform Initiative Project (USAID)
PRA        Pest risk assessment
SPS        Sanitary and Phytosanitary
STDF       Standards and Trade Development Facility
TA         Technical assistance
TBT        Technical Barriers to Trade
TOR        Terms of reference
US         United States of America
USAID      United States Agency for International Development
WTO        World Trade Organization




                                                                      6
Executive summary

1.      Background of the report. The development objective of the Nepal-India Regional Trade and
Transport Project (NIRTTP)2 is to decrease transport time and logistics costs along the Kathmandu-Kolkata
corridor for the benefit of traders. Sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures contribute significantly to
time and costs and some of these can be reduced. There are occasional requirements by import authorities
in India to send samples to a laboratory in India3 for testing because SPS certificates from Nepal are not
recognized. Nepal has also market access problems because it lacks capacity for SPS management. Since
Customs faces technical constraints in clearing goods, suggestions have been made for building co-located
multi-functional laboratories at Kathmandu and at the border near Birgunj for facilitating border clearance.
From 16-29 November, 2014, an assessment was made of (i) SPS capacity needed for market access and
health protection; and (ii) laboratory services needed in SPS and Customs clearance.

2.       Trade. Birgunj is the main border checkpoint for trade in goods subject to SPS measures. In 2013,
Nepal had recorded exports and imports subject to SPS measures of about US$ 250 million and US$ 1.16
billion, respectively. One-quarter of these exports and more than half of these imports were cleared at
Birgunj while one-third of exports and 13% of imports were cleared at Biratnagar. It is noteworthy,
however, that there is a significant amount of informal exports and imports.

3.      SPS requirements. Market access for plant products is most important for Nepal’s exports.
Phytosanitary requirements for most plant products are dominant in India, China and most other countries.
Food safety requirements are usually less constraining, unless there is a history of non-compliance. About
70 percent of Nepal’s exports go to India. Nepal presently does not have any capable food safety laboratory
with accreditation and insufficient capacity in plant pest surveillance and diagnosis that meets Indian
requirements. Working relations between SPS authorities in Nepal and India are limited and their
improvement could enhance transparency and mutual trust. Three years ago Nepal and Tibet Autonomous
Region, PR China, agreed on a SPS protocol for citrus exports, but successful implementation is pending
because Nepal cannot meet the requirements yet. Private buyers often add additional safety and quality
requirements to those of the importing country.

4.       Nepal’s current SPS system has major capacity gaps and weaknesses in WTO compliance:
(i) the SPS system is not risk-based; (ii) the food control system is mainly focused on quality requirements,
not on food safety requirements; (iii) SPS agencies and laboratories suffer from frequent rotation of staff;
(iv) insufficient capacity in plant pest surveillance and diagnostics; (v) no capacity to control pesticides;
(vi) SPS import inspection is hardly in place and ineffective; and (vii) there is at present no testing capacity
and accreditation for food safety parameters in microbiology, pesticide residues, veterinary drug residues,
heavy metals, other pollutants and mycotoxins in any of the food laboratories including the Central Food
Laboratory.

5.      Sustainable investment in laboratories. Government regulatory agencies and private enterprises
need access to laboratories. But, sustainability of investment in laboratories is a major challenge for
developing countries. The cost of laboratories is generally high. Investment costs are often not the
bottleneck, since donors provide funds and, if well maintained, equipment may have an economic life of 5-
8 years. Crucial factors for sustainability of laboratories are: (i) availability of sufficient operational
funding; (ii) a sufficiently large stream of samples; and (iii) experienced and dedicated laboratory staff.



2
    Nepal-India Regional Trade and Transport Project (NIRTTP). World Bank Report No. 78199, 3 June 2013.
3
    Choice at convenience of the exporters is Kolkata or Patna of Bihar or Lucknow of UP.

                                                                                                              7
6.       For Nepal the option of co-location of SPS and Customs laboratories in an integrated institution
has been raised as a possibility for reducing costs. However, there are technical constraints about co-
location and benefits are mainly restricted to overhead. An important institutional obstacle for integrated
institutions is that plant health, animal health and food safety authorities each have their own legal mandates
that can only be changed by new legislation. Shared use of laboratory services also requires sophisticated
rules for funding and accounting. Therefore, it is uncommon in most countries to combine plant diagnostics,
animal disease diagnostics, food and chemical laboratories in one institution.

7.      Testing in regulatory laboratories depends largely on government programs and funding. Private
laboratories focus on service that satisfies customers (e.g. operation 7x24 hours and rapid turn-around).
Their income from government services is mostly limited.

8.       Considerations for proposed investment in laboratories. Duplication of public laboratory
services is undesirable for expensive equipment because it increases need for government funding and can
worsen sustainability of laboratory functions. Therefore, most countries have an apex laboratory structure
for regulatory laboratories and samples for expensive chemical testing are sent to the central laboratory.
Priority for expensive chemical food testing is to strengthen the Central Food Laboratory in Kathmandu.

9.       A laboratory for pest-free analysis (PFA) reports at the border checkpoint is uncommon.
International practice is that phytosanitary certificates (PC) certify the pest-free status of the consignment
as required by importing authorities. If India would recognize Nepalese PCs then a PFA is redundant. The
real problem is lack of capacity of the Nepal National Plant Protection Office (NPPO) to issue credible PCs.
By international standards, plant pest screening and issuance of PCs always needs backup from crop pest
surveillance, a reference laboratory, and inspection at production and/or packing locations. Nepal does not
have a national reference laboratory for diagnostics of plant pests and diseases and its pest surveillance
methodology and coverage are deficient. Without addressing these deficiencies, even investment in
screening capacity on the border is of limited use.

10.     Customs laboratories should focus on testing needed for support of raising revenue and controlling
fraud and smuggling. The present Customs laboratory in Kathmandu has limited capacity and structural,
climatic and safety deficiencies. At the border checkpoints, Customs lacks back-up from rapid tests and
screening, and considers especially screening for chemicals high priority.

11.      A product focus can be desirable for product-specific SPS risks and market access. For example,
soil on root products forms a special phytosanitary risk for ginger imports in other countries, which can
only be addressed by adequate washing facilities for ginger. Quarantine pest lists of the importing country
often require product specific care in surveillance, mitigating treatment and inspection. However, most SPS
capacity needed is basic and cross-cutting and therefore, senior officers in SPS agencies do not support the
idea of having priority export products as an important consideration for investment in laboratories.

12.     Recommendations. The proposals for NIRTTP have been developed against (i) recommended
overall SPS policy priorities; and (ii) ongoing support from development partners.

Recommended SPS policy priorities:
   • Improve compliance with WTO requirements by introducing risk-based SPS measures.
   • Follow good international practice and develop safety requirements for food products, in particular
      Maximum Residue Limits (MRLs) for pesticides residues, veterinary drugs and growth enhancers,
      mycotoxins and other contaminants, and tolerances for microbiological contamination.
   • Address retention of SPS specialists in laboratories and inspectorates.



                                                                                                             8
      •   Tasks of Customs and SPS agencies need alignment. The principle of “quarantine release before
          Customs release” is properly enacted, but implementation is insufficient.
      •   Laboratory support for Customs should focus on support for revenue collection, control of
          smuggling and fraud, and rapid release at the checkpoints.
      •   SPS controls at border checkpoints deserve improvement with regard to international SPS good
          practice, since presently they are low effective.

13.     Donor support for SPS. NIRTTP support should not overlap with support by other agencies. No
other agency supports laboratory capacity for Customs. However, in the SPS area several other agencies
provide support.

14.     The World Bank Project for Agriculture Commercialization and Trade (PACT) has a small
component to improve SPS services, including laboratory capacity, with equipment, training and support
for accreditation, mainly in the Department for Food Technology and Quality Control (DFTQC). Much of
the support has been allocated for strengthening and accreditation of quality controls.

15.       The USAID Policy Reform Initiative Project (PRIP) focuses on policy reform in the SPS area.

16.     A new EU project will enhance the capacity of the DFTQC Central Food Laboratory and the
regional food testing laboratory at Biratnagar. It will extend accreditation to food safety parameters,
including pesticide residues. The project will also support National Bureau of Standards and Metrology
(NBSM) laboratories for testing vegetable fats and oils and microbiology parameters, and provide technical
assistance to prepare a training program on the application of GHP, GMP, and HACCP in the tea, coffee,
dairy processing, and meat processing industries.

Recommendations for NIRTTP:
   • Establish a plant diagnostic reference laboratory and support the enhancement of a program for
      pest surveillance.
   • Upgrade the Customs laboratory in Kathmandu.
   • Establish at the border checkpoint at Birgunj screening laboratories for Customs, food safety, plant
      quarantine and animal quarantine, preferably co-located with separate rooms (or in laboratory
      buildings in or near the border checkpoint).
   • Adequate space in buildings at suitable locations will be needed for the laboratories. (A difficulty
      for planning screening laboratories on the Birgunj border is that Nepalese authorities seem to be
      uncertain about time of delivery of works at the Integrated Check Post or ICP.)

17.     Proposed next steps. This report provides steps for implementing the proposals in the next 2-3
years. The first step is to have Government endorsement for the proposals. After approval the Government
of Nepal might consult with Indian SPS authorities, aiming at obtaining cooperation in SPS capacity
building and building mutual trust. Other steps include the recruitment of international phytosanitary and
chemical laboratory specialists for designing the proposed investment plans. Outline Terms of Reference
(TOR) for the international specialists are provided.




                                                                                                        9
Introduction
18.       Background of the report The development objective of the Nepal-India Regional Trade and
Transport Project 4 is to decrease transport time and logistics costs for bilateral trade between Nepal and
India and transit trade along the Kathmandu-Kolkata corridor for the benefit of traders by reducing key
infrastructure bottlenecks in Nepal and by supporting the adoption of modern approaches to border
management. Its Component B: Strengthen Trade-Related Institutional Capacity in Nepal, has a sub-
component “Improvement of Trade-Related Laboratories” (with indicative budget of US$3m), including
laboratories for Customs and sanitary and phytosanitary testing for food safety, plant quarantine and animal
quarantine. The project document mentions the possibility of co-located multi-functional laboratories for
facilitating the border clearance process.

19.      In recent years, concerns have been raised in Nepal by government agencies and the private sector
about occasional requirements by import authorities in India to send samples to Kolkata for testing because
certificates from Nepal were not recognized. In the Aide Memoire of the NIRTTP Implementation Review
and Support Mission5 the question was raised whether investment in trade-related accredited integrated
laboratories for SPS and Customs functions are desirable and feasible, e.g. one at Kathmandu Valley and
one at a border checkpoint. It was agreed that as next steps the government would prioritize export products
that should be promoted through consultation with public and private sector stakeholders, and that the Bank
would send an international expert on laboratory certification to review assessments done and to propose
an action plan for moving forward, including helping the Department of Customs (DoC), the Ministry of
Commerce and Supplies (MoCS), and the Ministry of Agricultural Development (MoAD) to draft Terms
of Reference (TOR) for a consultant to begin the design of the laboratories.

20.     Work conducted.           The Consultant visited Nepal during 16-29 November, 2014 and, in close
cooperation with the NIRTTP Project Coordination Office (PCO), conducted interviews with public and
private stakeholders in Kathmandu and Birgunj, and organized on Monday, 24 November a consultative
workshop with stakeholders in Kathmandu. The list of interviewed persons is attached as ANNEX I. In
addition, information was collected about foreign trade of products that might be subject to SPS
requirements, i.e. (i) agriculture and food products, and (ii) medical and aromatic products (MAPs). It also
appeared necessary to collect information about activities and experiences of projects supported by
Development Partners, especially the EU, the World Bank Project for Agriculture Commercialization and
Trade, and USAID.

21.     The agencies and stakeholders directly involved in this initiative include the Ministry of Commerce
and Supplies, Department of Customs, Department of Agriculture (DoA), Department of Livestock
Services (DoLS), Department of Food Technology and Quality Control, and the Agro-Enterprise Center of
the Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce and Industry (AEC/FNCCI).

22.        Structure of the report The subsequent chapters of this report cover the following:
           • Exports and imports subject to SPS measures
           • Nepal’s SPS system: critical policy issues
           • Basic capacity for SPS management
           • Sustainability of SPS laboratories
           • Demand for SPS laboratory services
           • Conclusions and recommendations



4
    Nepal-India Regional Trade and Transport Project (NIRTTP). World Bank Report No. 78199, 3 June 2013.
5
    World Bank, Aide Memoire, 22 October, 2014.

                                                                                                           10
Exports and imports subject to SPS measures
23.     WTO members have the right to take sanitary and phytosanitary measures necessary for the
protection of human, animal or plant life or health, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with
the provisions of the SPS Agreement. All imported plants, animals and products thereof, including food
and feed, can cause risks to the life and health of consumers, animals, plants and the biodiversity, and are
therefore subject to sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

24.      Exports.    In 2013, Nepal had recorded exports of about US$ 250 million of products that are
subject to SPS measures. (See Annex II Table II.1) The exports include a broad range of products. Among
these, there were 25 products of which the export value was more than US$ 1 million and their total value
was US$218 million and 36 products with export value of more than US$ 0.5 million with a total export
value of US$225 million. Important products include:

    •   Agriculture crop commodities: cardamom, big cardamom, black fermented tea, lentils, betel nut
        and ginger;
    •   Processed products: fresh and frozen fruit juices, oil cakes, pasta; and
    •   Medicinal and aromatic products: these include plants and parts of plants (including seeds and
        fruits) of a kind used primarily in perfumery~ in pharmacy or for insecticidal or similar purposes.
Export value of animals and animal products is relatively limited.

25.     Imports. In 2013, recorded imports subject to SPS measures were about US$ 1.16 billion (See
Annex II Table II.2). Of these, there were 43 and 109 products with import values of US$ 5 million and
US$ 1 million, respectively, and total import value of US$ 0.94 billion and US$ 1.10 billion. Most imported
products are processed food, and agriculture crop products, including cooking oil, fruit and vegetables.
Animals and animal products form a small share of imports and import of MAPs is limited.

26.       Informal export and import. Nepal has an open border with India and in addition to recorded
formal exports and imports of agriculture and food products there is much informal trade, especially with
India. According to independent specialists, much more agricultural and food products are exported
informally than formally, mostly potatoes, rice and vegetables from border districts. The Nepal tax system
is said to provide incentives for informal export. By legislation, tax can be levied in the district of production
and the district of consumption. However, districts also tax transiting cargo, which means that there is costly
accumulation of taxes between production areas and Kathmandu. Informal trade with China is of much
smaller scale and concentrated in particular locations, but may include some export of highly valuable
MAPs. Informal imports include a range of products, including goats and buffalo.

27.      The implications of informal trade are that there is no protection against health risks and that there
is no tax revenue.

28.     Border checkpoints.      In 2013, one-third of all recorded exports were cleared at Biratnagar,
followed by Birgunj with one-quarter and Tribhuvan International Airport with about one-fifth (Annex II
Table II.3). More than half of all recorded imports enter the country at Birgunj and Birgunj Dry Port.
Bhairahawa handles 15 % and Biratnagar 13% of imports.

29.     Recorded exports subject to SPS controls contribute 27% of the export value. Most exports subject
to SPS controls are released at Biratnagar (37%), Birgunj (27%) and Mechi (20%) (Annex Table II.4).
Birgunj and Birgunj Dry Port together have the biggest share in handling recorded imports subject to SPS
with 57%, followed by Bhairahawa with 20% and Biratnagar with 16%.

                                                                                                               11
Export market access
30.     Given their dominant share in trade, market access for plant products is most important for Nepal’s
exports. Second priority is access for processed food products.

Formal market access in India
31.      About 70 percent of Nepal’s formal exports go to India and therefore market access requirements
in India are very important. There are clearly SPS issues with market access to India, but much information
is anecdotal and without detailed interviews of traders and officials on both sides of the border and
assessment of India’s SPS imports policies and its implementation it is not possible to pinpoint exact
bottlenecks. The implementation of SPS requirements among different border checkpoints apparently
differs and may be subject to discretionary powers by authorities in different Indian states. Experiences
differ among products and allegedly rent-seeking may also affect decision-making. The formal
requirements for food safety and plant quarantine are provided and some experiences discussed below.

32.      Initial market access for plant products requires that they need to be listed in the Plant Quarantine
Order of India. If this is not the case products may be refused access because of suspicion that they may be
in transit from China. Listing requires a formal request from Nepal to India and can perhaps trigger a pest
risk assessment (PRA) by India before the listing is approved. For most processed food products no special
market access approvals are required.

33.      For regular shipments of approved plant products, the formal requirements for each consignment
are that a random sample is taken and that for release (i) a pest-free analysis report and (ii) a pesticides
residues report are required from the importer. An alternative for regular exporters of plant products to India
is to obtain through an agent a special approval for a number of months or for the growing season. For this,
traders need to present a so-called “type sample” of their product to the Indian authorities. The approval
takes time and is costly, but the advantage is that subsequent imports are smooth.

34.     Special issues for SPS management are that India requires phytosanitary certificates from Nepal
but does not seem to recognize them and neither does India recognize the capacity of SPS testing
laboratories in Nepal to provide test reports on pesticides residues. As a result, Indian authorities can and
do sometimes require for some products at some border checkpoints that pest-free analysis and tests for
pesticides are conducted at a laboratory in India6 which requires long turn-around times of 7-10 days.
However, it was reported that in Birgunj Indian importers manage to avoid long delays. There are concerns
about rent-seeking on the Indian side of the border, which do raise transaction costs and in some cases result
in increased waiting times. It is generally believed that the government of Nepal should ask for a Mutual
Recognition Agreement (MRA) to solve SPS issues in bilateral trade, but that most likely India will respond
that Nepal presently does not have any capable food safety laboratory with accreditation and insufficient
capacity in plant pest surveillance and diagnosis.

35.    At present working relations between Nepalese and Indian SPS authorities are limited and their
improvement could enhance transparency and mutual trust.

Formal market access in China
36.     PR China has demanding phytosanitary requirements. Market access for each product requires a
signed protocol. So far Nepal only signed a protocol with Tibet Autonomous Region, PR China, for citrus

6
    Choice at convenience of the exporters is Kolkata or Patna of Bihar or Lucknow of UP.

                                                                                                            12
exports three years ago. In order to implement this protocol, Nepal needs crop pest surveys of which the
results need to be approved by China Inspection and Quarantine (CIQ). China has specified 24 quarantine
pests, of which according to Nepalese specialists about 20 are absent in Nepal. However, no evidence based
on international surveillance standards has been provided. After approval, it is likely that registration of
production areas, traders, and packing houses will be required.7 So far, successful implementation is
pending and food safety requirements are not fully clear yet.

Formal market access in other countries
37.      Market access requirements can vary much country by country, but phytosanitary requirements are
likely to be dominant in most countries. They can be specific for plant species and pests and diseases.

38.      Food safety requirements are generally not dominant, unless there is a history of non-compliance
for certain food safety parameters. Food safety testing costs can be high, e.g. for the EU, because of the
range of test parameters and tolerance levels. Sometimes, Good Agricultural Practice (GAP), Good Hygiene
Practice (GHP), Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP),
and health certificates are required.

Requirements of private buyers
39.     Often requirements of buyers are additional to the requirements of the importing country. They
differ much between market segments, e.g.:

      •    In demanding markets, such as supermarkets and branded food companies in the EU, Japan, private
           inspection companies are often used for certification of safety and quality parameters.
      •    Less demanding markets, such as the modern sector in developing countries.
      •    Markets with low requirements, which are typically traditional market segments in developing
           countries, including wet markets.
      •    Private buyers in demanding markets can have many requirements. Food safety requirements can
           include GAP, GMP, HACCP, ISO 22000, etc. Often there is routine testing for each shipment, with
           preference for private laboratories (which provide 7x24 hours service with short turn around). Some
           private schemes accept third party laboratories only. The choice of laboratories depends in addition
           to trust also much on logistics.
      •    Quality requirements also differ much depending on the product and its commercial purpose. Often
           there is routine testing for each shipment. Public mandatory quality standards are mostly not useful
           for private buyers, or even a burden. Increasingly, requirements include environmental and labor
           conditions. Control of storage pests is common, but generally there are no other private
           requirements on plant and animal quarantine, except by seed and breeding businesses.
      •    Special requirements from buyers of MAPs include testing reports about concentrates of essential
           oils and active ingredients. This is about product characteristics, not SPS requirements. Technical
           capacity requirements for tests can be very diverse.


Nepal’s SPS system: critical policy issues
40.     The current SPS system has major capacity gaps and weaknesses in WTO compliance. Some of
these weaknesses are being addressed with support from development partners, which need to be taken into
consideration while designing improved laboratory capacity (See Chapter VIII).


7
    In protocols with countries in Southeast Asia such requirements are common.

                                                                                                            13
SPS system not risk-based
41.     The present SPS system is not compliant with the WTO SPS Agreement. SPS measures should be
risk-based and controls should be proportionate to risk. This requires risk categorization of products and
processes, which still has not received attention. Adoption of risk-based management will shift attention
from routine controls to prevention and targeted controls, and the need for laboratory testing may turn out
to be much lower than assumptions based on the present non-risk based system. USAID is providing support
for adopting risk-based management.

Food control system mainly based on quality requirements
42.     Nepal has about 115 mandatory food product standards which contain mainly minimum quality
requirements and only a limited number of safety requirements. Good international practice suggests that,
generally, quality standards should be voluntary, and that mandatory standards (called technical regulations
in the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) Agreement) should only be used where necessary for the
protection of safety, environment, and consumers. Food safety requires SPS measures with Maximum
Residue Limits for chemical and microbiological contamination. The main DFTQC Central Food
Laboratory has accreditation for 27 food quality parameters, not food safety parameters. Much of the
capacity for quality testing is not relevant for international food safety requirements. Legislation and the
policy framework for food safety are deficient. USAID and the EU are supporting formulation of food
safety policy, testing capacity and accreditation for food safety parameters.

Inability to retain specialist staff
43.     Diagnostics, testing, and quarantine inspection require high level specialists, of whom training is
costly and requires much time. Frequent rotation of staff is a serious obstacle for building sustainable
capacity in laboratories and inspectorates. Much international support has been provided for training in the
country and abroad, but often after training the trained staff move to better paying employment in and
outside of government.


Basic capacity for SPS management
Insufficient capacity in plant pest surveillance and diagnostics
44.      Plant quarantine capacity, which is highest priority for market access for plant products, is very
weak. International standards (i.e. the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC)’s International
Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM)) have been adopted with international support, but there is
no implementation. A main shortcoming is that there is only ad hoc pest surveillance and no central
diagnostics laboratory with specimen collection. There are insufficient numbers of specialists in pathology,
entomology, taxonomy, etc., in the country. Capacity in plant quarantine is critical for (i) market access
negotiations for plant products; (ii) developing quarantine and non-quarantine pest lists; and (iii) issuance
of reliable phytosanitary certificates.
No capacity to control pesticides
45.      Nepal has pesticides registration in place, but there is no market surveillance and no laboratory to
control the approval status, prescribed quality and labeling requirements of pesticides in the market. These




                                                                                                          14
issues are overlooked in public documents such as the agricultural development strategy8 and present donor
support.

SPS import inspection
46.    SPS import inspection is hardly in place and ineffective. Samples are taken of every incoming
consignment and papers are inspected, but at the main import checkpoint, Birgunj, testing is generally not
conducted and no interceptions are being reported for food, plant and animal products.

47.     The legal principle of the sequence in border release processes is correct: quarantine release before
Customs release. However, the lay-out of border checkpoints is not suitable for correct implementation and
quarantine inspectors are not operating in the Customs area but located behind.

Capacity for food safety surveillance and testing
48.     There is at present no testing capacity and accreditation for food safety parameters in microbiology,
pesticide residues, veterinary drug residues, heavy metals, other pollutants and mycotoxins in any of the
food laboratories including the Central Food Laboratory.

49.      There is an urgent need to build this capacity, which EU support is addressing. However, since
testing for chemical parameters is often more expensive than quality testing, there will be competition for
skilled staff and funding within the DFTQC Central Food Laboratory.


Sustainability of SPS laboratories
50.     Sustainable use of SPS laboratory capacity is a major challenge for developing countries. This
chapter discusses the main issues.
Cost of laboratories is generally high
51.     Costs of SPS laboratories depend on the area and range of parameters. Investment costs are (i)
high for:
    • Food safety testing for chemical parameters for the international markets
    • Animal disease control
    • Quality testing of veterinary drugs and bio-active substances


(ii) moderate for:
    •   Quality of pesticides


(iii) low to moderate for:
    •   Plant pest and disease diagnostics
    •   Microbiology in food




8
 Ministry of Agricultural Development 2014. Agriculture Development Strategy (ADS) 2014 , Singhdurbar, Nepal.
See also Nepal Country Report in: FAO 2013. Advancement of Pesticide Regulatory Management in Asia. RAP
publication 2013/08.

                                                                                                                15
52.    Investment costs are often not the bottleneck, since donors provide grants, and if well maintained,
equipment may have an economic life of 5-8 years.

53.     Annual operational costs, however, are usually much more constraining since donors are reluctant
to pay for them and operational funding largely depends on Government. They are usually about 25% of
investment costs in equipment and include expenses for:
    • Participation in proficiency testing and maintaining accreditation
    • Maintenance and calibration
    • Expensive chemicals and standards needed for testing
    • A minimum number of tests per year for maintaining proficiency and operational functioning of
        advanced testing equipment: it requires preferably 1000-2000 tests per year for advanced
        equipment and a minimum of at least 500 tests per year
    • Collecting sufficient numbers of samples through active and passive surveillance and sending them
        to laboratories

Staff requirement
54.      Staff requirements depend on the kind and range of tests. Specialized equipment and testing
parameters require significant special training, and reliable results require experience and proficiency of
staff. Staff cannot easily be reallocated to other equipment and other tests. Therefore, if a specialized staff
takes another job, the laboratory may not be able to continue testing until replacement staff has been trained.
Therefore, more than one staff has to be trained for sustainable use of sophisticated equipment.

Crucial factors for sustainability of laboratories
55.     There are many examples of laboratories and testing capacity in developing countries that are not
sustainable. Main factors for sustainability are:
    • Availability of sufficient operational funding
    • A sufficiently large stream of samples
    • Experienced and dedicated laboratory staff

Co-location of laboratories
56.     Given the sustainability constraints, the question arises whether co-location of laboratories (or
integrated laboratories) would mitigate bottlenecks of funding, samples and staff. For Nepal the option of
combining SPS and Customs laboratories in an integrated institution has been raised.

57.      Different laboratories can be combined in one location. However, testing for different groups of
products and parameters will require physical separation of individual rooms and groups of rooms to
prevent cross-contamination. For example, microbiological and chemical testing needs to be done in
separate laboratories and plant pest diagnostics has to be separated from food safety testing. There are only
limited options for multiple use of expensive equipment for testing of different parameters. For example,
testing pesticides quality and pesticides residues requires the same type of equipment but use of the same
equipment and the same rooms for these different purposes should be avoided.

58.      For all these reasons possibilities for cost saving though co-location are limited and are mainly
restricted to overhead and staffing. Benefits of co-location for users are limited since multiple testing of
samples is infrequent. Testing the same samples for food safety and plant pests rarely occurs. Testing animal
(including fish) food and feed can have overlap of testing for zoonotic and general food/feed safety
parameters. Therefore, there is a dilemma whether to establish animal food and feed laboratories near


                                                                                                            16
animal disease diagnostic laboratories or near general food safety laboratories. In developed countries
where the number of samples for testing is high, the choice is usually for duplicated laboratory capacity in
general food safety and laboratories for safety of animal food and feed.

59.     A complicating factor for co-locating SPS regulatory laboratories under one management is that
plant health, animal health and food safety authorities each have their own different legal / institutional
mandates. Use of services of a legally independent common laboratory requires sophisticated rules for
funding and accounting for which present systems have no ready solutions. For all these reasons, it is
uncommon in most countries to combine plant diagnostics, animal disease diagnostics, food and chemical
laboratories in one institution.

60.      Sometimes, combination of SPS laboratories with research, education and commercial testing are
proposed for possible saving of costs. However, advantages are limited at best. International experience
shows that combining research and regulatory laboratory functions is problematic because of different
cultures and disruption of disciplined regulatory testing. Combining educational and regulatory laboratory
functions is undesirable, because of risks of disruption and damage to expensive equipment.9 Finally,
combining regulatory and commercial testing functions is possible, especially in food and feed testing, but
there is a difference in culture between commercial and regulatory testing laboratories as will be pointed
out below.


Demand for SPS laboratory services

Regulatory laboratories
61.       Testing in regulatory laboratories depends largely on government programs and funding. Funding
can be lump sum, per test, and combinations of these. Demand and fee income from the private sector are
often limited. As indicated already, often lack of funding is a main constraint for sustainability. It results in
lack of samples, maintenance, calibration and accreditation, lack of safety, environmental care and climatic
facilities, and last but not least, lack of quality of services.

62.     In such cases, there is temptation to use regulatory powers to earn fee income from private
enterprises, and sometimes also to set fees below cost in order to compete with other laboratories.

Private laboratories
63.     Private investment in laboratories is subject to expected demand. If there is enough paying demand
for quality of services, the investor will seek ISO 17025 accreditation. Private laboratories often have a
limited range of tests, compared to reference laboratories. Their focus is on service to satisfy customers
(e.g. operation 7x24 hours and rapid turn-around). They mostly earn little income from government
services.

Geographic spread of regulatory laboratory services
64.     Duplication of laboratory services is undesirable for expensive equipment because it increases need
for government funding and can worsen sustainability of laboratory functions. Mostly, it is better to send
samples for expensive chemical testing to the central laboratory than to duplicate capacity. However, it can
be unavoidable for services of which turn-around time is critical. Duplication need not be a problem for

9
 This does not mean that groups of students cannot visit a regulatory laboratory to learn about the use of
sophisticated equipment, but that is different from getting laboratory skills.

                                                                                                              17
services with limited economies of scale, e.g. microbiology testing, simple quality parameters, and if
logistics costs of central sample collection is relatively high. It can be even attractive if it generates
sufficient extra demand.

65.     For these reasons, it is common to have an apex laboratory structure for regulatory laboratories. It
will have one central laboratory with reference function and expensive equipment that cannot be duplicated.
In addition, it will have regional and local laboratories where unavoidable, or where duplication is not a
problem, or even attractive. Decentralized laboratories need back-up from central laboratories. Nepal SPS
agencies and the Department of Plant Resources (DPR) all focus on an apex structure. Figures A, B, C and
D in ANNEX III show their present regional spread.

66.      Is a laboratory on the border a good contribution, given the requirements by Indian authorities
sometimes to send samples to Kolkata for analysis? Common international practice is to have only
screening functions at border checkpoints. Many good screening tests are available for residues of (part of)
pesticides, veterinary drugs / growth enhancers, aflatoxin, which provide cheap alternatives for
conventional testing. Only ports with large volumes of trade have laboratories to avoid logistical delay and
to facilitate trade. For financial and operational sustainability of a laboratory, at least 1000 samples of
testing is required per year, and it should be taken into consideration that expensive testing equipment at
the border competes with capacity at central laboratories.

67.     Because it is important to avoid queuing at the border, testing for which cargo has to wait for release
at the border is undesirable for all testing with turn-around time of more than one day. This applies to all
microbiology testing since it requires several days. Moreover, testing of perishables that requires more than
a few hours is undesirable because of rapid loss of quality.

68.      India’s future requirements for testing pesticide residues will be the main factor for demand. Will
it be mandatory for all food consignments or will there be options for mitigation? If testing would become
mandatory, the overall demand for testing services would probably jump to many thousands of samples per
year. It would also make private investment in accredited laboratories attractive.

69.     It is important to note that imposition of mandatory testing of all consignments may not be risk-
based, unless India makes the point that there is frequent and persistent non-compliance. In the years ahead
risk-based testing intensity by India may be modified when compliance improves, for example because of
proper response from exporters.

70.      Without mandatory testing, private sector demand for testing at the border is uncertain because the
cost of conventional testing of pesticides residues is at least US$50 per sample. For most informal exporters
the present system is preferable, and if testing becomes mandatory, incentives for informal exports will
increase. For many formal traders, the present practice of approval for several months based on type sample
may be more attractive than testing for each consignment. Some of the exporters may for logistical reasons
prefer using the Central Food Laboratory after its accreditation. Most exporters to the EU, Japan etc., will
probably not use a testing laboratory on the border since requirements in these countries cover more
parameters and require lower levels of detection than India does.

71.     Would requirements for import of food products in Nepal add demand for testing pesticide
residues? This is not sure yet. To date, Nepal has only been testing for compliance with mandatory product
standards, and these standards do not include requirements for maximum residue limits for pesticide
residues and other contaminants. Development of food safety policy is needed to establish such
requirements. However, these requirements should be risk-based and a system combining use of rapid test
kits and conventional testing seems to be most appropriate for Nepal. Mandatory testing of pesticides


                                                                                                            18
residues for all imports will impose significant costs. If the government pays it will be a drain on public
finances and if private traders have to pay it would be an incentive for informal imports.

Is a laboratory for pest-free analysis (PFA) reports at the border checkpoint desirable?
72.    Common international practice is that phytosanitary certificates certify the pest-free status of the
consignment, as required by importing authorities. If India would recognize Nepalese PCs then a PFA is
redundant. The real problem is lack of capacity/recognition of Nepal National Plant Protection Office
(NPPO) to issue credible PCs.

73.     By international standards, plant pest screening and issuance of PCs at the border always needs
backup from crop pest surveillance, a reference laboratory, and inspection at production and/or packing
locations. Therefore, a plant pest diagnostic laboratory on the border has only limited technical use, and is
generally not good international practice.

74.     Nepal does not have a national reference laboratory for diagnostics of plant pests and diseases and
its pest surveillance methodology and coverage are deficient. Without addressing this deficiency,
investment in screening capacity on the border is of limited use.
Customs laboratory
75.     Customs laboratories should focus on testing needed for support of raising revenue and controlling
fraud and smuggling. Duplication of laboratory functions of regulatory agencies can create sustainability
problems and confusion because of the legal mandate of regulatory agencies.

76.     The present Customs laboratory in Kathmandu has limited capacity and structural, climatic and
safety deficiencies. At the border checkpoints, Customs lacks back-up from rapid tests and screening, and
considers especially screening for chemicals high priority.

Should SPS support be focused on products?
77.      The Nepal Trade Integration Study (NTIS) 2010 has a focus on institutions, policies, projects and
trade issues for major export goods: cardamom, ginger, honey, lentils, green tea, black tea, uncooked pasta,
medicinal plants and essential oils. Several donor projects focus on supply chains for some of these
commodities, such as the STDF/FAO project for ginger. SPS capacity is often only one of many factors for
trade facilitation and the question is how much weight should be given to product specific considerations
for building SPS laboratory capacity.

78.      A product focus can be desirable for product-specific SPS risks and market access constraints. For
example, soil on root products forms a special phytosanitary risk for ginger imports in other countries,
which can only be addressed by adequate washing facilities for ginger. Quarantine pests lists of the
importing country often require product specific care in surveillance, mitigating treatment and inspection.
However, some capacity needed is basic and cross-cutting. Testing pesticides residues requires costly
generic testing capacity that can with limited fine-tuning be applied for all domestic and export products.
Following international standards for crop pest surveillance and diagnostics requires generic capacity.
Laboratory capacity needed for ISO 17025 has requirements that are partly basic and partly focused on a
specific testing parameter. The actual range of products subject to SPS controls exported at the main
checkpoints is broad (See Annex II Table II.5). Focusing on specific capacity for a few products can only
be justified for specific constraints of major export products, such as ginger which should be free of soil.

79.      In a consultation workshop, senior officers in SPS agencies did not support the idea of having
priority export products as an important consideration for investment in laboratories.

                                                                                                          19
80.       Conclusions and recommendations
81.      Requirements by India for pest-free analysis and testing for pesticide residues have triggered the
proposal to establish two new integrated laboratories for SPS and Customs, one in Kathmandu and one on
the border. The assessment of this proposal should be conducted against (i) overall SPS policy priorities;
and (ii) ongoing support by development partners.

SPS policy priorities
82.       Recommended policy priorities are:
      •   Improve compliance with WTO requirements by introducing risk-based SPS measures. This
          includes SPS policy reform, strengthening of the legal framework and risk-categorization.
      •   Follow good international practice and develop safety requirements for food products, in particular
          MRLs for pesticide residues, veterinary drugs and growth enhancers, mycotoxins and other
          contaminants, and tolerances for microbiological contamination. In this context, the present system
          of product standards with regard to WTO compliance and necessity should be reviewed. At present,
          quality requirements are much more demanding than safety requirements and there will be strong
          competition for scarce funds and staff between testing for quality and safety requirements.
      •   Address retention of SPS specialists in laboratories and inspectorates. The high job rotation of
          technical specialists affects capacity and creates recurrent gaps in capacity for use of advanced
          equipment in laboratories, plant pest and animal disease diagnostics, and surveillance and
          inspection. High mobility thwarts the buildup of specialized capacity in SPS agencies, and causes
          continuous high training costs to fill vacancies with adequate technical experience.
      •   Tasks of Customs and SPS agencies need alignment. The principle of quarantine release before
          Customs release is properly enacted, but implementation is insufficient because of deficiencies in
          the lay-out of border checkpoints and perhaps lack of SPS inspectors.
      •   Laboratory support for Customs should focus on support for revenue collection, control of
          smuggling and fraud, and rapid release time at the checkpoints. Better alignment with regulatory
          laboratories is desirable.
      •   SPS controls at border checkpoints deserve improvement with regard to international SPS good
          practice since presently they are not very effective. Technical screening capacity in Birgunj
          checkpoints appears to be missing for animal quarantine, poor for food quarantine, and limited for
          plant quarantine and underutilized. At present there appear to be virtually no interceptions.
          Requirements need to be clarified, and procedures reconsidered, also in interaction with Customs.
      •   Following international good practice in SPS it is desirable to have intensive contacts and regular
          consultations with the trading partners. Therefore, bilateral working groups should be considered
          for SPS – food safety, animal health, and plant health – with the main trading partners, i.e. India,
          China and Bangladesh. The Government of Nepal may propose to the authorities of the respective
          countries to include this in the agenda for the next trade treaty negotiations.

Donor support for SPS
83.     NIRTTP support should not overlap with support by other agencies. No other agency supports
laboratory capacity for Customs. However, in the SPS area several other agencies provide support which
covers priority areas identified above.

84.     The World Bank PACT has a small component of US$ 5.39 million to improve effectiveness and
efficiency of SPS services, including strengthening laboratory capacity with equipment, training and
support for accreditation, mainly in DFTQC. About US$ 0.8 million is not spent yet. PACT did not carry

                                                                                                           20
out an initial needs assessment of laboratory capacity and responded generally to demand formulated by
the SPS departments. Much of the support to DFTQC seems to have been allocated for strengthening of
quality controls, and the 27 parameters for which accreditation has been obtained are not in SPS food safety,
but in quality control.10 Following a recent project review11 it was decided to assess effectiveness of this
support. The assessment will focus on output and outcome of support for testing, and for what parameters
have been tested.

85.      The SPS authorities have felt urgency to improve the legal framework to harmonize with
international and WTO regulatory provisions. The USAID Policy Reform Initiative Project is addressing
policy reform in the SPS area. It includes a.o. support for (i) food safety policy formulation; (ii) improving
compliance of the food law and regulations with the WTO agreements; (iii) development of national
standards on plant and animal quarantine; (iv) commodity-based pest lists; (v) assessment of strengths of
public and private laboratories; and, (vi) a needs assessment of screening facilities on the border.

86.     A new EU project will enhance the capacity of the DFTQC Central Food Laboratory and the
regional food testing laboratory at Biratnagar to reach international benchmarks. It will provide technical
assistance to extend accreditation to parameters of testing of pesticide residues, heavy metals, mycotoxins,
veterinary drug residues, food colors, caffeine in tea and coffee, HMF12 in honey, benzoic acid, nitrites and
microbiological testing parameters for total plate count, coliform count, E.coli, and yeast and molds.
Training will be provided on site using installed equipment in Kathmandu in which staff from regional
laboratories and one or more private sector laboratories will participate. A laboratory needs assessment will
be carried out in the first quarter of 2015 to identify equipment to be provided. The laboratory equipment
and supplies will be delivered in June 2016.

87.     The EU project will also support National Bureau of Standards and Metrology laboratories for
testing vegetable fats and oils and microbiology parameters. It will also provide technical assistance to
prepare a training program on the application of GHP, GMP, and HACCP in the tea industry, the coffee
industry; the dairy processing industry, and meat processing industry.

SPS laboratory priorities
88.       Considering the above, prioritized recommendations for NIRTTP are:

     i.   Establish a plant diagnostic reference laboratory and support the enhancement of a program for
          pest surveillance. Nepal lacks capacity in this area and given the dominant importance of exports
          of crop and other plant products, highest priority should be given to solve this bottleneck in
          phytosanitary capacity needed for negotiating improved market access. The laboratory and
          surveillance should serve all exported crop products and other plant products, such as MAPs and
          other non-timber forest products, for which importing countries require phytosanitary controls. For
          this, the MOAD should work in close cooperation with the Ministry of Forestry and Department
          of Plant Resources (DoPR).



10
   It has been estimated that to date only 10% of the testing is focused on food safety.
11
   Progress report 14-6-2014: Nepal - Project for Agriculture Commercialization and Trade (PACT) : P087140 -
Implementation Status Results Report: Sequence 10 (English)
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/SAR/2014/06/14/090224b0824f935c/1_0/Render
ed/PDF/Nepal000Projec0Report000Sequence010.pdf
12
   5-hydroxymethylfurfural

                                                                                                           21
  ii.      Upgrade the Customs laboratory in Kathmandu. It should support revenue collection and control
           of smuggling and fraud. Its technical scope should not duplicate capacity and mandates of
           regulatory agencies and NBSM laboratories.

 iii.      Establish at the border checkpoint at Birgunj screening laboratories for Customs, food safety,
           plant quarantine and animal quarantine, preferably co-located with separate rooms (or in
           laboratory buildings in or near the border checkpoint). The selection of technical facilities,
           equipment and screening kits should focus on bottlenecks for timely release of consignments of
           regularly traded goods. The capacity on the border should be related to capacity of more advanced
           laboratories of SPS regulatory agencies, customs and NBSM.

89.     Laboratory buildings. Adequate space in buildings at suitable locations will be needed for the
laboratories. DoA needs a building for the plant quarantine. Customs has a laboratory building already in
Kathmandu. At the Inland Container/Clearance Depot (ICD) or Integrated Checkpost (ICP) in Birgunj one
or a few co-located buildings are needed for screening laboratories for quarantine and Customs, for which
a building is under construction, but it may not provide sufficient space. There is also a canteen building at
the ICD, presently used by security personnel which may offer additional suitable place. If existing
buildings are made available, structural improvements will be required to make them suitable for the
designed tasks, but this will most likely be much cheaper and cost less time than creating new buildings.

 iv.       The PCO should in consultation with the concerned agencies identify possible buildings. The
           specification of building requirements and necessary upgrading/new construction should be based
           on a detailed assessment of the scope of work for each laboratory. The assessment needs to be done
           by the responsible agencies with support from international laboratory specialists. A difficulty for
           planning screening laboratories on the border is that Nepalese authorities seem to be uncertain
           about delivery of works at the ICD.

90.     Already covered by other donors. As mentioned earlier, USAID and EU are already offering
support focusing DFTQC capacity on testing and accreditation for food safety control, including pesticides
residues testing.

91.        Not recommended. The following actions are not recommended based on the above analyses:

       •   Establishment of large integrated laboratories for SPS – this requires a costly and complex
           reorganization, including new legislation, and has limited advantages.
       •   Establishment of a laboratory on the border for pest free analysis – this addresses symptoms of
           weaknesses in plant quarantine management screening, not the basic weakness of the system.
       •   Establishment of an accredited pesticides residues testing laboratory on border – this duplicates
           capacity of advanced equipment already being created at DFTQC and has serious sustainability
           issues given the expected limited demand for testing.

Proposed next steps
92.   For implementing the recommendations in the next 2-3 years, the following activities are
recommended.

   i.      Discuss proposals of this report with relevant Government agencies
  ii.      The Government needs to propose suitable buildings for the plant diagnostic reference laboratory
           and screening laboratories on the border for Customs, food safety, plant quarantine and animal
           quarantine

                                                                                                            22
 iii.   After its approval, the Government of Nepal might consider to consult about the overall plan and
        its implementation with Indian authorities, which will enhance mutual trust. Special issues for
        discussion might be:
            a. Adopting firm dates for finishing infrastructural work for the ICP
            b. Explore possibilities of establishing bilateral working groups for plant health, animal health
               and food safety with major trade partners which meet twice per year to share information,
               discuss coordination and harmonization issues for SPS border release, and possible
               cooperation in capacity building for plant pest diagnostics and surveillance, and exchange
               programs for SPS staff
 iv.    Contract two specialists for designing the proposed investment plans: a phytosanitary specialist
        with expertise in plant pest surveillance, pest diagnostic reference laboratories, and pest screening
        at border checkpoints; and a chemical laboratory specialist with expertise in chemical laboratory
        analysis, and screening at border checkpoints (outline TORs are proposed in the section below)
  v.    Procure the renovation/adjustment of buildings for the laboratories, laboratory equipment and
        supplies, and vehicles for plant pest surveillance
 vi.    Provide relevant general and hands-on training through TA by consultants (and if possible by
        exchange programs with India) for:
            •   staff in plant pest surveillance, pest identification and improvement of quarantine pest lists
            •   staff in the Customs laboratory
            •   the preparation of inspection manuals and training of SPS staff at the ICD and IPC and the
                border screening laboratories
vii.    Provide support for the operational cost of plant surveillance during two years

Outline TOR for two consultants for designing the investment plans
(1)     Phytosanitary specialist (1.5 PM)
Under guidance of the PCO and in close cooperation with the Plant Protection Directorate and in
consultation with the Ministry of Forestry and Department of Plant Resources (DoPR) the consultant will:
    • Take stock of the capacity in phytosanitary management and ongoing upgrading, with special
        attention to compliance to international standards in pest surveillance, pest diagnostics, pest
        specimen collection, and border screening.
    • Prepare a proposal for priorities for plant pest surveillance for export crops and MAPs in the next
        five years.
    • Prepare the design for the institutional and physical establishment of a basic reference laboratory
        for plant pest and disease diagnosis and specimen collection, compliant with international standards
        for phytosanitary measures (ISPM), and with priority in entomology and pathology. (Other
        specialist fields may be strengthened later)
    • It is assumed that an existing building will be proposed by government, and the consultant will
        identify necessary structural, climatic, and power supply improvements for the proposed building.
    • Identify jointly with government staff and the chemical laboratory specialist, and taking into
        consideration assessments and recommendations from other projects, in particular the EU and
        USAID projects, the scope of screening laboratories on the border checkpoint at ICD or ICP near
        Birgunj, structural requirements of the building(s), equipment for simple screening that can be used
        (i) to improve SPS quarantine controls; and (ii) to enhance the timely SPS release for most common
        imports.


                                                                                                           23
    •   Identify major gaps in staff qualification for pest surveillance and pest identification and
        diagnostics, and make a proposal for training and mitigation of bottlenecks for the next five years;
        this can involve arrangement with an expert center abroad (or a bilateral arrangement with plant
        quarantine of India), and technical assistance.
    •   Prepare a list of equipment and current supplies for two years with specifications required for
        NIRTTP procurement for surveillance (including necessary vehicles), the reference laboratory, and
        screening at the quarantine border inspection station.
    •   Provide itemized cost estimates for the proposed improvements by NIRTTP.
    •   Provide itemized estimates of annual operational cost needed for the government to make
        sustainable use of the investments.
    •   The ambition level of the proposals should take into consideration the size of the country and the
        low present capacity that forms the basis for improvements.
    •   Requirements: An advanced degree in entomology or plant pathology or equivalent, at least ten
        years of international experience in plant quarantine, and demonstrated experience in having
        designed/upgraded similar laboratories as specified herein.

(2) Chemical laboratory specialist (1.0 PM)
Under guidance of the PCO and in close cooperation with the Customs Department and the SPS
departments the consultant will:

For the Customs laboratory
   • Assess the capacity of the Customs laboratory, its operation, current use, and funding.
   • Assess the need for in-house testing services in the Customs laboratory in support of Customs
        responsibility for revenue raising and control of smuggling and fraud, taking into consideration
        capacity in regulatory and other laboratories. Unnecessary duplication with other laboratories will
        be avoided.
   • Prepare a proposal for upgrading of the building with regard to solving structural, climatic, safety
        and power supply deficiencies, and ISO 17025 accreditation for a few core parameters.
   • Prepare a list of equipment and current supplies for two years with specifications required for
        NIRTTP procurement.
   • Identify skilled staff requirements for operation of the laboratory and make a proposal for staff
        training; this will include technical assistance.


For the border screening laboratory
    •   Identify jointly with government SPS and Customs staff and the phytosanitary specialist and taking
        into consideration assessments and recommendations from other projects, in particular the EU and
        USAID projects, the scope of screening laboratories at the border checkpoint at ICD or ICP near
        Birgunj, structural requirements of the building(s), equipment for simple screening, and rapid test
        kits that can be used (i) to improve SPS quarantine controls; (ii) Customs controls; and (iii) enhance
        the release time for most common imports.
    •   Identify skilled staff requirements for operation of the screening laboratories and make a proposal
        for staff training by SPS agency and Customs laboratory staff in Kathmandu.




For each of the facilities above
    •   Provide itemized cost estimates for the improvements by NIRTTP.


                                                                                                           24
•   Provide itemized estimates of annual operational cost needed for the government to make
    sustainable use of the investments.
•   The ambition level of the proposals should take into consideration the current conditions and low
    capacity that form the basis for improvements.
•   Requirements: An advanced degree in chemistry or equivalent, at least ten years of international
    experience in chemical and food laboratories, and demonstrated experience in having designed
    similar laboratories as specified herein.




                                                                                                  25
 ANNEXES
 Annex 1. Visit Schedule
 Persons contacted by Mr. Kees Van Der Meer, World Bank SPS Laboratory Experti
 Day/     Timing     Visit and other programs                                  Location                 Tel. No.
 Date
 Mon, 10.00 AM       Purushottam Ojha (former Secretary, MoCS), World          World Bank Office,       9851091822
 17 Nov              Bank Consultant to NIRTTP                                 Kathmandu
          11.00 AM   Mr. Mahesh Timsina, Project Coordinator and Mr.           NIRTTP/ PCO, Nepal       9851161777
                     Murari P. Gautam Upadhya, Project Manager/T A             Food Corp Building       9841325382
                     NIRTTP
          11.30 PM   Dr. Dinesh Prasad Parajuli, Joint Secretary, and Dr.      Singha Durbar,           4211687
                     Pradyumna Pandey, Under Secretary, Ministry of                                     9841295259
                     Agricultural Devevelopment                                                         9851125554
          12.30 PM   Mr. Narendra Khadka, President, Mr. Hemanta Raj           NIRTTP/ PCO, Nepal       9842711994
                     Bohora, Secretary, Nepal Ginger Producers and Traders     Food Corp Building,      9851069351
                     Association                                               9813542100               9851033784
          01.30 PM    Mr. Toya Narayan Gyawali, Joint Secretary, Ministry      Singha Durbar
                     of Commerce and Supplies
          02.30 PM   Mr. Krishna Bhandary, Advisor, Large Cardamom             PCO Office ,             9841373171
                     Entrepreneurs Association Nepal (LCEAN)                   9852671150, (President
                                                                               Rajendra K. Ghimire)
          03.30 PM   Professor Biswo Poudel, Kathmandu University              biswo@kusom.edu.np       9851147844
 Tues,    10.00 AM   Mr. Yam B. Thapa, Director General, and Ms. Sushma        Thapathali, Kathmandu    9851010997
 18 Nov              Upadhya, DDG, Department of Plant Resources                                        4251171
          11.00 AM   Mr. Surya P. Acharya, Director General, Mr. Ramesh        Tripureswor,             9841323983
                     Sharma Paudel, Director, and Mr. Manoj Nidhi Wagle ,      Kathmandu                9851123119
                     Laboratory Director, Department of Customs                                         9848029138
          02.00 PM   Ms. Rita Pandey, Director General, Mr. Mohan K.           Babarmahal,              4262369
                     Maharjan, Sr. Food Res. Officer, and Mr. Gajendra K.                               4262741
                     Paudyal, Sr. Food Res Off., Department of Food                                     9841339911
                     Technology and Quality Control (DFTQC)                                             and 4262337
 Wed, 10.30 AM       Dr. Vijay Kant Jha, DDG (Dr. Keshav P. Premy, DG),         Harihar Bhawan,         5522056
 19 Nov              Department of Livestock Services,                         5521610,                 9804439035

          11.30 AM   Mr. Dilliram Sharma, Program Director, Plant Protection   Harihar Bhawan,          5535844
                     Directorate, Department of Agricultural; Mr. Prakash      Pulchowk                 9841369615
                     Paudel, PQO, Mr.Harihar Acharya, NPQP.                                             9841882798
          01.00 PM   Mr. Bimal Nepal, DED, Mr.Suyas Khanal Director, Mr.       Trade and Export
                     Surendra Gongal, Director & Mr. Rajendra Shrestha, Dir    Promotion Centre
                                                                               (TEPC)
          02.45 PM   Mr. Dilli Baskota, General Secretary, Himalayan           hotpa@mail.com.np        5521942/20
                     Orthodox Tea Producers Association (HOTPA                                          41036
          03.30 PM   Mr. Lobsang Lama, Vice Chariman/MD, Ms. Shanta            sagro@wlink.com.np       4469503
                     Baskota Koirala, Director, Shangrila Agro World (P)       www.saw.com.np           9851082828
                     Ltd.                                                      Shinamanagal
          03.30 PM   Ms. Tara Baskota, Director, Kanchanjangha Tea Estate      kte@organic.wlink.com    4493303
                     & Research Centre Pvt. Ltd.                               .np                      4469503
                                                                               Shinamanagl
          05.00 PM   Mr. Colm Halloran, Quality Infrastructure Development     Hotel Yak & Yeti         9808150228
                     Advisor, GFA Consulting Group GmbH
Thurs,    10.30 AM   Mr. Yogendra K.Karki, Project Director, Project for        Maharagunj,             4017765
20 Nov               Agriculture Commercialization and Trade (PACT)            ykkarkee@hotmail.com


                                                                                                             26
         12:00PM    Dr. Deva Bhakta Shakya, Project Coordinator, and Mr.       Mandikhatar,              9851066062
                    Madhab Karki, Policy Reform Initiative Project (PRIP)      dbshakya@gmail.com
         01.00 Pm   Mr. Bishwo Babu Pudasaini, DG, Nepal Bureau of             Balaju,                   4350818
                    Standard and Metrology , 9841440568 / 4356810                                        4350445
         03.00 PM   Mr. Prem Tiwari, Vice President, Nepal Herbs & Herbal      4462208/nehhpa@gmai       9851060062
                    Producers Association (Mr Govinda Ghimire, President),     l.com,                    9851120541
Fri,   11.00 AM     Mr. Pradeep Maharjan, Executive Director, AEC/FNCCI        info@aec-fncci.org,       4262260/45
21 Nov                                                                         Teku
         01.00 PM   Mr. Ganesh Dawadi, NTIS                                    PCO, Bhadrakali           9841364722
Sun,     9:30       Ms. Shova Basnet, MD, Zest Laboratories (P) Ltd.           Gothatar, Thimi           9851055140
23 Nov
Mon,     01.00 to   Consultation workshop with all stakeholders, Jointly       PCO N F C Building,       4267534
24 Nov   4.00PM     organized by MOAD and NIRTTP of MOCS.                      Bhadrakali
Tues,    06.00AM    Departure to Birgunj
25 Nov
          01.00 PM Meeting with Mr. Animesh Kumar, Himalayan Terminal ICD and ICP Syrsiya                  9855026969
          02.00 PM Meeting with Mr. Moti Lal Shah, SPS Inspector, Plant      ICD Syrsiya                   9804216219
                    Q.
          03.00 PM Visit sites at ICD and ICP
          04.00 PM Meeting with Customs Officials, Mr. Man Bahadur           ICD Customs Office,           9851105176
                    Poudel and Mr. Harihar Poudel                            Syrsiya                       9742043797
Wed, 8.00AM         Meetings with Mr. Bijaya Khanal, Chief, DFTQC, Food Birgunj Border Area                9845289672
26 Nov              Quarantine Office,
          9.30 AM Meeting with Dr. Hareram Yadav,Chief Animal                Animal Quarantine
                    Quarantime, Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Chief Check post, and      Office, Birgunj
                    Mr. Dhanai Prasad Yadav, Fisheries Officer
          11.00 AM Meeting with Mr. Shankar Neupane (PQO), Plant             Birgunj Border                9841607670
                    Quarantine Office and Mr. Jhalaknath Kandel, S.Agri      Customs                       9845671372
                    Ext. Officer (National Plant Quarantine Office)
          12.00 PM Meeting with Mr. Gopal Khatri, Chief Customs Officer      Birgunj Customs               9851092382
Thurs, 06.00AM Travel back to Kathmandu
27 Nov
Fri,      11.30 M   Briefing to Dr. Dinesh Prasad Parajuli, Joint Secretary, Singha Durbar                 Postponedii
28 Nov              and Dr. Pradyumna Pandey, Under Secretary at MoAD
          12.30 PM Briefing to Mr. Jibraj Koirala, Joint Secretary, MOCS     Singha Durbar                 Postponedii
          01.30 PM Wrap up and general discussion at PCO office with         PCO                           Postponedii
                    Project Coordinator, PM/TA
Notes:
i
   The team members comprised of Mr. Kees Van Der Meer, WB Laboratory Expert; and Mr. Murari P.Gautam
Upadhya, Project Manager/Technical Adviser, NIRTTP.
ii
   Mr. Murari P.Gautam Upadhya to complete all the postponed briefing meetings to the Joint Secretaries in the
MoAD and MoCS after draft report is submitted.




                                                                                                                27
Annex II. Nepal Export and Import 2013
Table II.1 Nepal's Exports of Agricultural, Food, and Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Products - 2013
 S.N.   HS Code      Product Name                                       Unit   Quantity       Value(USD)
 1      09083010     Cardamom                                           Kg.       2,914,470
                                                                                                28,211,343
 2      20099000     Mixture of juices                                  Ltr      34,376,568
                                                                                                25,054,999
 3      09024000     Black tea fermented                                Kg.      10,805,321
                                                                                                21,609,279
 4      09083110     Big Cardamon (Alaichi)                             Kg.       2,403,939
                                                                                                20,153,948
 5      07134000     Lentils                                            Kg.      13,323,172
                                                                                                18,151,830
 6      08029000     Betelnuts                                          Kg.      10,420,723
                                                                                                17,043,942
 7      20091100     Frozen orange juice                                Ltr      12,795,315
                                                                                                10,079,631
 8      24039910     Jarda~ Khaini~ Snuff~ Ghutka and similar           Kg.       2,210,655
                     preparations containing chewing tobacco                                     9,390,712
 9      12119090     Plants and parts of plants ( including seeds and   Kg.       5,060,183
                     fruits) of a kind used primarily in perfumery~                              9,159,304
                     in pharmacy or for insecticidal or similar
                     purposes
 10     09101000     Ginger                                             Kg.      27,824,777
                                                                                                 7,255,995
 11     19021900     Uncooked pasta~ not stuffed or otherwise           Kg.       5,510,197
                     prepared                                                                    6,859,847
 12     23064100     Oil-cake and other solid residues of low erucic    Kg.      24,748,550
                     acid rape or colza seeds                                                    6,076,861
 13     21069020     Panmasala plain                                    Kg.       1,370,286
                                                                                                 5,493,901
 14     02023000     Meat of bovine animals~ frozen~ boneless           Kg.       4,125,053
                                                                                                 5,424,116
 15     20097100     Apple juice of a Brix value not exceeding 20       Ltr       8,415,045
                                                                                                 4,935,166
 16     01029000     Bovine animal ( Buffalo)                           Pcs.        125,919
                                                                                                 4,182,305
 17     20094100     Pineapple juice~ of a Brix value not exceeding     Ltr       6,315,834
                     20                                                                          3,904,951
 18     14049020     Vegetable products (khayar kattha)                 Kg.         738,300
                                                                                                 3,370,598
 19     15159000     Fixed vegetable fats and oil                       Kg.       3,200,854
                                                                                                 2,298,443
 20     14049012     Catechu of acacia (Kathas)                         Kg.         346,000
                                                                                                 2,072,166
 21     23091000     Dog or cat food                                    Kg.         193,512
                                                                                                 1,815,710
 22     4059000      Fats and oils derived from milk                    Kg.         466,542
                                                                                                 1,548,252
 23     23024000     Bran~ sharps~ and other residues of cereals        Kg.      10,747,764
                                                                                                 1,278,182
 24     09101110     Ginger~ fresh                                      Kg.       7,678,414
                                                                                                 1,190,473


                                                                                                           28
 S.N.      HS Code    Product Name                                       Unit        Quantity       Value(USD)
 25        23023000   Wheat bran                                         Kg.            4,740,485
                                                                                                       1,121,734
                                              Sub-Total 25 products                                  217,683,688
 26        9109990    Spices                                             Kg.            1,400,872
                                                                                                        889,152
 27        12119000   Plants and parts of plants ( including seeds and   Kg.              756,461
                      fruits) of a kind used primarily in perfumery~                                    884,282
                      in pharmacy or for insecticidal or similar
                      purposes
 28        14049011   Semi-prossed Catechu of acacia (liquid Kattha)     Kg.              238,830
                                                                                                        789,679
 29        23099090   Preparations of a kind used in animal feedings     Kg.              360,000
                                                                                                        784,251
 30        12119010   Yarchagumba                                        Kg.                  274
                                                                                                        710,708
 31        21069010   Dalmott~ papad~ salted bhujiya and chamena         Kg.              616,033
                                                                                                        687,684
 32        11010000   Wheat flour                                        Kg.            1,935,233
                                                                                                        648,573
 33        24039100   Homogenised or reconstituted tobacco               Kg.              148,682
                                                                                                        617,715
 34        02021000   Meats of bovine animals~ caracasses and half-      Kg.              872,540
                      caracasses~ frozen                                                                574,571
 35        09061100   Cinnamon (Cunnamomum zeylanicum Blume)             Kg.              722,715
                                                                                                        561,566
 36        20092100   Grapefruit (including pomelo) juice~ of a Brix     Ltr              812,772
                      value not exceeding 20                                                             542,530
                                              Sub-Total 36 products                                  225,374,399
                                                        Grand total
                                                                                                     234,923,940
 Source: Export Import Trade Data Bank, Trade and Export Promotion Centre,
 www.tepc.gov.np


Table II.2. Nepal’s Imports of Agricultural, Food, and Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Products – 2013
            Product
 S.N.                 Product Name (Covered by HS 01 to 24)                Unit          Quantity    Value(USD)
               Code
      1    15071000   Crude soyabean oil                                       Kg.    139,623,685    152,610,348
                      Semi milled or wholly milled rice~ whether or
      2    10063000                                                            Kg.    247,537,401     99,703,014
                      not polished or glazed
       3   10059000   Maize corn                                               Kg.    207,235,767     52,442,342
       4   10061000   Rice in the husk                                         Kg.    216,305,229     49,420,292
       5   23040000   Oil cakes                                                Kg.     76,174,711     48,943,747
       6    8029000   Betelnuts                                                Kg.     53,634,082     46,528,530
       7   15111000   Crude palm oil                                           Kg.     46,573,989     39,514,973
       8    7019000   Potatoes~ fresh or chilled                               Kg.    214,273,497     35,031,550
       9   21069040   Concentrate of non-alcoholic soft drinks                 Kg.      8,736,557     27,766,401
      10   24012000   Tobacco~ partly or wholly stemmed/stripped               Kg.      8,045,608     23,612,053
      11   12051000   Low erucic acid rape or colza seeds                      Kg.     37,263,985     22,899,320
      12   23099000   Preparations of a kind used in animal feeding            Kg.     19,250,861     21,057,842
      13   12075000   Mustard seeds                                            Kg.     38,329,064     19,961,340
      14    7031000   Onions and shallots                                      Kg.     80,829,226     19,797,431
      15   12010000   Soya beans~ whether or not broken                        Kg.     26,855,149     18,421,809

                                                                                                                 29
        Product
S.N.              Product Name (Covered by HS 01 to 24)                Unit    Quantity    Value(USD)
           Code
 16     8081000   Apples~ fresh                                        Kg.    56,827,596    17,509,844
 17    19019000   Malt extracts                                        Kg.     7,433,260    17,136,066
 18    15121100   Crude sunflower oil                                  Kg.    16,444,880    13,677,216
 19     1042000   Goats                                                Pcs.      460,260    13,382,974
 20     7139000   Dried leguminous vegetables                          Kg.    21,003,586    12,946,804
 21    22029000   Water~ non alcoholic beverages                        Ltr   13,236,644    11,984,960
 22    19053100   Sweet biscuits                                       Kg.     9,019,696    11,967,362
 23     7131000   Dried peas                                           Kg.    21,154,142    11,283,536
 24     7132000   Chickpeas                                            Kg.    16,597,771    11,158,786
 25    17049000   Sugar confectionery not containing cocoa             Kg.     5,132,260    10,933,802
 26    12019000   Soya beans~ whether or not broken                    Kg.    16,727,856    10,709,418
 27     7134000   Lentils                                              Kg.    16,457,313    10,679,302
 28    17011490   Cane sugar                                           Kg.    18,689,694    10,340,485
 29    18069000   Chocolate in blocks~ slab or bars                    Kg.     1,970,851     9,928,684
 30     8028000   Areca nuts                                           Kg.    11,036,826     9,779,230
 31     9041100   Pepper~ neither crushed nor ground                   Kg.     1,318,458     9,605,079
                  Plants and parts of plants ( including seeds and
 32    12119000   fruits) of a kind used primarily in perfumery~ in    Kg.     2,261,861     7,407,380
                  pharmacy or for insecticidal or similar purposes
 33    10011000   Durum wheat                                          Kg.    25,859,564     6,923,616
                  Sugar~ raw not containing added flavouring or
 34    17011110                                                        Kg.    11,176,466     6,893,198
                  colouring matter
 35    10019000   Wheat and meslin                                     Kg.    27,587,474     6,770,447
 36     9083090   Cardamom~ Small~ Sukumel                             Kg.     1,712,995     6,739,792
 37    22083090   Whiskies                                             Ltr       516,900     6,353,640
                  Undenaturated ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic
 38    22071000                                                         Ltr    7,771,105     6,162,897
                  strength by volume of 80% or higher
 39    11010000   Wheat flour                                          Kg.    17,430,285     5,412,447
 40     3019900   Live fish                                            Kg.     7,372,121     5,336,210
 41    12011000   Soya beans~ seed                                     Kg.     8,126,281     5,297,668
 42     9093000   Cumin seeds                                          Kg.     3,144,025     5,271,024
 43    15119000   Palm oil                                             Kg.     5,403,060     5,094,225
                                               Sub-total 43 products                       944,397,084
 44    10064000   Broken rice                                          Kg.    22,897,805     4,795,197
 45    21069090   Food preparations                                    Kg.     2,061,664     4,635,427
                  Milk and cream in powdered and granules of a fat
 46    4022900    content by weight exceeding 1.5% containing          Kg.      963,001      4,616,847
                  sugar or added sweetening matter
 47     9101000   Ginger                                               Kg.    12,270,593     4,594,544
 48    21069010   Dalmott~ papad~ salted bhujiya and chamena           Kg.     2,808,442     4,185,774
                  Vegetable products (including unroasted chicory
 49    12129900   roots of the variety Cichorium intybus sativum)      Kg.    72,624,202     4,135,551
                  of a kind used primary for human consumption
 50    17041000   Chewing gum                                          Kg.     1,491,980     3,644,945
 51     9093100   Seeds of cumin~ neither crushed nor ground           Kg.     2,228,365     3,611,081
 52    19011000   Preparations for infant use                          Kg.     1,141,259     3,540,254
                  Edible mixtures and preparations of animal or
 53    15179000                                                        Kg.     3,646,790     3,406,214
                  vegetable fats or oil
                  Alcoholic fluids including spirits used as raw
 54    22085010                                                         Ltr     235,107      3,348,783
                  materials of Gin and Geneva
 55    21039000   Sauces                                               Kg.     1,269,759     3,328,107
 56    20089910   Fruit pulp                                           Kg.     4,498,536     3,209,660

                                                                                                    30
       Product
S.N.              Product Name (Covered by HS 01 to 24)               Unit    Quantity    Value(USD)
          Code
 57    7032000    Garlic                                              Kg.     6,108,824     3,017,653
                  Fruits of the genus capsicum or of the genus
 58    9042000                                                        Kg.     3,395,524     2,798,990
                  pimenta~ dried or crushed or ground
 59     1051900   Live poultry weighing not more than 185g            Kg.      237,848      2,723,110
 60    19059020   Potatoes chips                                      Kg.      616,835      2,668,031
                   Fruits of the genus Capsicum or of the genus
 61    9042100                                                        Kg.     2,622,286     2,645,965
                  Pimenta~ Dried~ neither~crushed or ground
 62     8109000   Fresh fruit                                         Kg.     6,201,189     2,537,850
 63    20099000   Mixture of juices                                   Ltr     3,923,573     2,485,976
 64    10019900   Wheat and meslin                                    Kg.     8,917,489     2,483,982
 65    10011900   Durum wheat                                         Kg.     8,849,375     2,462,012
 66     8011100   Desiccated coconut                                  Kg.     2,448,676     2,454,311
                  Beans (Vigna spp.~ phaseolus spp.)~ shelled~
 67    7133900                                                        Kg.     3,877,268     2,451,856
                  whether or not skinned or split
 68    11071000   Malt~ not roasted                                   Kg.     5,014,225     2,436,756
 69    21069060   Kurkure~ kurmure~ lays & Similar goods              Kg.       699,459     2,433,391
 70    12099100   Vegetable seeds                                     Kg.       275,390     2,430,004
 71    10019100   Wheat and meslin~ seed                              Kg.     9,375,458     2,385,793
 72    15121900   Sunflower oil                                       Kg.     1,377,830     2,326,814
                  Glucose and glucose syrup not containing
 73    17023000   fructose or containing in dry state less than 20%   Kg.     3,321,960     2,325,860
                  by weight of fructose
 74     8059000   Citrus fruits                                       Kg.    11,116,246     2,280,090
 75     8061000   Fresh Grapes                                        Kg.    12,006,129     2,277,001
 76    10011100   Durum wheat~ seed                                   Kg.     8,631,620     2,211,166
 77    15020000   Fats of bovine animal~ sheep or goats               Kg.     3,010,794     2,199,222
                  Protein concentrate and textured protein
 78    21061000                                                       Kg.      324,558      2,121,003
                  substance
                  Flour~ meals and pellets of fish or of
 79    23012000                                                       Kg.     2,786,071     2,113,561
                  crustaceanes
 80    10051000   Maize seeds                                         Kg.     1,368,796     2,055,993
 81     8051000   Oranges                                             Kg.     9,849,477     2,023,644
 82    19059090   Bakers wares                                        Kg.       724,529     1,920,857
                  Bean of the species vigna mungo~ Hepper or
 83    7133100                                                        Kg.     2,818,695     1,886,614
                  vigna radiata Wilczek
 84    21011100   Extracts~ essences and concentrates                 Kg.       151,988     1,885,842
 85    11090000   Wheat gluten                                        Kg.     1,220,255     1,710,094
 86    12024200   Ground-nuts~ shelled                                Kg.     1,706,251     1,706,682
 87    22041000   Sparkling wine                                      Ltr.      539,488     1,679,220
 88     4051000   Butter                                              Kg.       610,476     1,655,773
 89    10082900   Millet                                              Kg.     6,513,595     1,605,057
 90     9092000   Seeds of coriander                                  Kg.     2,139,836     1,588,913
 91    10082000   Millet                                              Kg.     8,151,178     1,559,480
 92     8013200   Cashew nuts shelled                                 Kg.       354,066     1,544,857
                  Milk and cream in powder~ granules or other
 93    4021000    solid form~ of a fat content~ by weight~ not        Kg.      584,139      1,533,926
                  exceeding 1.5%
 94    7099000    Vegetables~ fresh or chilled                        Kg.    13,110,928     1,505,651
 95    8021200    Almonds~ shelled                                    Kg.       253,290     1,406,231
 96    9092100    Seeds of coriander~ neither crushed nor ground      Kg.     1,617,127     1,363,240
 97    8041000    Dates                                               Kg.     2,503,249     1,355,437


                                                                                                   31
        Product
S.N.               Product Name (Covered by HS 01 to 24)            Unit     Quantity     Value(USD)
          Code
                   Lemons (Citrus limon~ citrus limonum) and
  98    8055000                                                       Kg.    4,092,443      1,296,335
                   limes (Citrus aurantifolia~ Citrus latifolia )
  99     8045000 Mangoes                                              Kg.   10,838,709      1,286,581
 100 24039100 Homogenised or reconstituted tobacco                    Kg.      546,721      1,220,470
 101 11031100 Groats and meals of wheat                               Kg.    3,778,604      1,206,661
 102 21041000 Soups and broths and preparations thereof               Kg.      196,926      1,181,934
 103     8013100 Cashew nuts in shell                                 Kg.      295,026      1,178,688
                   Milk and cream~ not concentrated nor containing
                   added sugar or other sweetening matter of a fat
 104     4012000                                                      Kg.    2,480,740      1,174,357
                   content~ by weight~ exceeding 1% but not
                   exceeding 6%
 105 23061000 Oil-cake and other solid residues of cotton seed        Kg.    5,843,427       1,085,168
 106 23024000 Bran~ sharps~ and other residues of cereals             Kg.    7,489,975       1,028,188
 107 19053200 Waffles and wafers                                      Kg.      249,736       1,025,686
 108 24039930 Cut tobacco~ dust tobacco not for retail sale           Kg.      593,141       1,015,832
 109     8011900 Cocunuts                                             Kg.    3,709,668       1,006,645
                                             Sub-total 109 products                      1,095,413,921
                                                   Total all products                    1,160,975,862
Source: Export Import Trade Data Bank, Trade and Export Promotion Centre,
www.tepc.gov.np




                                                                                                    32
Annex II Table II.3. Total trade share by customs checkpoint
                              Total trade (%)                Subject to SPS controls*
Checkpoint              Export %         Import %            export %        import %
Biratnagar                  34               13                   37              16
Birgunj                     25               41                    7              45
Dryport Birgunj             3                10                    2              13
T.I. Airport                21               11                    8              1
Mechi                       7                 3                   20              5
Tatopani                    2                 3                    4              1
Bhairahawa                  5                15                    2              20
         Sub-total                                               100             100
Nepalgunj                   2                 3
Krishnanagar                1                 1
Kailali                     1                 1
Other Customs               0                 1
Total                      100              100
* includes agricultural products and food only (HS codes 1-24); timber and other plant
products not included


 Annex Table II.4. Export and import by major checkpoint
                                                           of which subject to SPS controls*
                           total (US$'000)
                                                            US$'000                       %
 checkpoint                 export         import      export         import      export     import
 Biratnagar                300,714        856,849      84,488        171,500         28.1        20.0
 Birgunj                   218,366      2,792,049      61,019        467,678         27.9        16.8
 Birgunj dry port           21,730        643,139       3,694        131,873         17.0        20.5
 T Intern Airport          184,658        740,784      18,269           7,599         9.9         1.0
 Mechi                      64,735        220,215      45,267          46,890        69.9        21.3
 Tatopani                   15,250        189,731       9,021          14,924        59.2         7.9
 Bhairahawa                 44,658        984,570       4,675        208,966         10.5        21.2
 Total                     850,111      6,427,337     226,433      1,049,430         26.6        16.3
 * includes agricultural products and food only (HS codes 1-24); timber and other plant products not
 included




                                                                                                        33
Annex II Table II.5. Main export products subject to SPS* at main customs checkpoints

Checkpoint           Main export products
Biratnagar           Meat                                      Mechi          Live animals
                     Fresh Vegetables                                         Fresh Vegetables
                     lentils                                                  Lentils
                     plants and parts of plants                               Green and black tea
                     vegetable products                                       Ginger
                     betel nuts                                               Vegetable seeds
                     fresh fruits                                             Plants and parts
                     black tea                                                Wheat bran
                     pasta                                                    Oil cakes
                     biscuits
                     cinnamon
                     Cardamom
                     Ginger
                     papad
                     brans
                     oil cakes
Bhairahawa           cinnamon
                     ginger
                     spices
                     buck wheat
                     uncooked pasta
                     plants and parts of plants
                     and oil cakes
                     brans
                     macadam
Birgunj              meat
                     fresh/dried vegetables
                     lentils
                     fresh fruits
                     coffee
                     green tea
                     ginger
                     spices
                     veg and oil seeds
                     plants and parts of plants
                     pasta
                     prepared foods
                     fruit fuice
                     pan masala
                     catechu of acacia
                     soapnuts
                     veg oils
                     cane molasses
                     oil cakes
T I Airport          live plants, bubs,
                     coffee and tea
                     pan masala
* includes agricultural products and food only (HS codes 1-24); timber and other plant products not included




                                                                                                               34
Annex III. Regional spread of DFTQC, DLS, PQO, DPR
Figure III.A




Figure III.B




                                                     35
Figure III.C




Figure III.D




               36
