 PHILIPPINES: LESSONS LEARNED FROM YOLANDA - An Assessment of the Post-Yolanda Short
      and Medium-Term Recovery and Rehabilitation Interventions of the Government

                                                                  POLICY NOTE

Table of Contents
Acronyms ........................................................................................................................................iii
I.      Background ............................................................................................................................... 1
II.        Findings from the Assessment ................................................................................................ 2
III.        Shortlist of Issues and Bottlenecks ........................................................................................ 3
IV.        Key Recommendations .......................................................................................................... 5
      A. Establish a More Responsive National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Agency or
          Department....................................................................................................................................... 5
      B. Institutionalize a Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework ................................................ 5
      C. Institutionalize an Effective Coordination Structure and Mechanisms............................................. 7
      D. Identify Implementation Modalities and Strategies to Speed Up Rehabilitation and Recovery
          Interventions................................................................................................................................... 12
      E. Develop an effective Emergency Procurement Guide .................................................................... 15
      F. Identify Funding Options for Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery ............................................... 17
      G. Develop Standards for Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Communications ............................ 24
Annex A. Findings on the Assessment ......................................................................................... 25
Annex B. Philippine Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework based on
                  Global and Local Good Practice and Experience from Past Disasters .......................... 28
Annex C. Proposed Pre-Disaster Activities ................................................................................... 30
Annex D. Guide for Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Planning ............................................ 35
Annex E. Coordination Structure and Institutional Arrangement for
                  Rehabilitation and Recovery......................................................................................... 40
Annex F. Interface of the National, Regional, and Local Government ......................................... 41
Annex G. Rehabilitation and Recovery Clusters .......................................................................... 42
Annex H. Modalities of Programs Scaled Up in Disaster Affected Areas .................................... 44
Annex I. Public-Private Partnership Arrangements ...................................................................... 49
Annex J. Standards for Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Communications ........................ 51
References .................................................................................................................................... 54



                                                                                                                                                            i
Tables
          Table 4. 1 Pros and Cons of Recovery-Specific and Planning Agencies' Participation in Recovery . 8
          Table 4. 2 Examples of Programs Scaled Up in DIsaster Affected Areas ....................................... 13
          Table AB. 1 Sector Outcome (Medium Term) ……………………………………………………………………………28
          Table AC. 1 Data Requirements ………………………………………………………………………………………..….….30
          Table AD. 1 Rapid Post Disaster Assessment………………………………………………………………………….….36
          Table AD. 2 Sample Timetable for Phasing of Activities ................................................................ 38
          Table AD. 3 Sample of Total Investment Requirement per Sector ................................................ 38
          Table AD. 4 Sample List of PPAs with Funding Source and Implementation Period ..................... 39
          Table AG. 1 Rehabilitation and Recovery Clusters - National Level……………………………………………43

Boxes
          Box 4. 1 Examples of Coordination Structures and Institutional Arrangements in
                   Other Countries ................................................................................................................ 11
          Box 4. 2 Examples of NGA Program for LGU Implementation in Other Countries ........................ 13
          Box 4. 3 LGU to LGU Collaboration ................................................................................................ 14
          Box 4. 4 Examples of Fast-tracked Procurement in Other Countries ............................................ 16
          Box 4. 5 GAA-Specific Funds for Disasters ..................................................................................... 18
          Box 4. 6 Types of ODA .................................................................................................................... 19
          Box AA. 1 Findings on Relief/Emergency Phase…………………………………………………………………………25
          Box AA. 2 Findings on Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework, Institutional Arrangements
                    and Other Cross-cutting Policies.................................................................................... 25
          Box AA. 3 Findings on Use of and Access to Government Funds .................................................. 26
          Box AA. 4 Findings on Output of Selected Programs and Projects and the Successful
                    Implementation Modalities ........................................................................................... 27
          Box AA. 5 Findings on Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms ................................................... 27
          Box AD. 1 Example of Guding Principles……………………………………………………………………………………37
          Box AH. 1 Examples of Regular Agency Programs……………………………………………………………..……..44
          Box AH. 2 Examples of Philippine NGA Programs for LGU Implementation ................................. 45
          Box AJ. 1 Various Communication Channels………………………………………………………………………………52

Figures
          Figure 4. 1 Post Disaster Budget Review ....................................................................................... 17
          Figure 4. 2 List of Municipal Development Fund - Second Generation Fund ................................ 22
          Figure 4. 3 Elements of Rehabilitation and Recovery Financing.................................................... 22
          Figure 4. 4 Overlap between Public and Private Funding .............................................................. 23
          Figure 4. 5 Timeframe for Use of Allocated Resources ................................................................. 23
          Figure AB. 1 Philippine Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework…………………………………29
          Figure AD. 1 Sample Monitoring Template……………………………………………………………………………….39
          Figure AE. 1 Coordination Structure for Rehabilitation and Recovery……………………………………….40
          Figure AH. 1 Menu of Post Disaster Permanent Shelter Options……………………………………………….46
          Figure AJ. 1 Sample Communications Snapshot for Rehabilitation and Recovery Issues…………...53




                                                                                                                                                     ii
Acronyms
      4Ps       Pantawid Pamilya Pilipino Program
      ABC       Approved Budget of the Contract
      ADB       Asian Development Bank
      ADM       Assistance to Disadvantaged Municipalities
      AFP       Armed Forces of the Philippines
      AM        Assistance to Municipalities
      BAC       Bids and Awards Committee
      BDRRMC    Barangay Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
      BFAR      Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
      BLGF      Bureau of Local Government Finance
      BUB       Bottom-Up Budgeting
      CAT-DDO   Catastrophe Deferred-Draw-Down Option
      CCT       Conditional Cash Transfer
      CDD       Community Driven Development
      CDP       Comprehensive Development Plan
      CDRRMC    City Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
      CFI       Countryside Financial Institution
      CHED      Commission on Higher Education
      CLUP      Comprehensive Land Use Plan
      COA       Commission on Audit
      CRRP      Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan
      CSCAND    Collective Strengthening on Community Awareness on Natural Disasters
      CSO       Civil Society Organization
      CSR       Corporate Social Responsibility
      DA        Department of Agriculture
      DAR       Department of Agrarian Reform
      DBP       Development Bank of the Philippines
      DaLA      Damage and Loss Assessment
      DBM       Department of Budget and Management
      DENR      Department of Environment and Natural Resources
      DepEd     Department of Education
      DICT      Department of Information and Communications Technology
      DILG      Department of Interior and Local Government
      DND       Department of National Defense
      DOE       Department of Energy
      DOF       Department of Finance
      DOH       Department of Health
      DOJ       Department of Justice
      DOST      Department of Science and Technology
      DOT       Department of Tourism
      DOTr      Department of Transportation

                                                                                       iii
DPWH           Department of Public Works and Highways
DRFI           Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance
DRM DPL        Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Loan
DROM           Disaster Response Operational Modality
DRRM           Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
DSWD           Department of Social Welfare and Development
DTI            Department of Trade and Industry
ES             Evacuation Shelter
EU             European Union
GAA            General Appropriations Act
GFI            Government Financial Institution
GOCC           Government-Owned and Controlled Corporation
GoP            Government of the Philippines
GPPB           Government Procurement Policy Board
GSIS           Government Service Insurance System
HLURB          Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board
HOPE           Head of Procuring Entity
HRNA           Human Recovery Needs Assessment
HUDCC          Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council
IAHE           Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation
ICC            Investment Coordination Committee
IRA            Internal Revenue Allotment
IRR            Implementing Rules and Regulations
JICA           Japan International Cooperation Authority
JMC            Joint Memorandum Circular
Kalahi CIDSS   Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan – Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of
               Social Services
LDRRM          Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
LDRRMC         Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
LDRRMF         Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Fund
LDRRMO         Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office
LGSF           Local Government Support Fund
LGU            Local Government Unit
LWUA           Local Water Utilities Authority
MDF            Municipal Development Fund
MDFO           Municipal Development Fund Office
MDRRMC         Municipal Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
MDTF           Multi Donor Trust Fund
MGB            Mines and Geosciences Bureau
MSME           Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
NAMRIA         National Mapping and Resource Information Authority
NAPC           National Anti-Poverty Commission

                                                                                           iv
NCDDP      National Community Driven Development Program
NCIP       National Commission on Indigenous Peoples
NDRRM      National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
NDRRMC     National Disaster Risk Reduction Management Council
NDRRMP     National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plan
NEA        National Electrification Authority
NEDA       National Economic and Development Authority
NHA        National Housing Authority
NIA        National Irrigation Authority
NFA        National Food Authority
NGA        National Government Agency
NGO        Non-Government Organization
OCD        Office of Civil Defense
OCS        Office of the Cabinet Secretary
ODA        Official Development Assistance
OES        Office of the Executive Secretary
OPAPP      Office of Presidential Adviser on Peace Process
OPARR      Office of Presidential Assistant for Rehabilitation and Recovery
PAGASA     Philippine Atmospheric Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration
PAGIBIG    Pagtutulungan sa Kinabukasan: Ikaw, Bangko, Industriya at Gobyerno
PCA        Philippine Coconut Authority
PCAB       Philippine Contractors Accreditation Board
PCIC       Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation
PCOO       Presidential Communications Operations Office
PDRRMC     Provincial Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
PDNA       Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
PDP        Philippine Development Plan
PDRF       Philippine Disaster Recovery Foundation
PHIVOLCS   Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology
PMS        Presidential Management Staff
PO         Private Organization
PPAs       Programs, Projects and Activities
PPP        Public-Private Partnership
PSA        Philippine Statistics Authority
PSMDF      Private Sector Multi-Donor Fund
QRF        Quick Response Fund
RA         Republic Act
RAY        Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda – Build Back Better
RAY I4R    Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda –Implementation for Result
RDC        Regional Development Council
RDRRMC     Regional Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
RPMC       Regional Project Monitoring Committees

                                                                                         v
SFF        Small Farmer and Fisherfolk
SHFC       Social Housing Finance Corporation
SME        Small and Medium Enterprise
SP         Sub-Project
SUCs       State University and Colleges
TESDA      Technical Education and Skills Development Authority
TMG        Technical Management Group
TS         Transitional Sheltering
UN ECLAC   United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
UNISDR     United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
IRP        International Recovery Platform




                                                                                    vi
     PHILIPPINES: LESSONS LEARNED FROM YOLANDA - An Assessment of the Post-Yolanda Short
          and Medium-Term Recovery and Rehabilitation Interventions of the Government

                                                 POLICY NOTE

I.     Background

 1. The Philippines is increasingly exposed and vulnerable to natural hazards, which undermines poverty
    reduction and long-term growth. Typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan), which struck the Philippines in 2013, is
    considered the strongest typhoon1 ever to make landfall. Typhoon Yolanda has caused over 6,300
    reported fatalities and an additional 2.3 million people were estimated to have fallen below the
    poverty line. The total damage and loss was estimated at PHP 571.1 billion (USD 12.9 billion)
    hampering economic growth by about 0.9 % in 2013, and another 0.3 % in 2014.2 Considering that
    Typhoon Yolanda was declared a level 3 category by the United Nations, it brought about several
    issues on the disaster governance aspect. The event highlighted the following major issues on the
    side of government and all other non-government actors: coordination at all levels, aid transparency
    and accountability, systems and protocols for donations and assistance, conduct of post-disaster
    needs assessment, recovery planning, implementation, monitoring, and communications.

 2. In the aftermath of Yolanda, several donor-financed studies and assessments were undertaken on
    the response of government. However, the documentation is limited on certain areas where the
    donors were engaged in. Bits and pieces of post-disaster response and recovery recommendations
    were provided, but there was no consolidated assessment of the overall Post-Yolanda recovery
    efforts of government. Four years after Typhoon Yolanda, government emphasized the need to
    conduct an objective assessment of the overall post-disaster recovery and rehabilitation
    interventions. The Government of the Philippines (GoP) through the National Economic and
    Development Authority (NEDA) requested for strategic recommendations that are operational,
    practical and applicable at the national and sub-national level to address the recovery issues and
    bottlenecks and speed up implementation in future reconstruction efforts.

 3. In response to the government’s request, the team conducted an assessment of specific aspects of
    the country’s short and medium-term recovery from the disaster. It was done through a review of
    official reports, studies and analytical work done by key government agencies, development
    partners and other stakeholders.

 4. The Phase I of the analytical work involved a rapid assessment of government and stakeholders’
    interventions in the relief/emergency phase, recovery and rehabilitation phases using some of the
    available documents such as the IAHE, Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda (RAY) – Build Back

 1 Typhoon Yolanda caused over 6,300 fatalities and additional 2.3 million people were estimated to have fallen below
 the poverty line. The total damage and loss from the event was estimated at PhP571.1 Billion (equivalent to US$12.9
 Billion) hampering economic growth by about 0.9% in 2013, and another 0.3% in 2014 (Reconstruction Assistance on
 Yolanda “RAY? in 2013).
 2
   The Government of the Philippines. 2013. Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda.

                                                                                                                   1
      Better, Yolanda Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA), RAY Implementation for Results, Yolanda
      Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan (CRRP), and the Monitoring and Progress Reports
      of NEDA and the key agencies.

  5. The Phase I output is a Report that contains a snapshot of the Post-Yolanda recovery and
     reconstruction initiatives, issues and bottlenecks. Then, several brainstorming sessions and
     roundtable discussions were organized with NEDA and concerned government agencies, local
     government units, development partners, private sector, and other stakeholders to identify key
     rehabilitation and recovery issues and bottlenecks experienced in Typhoon Yolanda and previous
     disasters. The sessions were also done to validate findings from the assessment.

  6. From a long list of rehabilitation and recovery issues and bottlenecks in the Phase I Report, NEDA
     and concerned government agencies through several consultation meetings decided to focus on a
     few major issues that this analytical work will focus on for Phase II.

  7. In Phase II, the analytical work output is this consolidated set of recommendations, lessons learned
     from Yolanda and previous disasters, and global good practice to help national and local
     government and other stakeholders to rapidly and effectively recover from disasters. To the extent
     possible, the recommendations include the development of practical solutions and operational tools
     such as disaster rehabilitation and recovery framework/guide, emergency procurement guidelines,
     guide for the conduct of rapid post disaster assessments, post-disaster shelter recovery policy
     framework, implementation strategies, among others. The development and institutionalization of
     these frameworks mentioned above are to some extent mandated by existing laws and issuances or
     are recommended based on lessons learned from previous disasters but have not yet been done.

  8. This policy note would address rehabilitation and recovery efforts for natural disasters i.e. typhoons,
     earthquakes, storm surges, flooding, tsunamis, among others. To some extent possible, it could also
     be used for slow onset events such as El Nino and La Nina. The policy note could also be adopted to
     the extent applicable for human-induced disasters such as post-conflict rehabilitation and recovery.
     This would facilitate continued dialogue with government counterparts and relevant stakeholders. It
     complements the other technical assistance provided by the Bank under the 2nd DRM Development
     Policy Loan with Catastrophe Deferred-Draw-Down Option and the overall DRM engagement.

II.   Findings from the Assessment

  9. The assessment resulted in findings specifically on the relief/emergency phase, rehabilitation and
     recovery framework, institutional arrangements, and other cross-cutting policies, use of and access
     to government funds, monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, and output of selected programs and
     projects and the successful implementation modalities. The findings range from the need:
      to institutionalize coordination mechanisms among government and stakeholders at every
         phase of the rehabilitation and recovery intervention;



                                                                                                           2
          to establish sound rehabilitation and recovery policies, effective implementation arrangements,
           and pre-disaster baseline data;
        to develop and institutionalize a standard disaster rehabilitation and recovery framework for
           government and other stakeholders;
        to strengthen DRRM institutions and promote transparency and accountability by developing an
           effective communications strategy and interoperable monitoring systems; and
        to review and identify available financing/resources, guidelines on access to and use of funds,
           and emergency procurement procedures.
       The details of the findings from the assessment are found in Annex A.

III.   Shortlist of Issues and Bottlenecks

   10. Based on all the findings from the initial assessment and three (3) extensive roundtable discussion
       sessions with government agencies and stakeholders, it was agreed that the analytical work and
       policy note would focus on the following priority issues and lessons learned:

       A. With the scale and impact of Typhoon Yolanda, the “NDRRM Council-structure? was not an
          appropriate vehicle for coordinating a response, rehabilitation and recovery effort. The
          current Philippine DRRM Law prescribes a council-structure composed of 42 member agencies
          that is limited to coordination, policy-making, and oversight/advisory roles. The implementation
          of response, recovery and rehabilitation programs and projects is not integrated and cohesive. It
          is based on the respective mandates of the member agencies. With several major disasters,
          experience has shown that the existing law is not sufficient and the current structure has limited
          authority, resources and staff capacity to address the impact, scale and rapidly evolving DRM
          issues. Thus, there is a need to establish a National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
          (NDRRM) agency with stronger mandate to coordinate, plan, finance, implement, and monitor
          all DRRM interventions – prevention and mitigation, preparedness, response, risk reduction and
          resilience, and rehabilitation and recovery. A “council-type? set-up for an NDRRM structure will
          not be able to effectively address the increasing magnitude, scale and frequency of disasters in
          the Philippines.

       B. During Yolanda, there was no standard rehabilitation and recovery policy framework. The
          post-disaster needs assessment and recovery planning stage caused confusion and undue
          burden among NGA and LGU staff. Different forms and templates which required varying
          baseline data and information were sent out by multiple agencies and had to be completed by
          the staff who were also managing the response. There is a need to develop a standard but
          flexible Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework to guide the government and
          stakeholders in the smooth transition from emergency phase to rehabilitation and recovery
          phase. It involves the conduct of rapid post-disaster assessment and recovery planning and
          budgeting, faster implementation of programs, and consistent monitoring of its progress. The
          Framework should be supported by pre-disaster activities such as database build-up for
          rehabilitation and recovery and develop science-based scenarios of disaster events. In addition,
          there is a need to design an assessment tool that builds on existing data and proceeds in a
          progressive manner so as not to burden the LGUs and communities at the recovery phase.

                                                                                                             3
C. Coordination issues in the response, rehabilitation and recovery interventions were glaring.
   The existing protocols, guidelines and mechanisms were not sufficient to address the
   magnitude and impact of the disaster. It is crucial to review existing mechanisms and protocols
   and develop systems that will take into consideration the lessons learned from the Yolanda
   experience. There is a need to revisit the roles and responsibilities of national and local
   government, and other non-government stakeholders. Coordination mechanisms on the
   interface of national government and local government, NGA/LGU with development partners,
   private sector, CSOs, academe, and communities should also be established.

D. Severe delays in the implementation of rehabilitation and recovery projects in Yolanda
   affected areas were due to a “national-centric? implementation system. The NGAs were
   mandated to implement all recovery projects in the affected areas without additional staff
   complement and funding. This task was on top of their regular agency mandates and
   deliverables. To address implementation bottlenecks and speed up recovery, it is necessary to
   adopt implementation arrangements and modalities that allows the LGUs and communities to
   actively participate and implement reconstruction projects with technical and financial support
   from NGAs. Thus, it will be useful to consolidate a list of implementation modalities/strategies
   based on existing programs that can be modified, implemented and scaled up in the aftermath
   of disasters.

E. While the Yolanda Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan and its budget was
   approved by the President, there was no clear information on the sources of funds (i.e. GAA,
   NDRRM Fund, LDRRM Fund, contributions from private sector, NGOs, and loans and grants
   from Development Partners). This caused delays in the agency budget requests and releases.
   For post-disaster recovery, it is important to develop a system that quickly identifies the
   available funding sources and financing arrangements. One that also provides options for quick
   access and use of government funds (national/local) and other available resources.

F. One of the problems faced by government in the Yolanda rehabilitation and recovery efforts is
   communications and messaging. Government was always at the defensive end struggling to
   react to recovery issues highlighted by international, national and local media. It is important
   to develop a flexible communications strategy for future rehabilitation and recovery programs
   that highlights key messages, milestones, issues management, and medium for communication
   at the international, national and local level.

G. The lack of basic guidelines on how emergency procurement is applied and an integrated
   public financial management system caused delays in the procurement and implementation of
   rehabilitation and recovery interventions. The Philippine Procurement Act and its
   Implementing Rules and Regulations provide a general provision for negotiated procurement or
   emergency procurement in times of disasters or emergency. However, the NGAs and LGUs are
   cautious in applying this mode of procurement without specific guidelines for fear of the
   Commission on Audit sanctions and disallowance.



                                                                                                      4
IV.   Key Recommendations
   Based on the issues/bottlenecks identified above, the following are suggested recommendations for the
   government and other stakeholders:

  A. Establish a More Responsive National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Agency or
     Department

  Based on the assessment and discussions with the different agencies, it is recommended that the
  government review the existing laws and, based on lessons learned from previous disasters, establish a
  stronger agency or department that will be able to effectively address the increasing scale, magnitude
  and impact of disasters in the Philippines. The agency/department must be able to mainstream disaster
  risk reduction and enhance resiliency as well as address quick disaster response and emergency
  management at the national, regional and local level. Aside from experiences from previous disasters,
  the agency models and good practices from Japan, Korea, Turkey, USA, Chile, Indonesia, among others
  could also be used by the Philippines.

  However, the Policy Note will not to pursue a detailed discussion on the recommendation to establish a
  national DRRM agency or authority and its proposed mandate and institutional arrangements because
  this covers other components that are more complex and will require more time and in-depth analysis.
  Currently, there is an ongoing mandatory review of the Philippine DRRM Law spearheaded by the
  NDRRMC. There is also an ongoing Congressional hearing on several bills that are already filed in
  Congress on the topic. Thus, NEDA and the key agencies agreed to submit the key recommendations in
  the policy note as an input to the ongoing review process and support the establishment of a stronger
  and more responsive national disaster risk reduction and management agency or department.

  B. Institutionalize a Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework

  It is important to institutionalize a standard and operational disaster rehabilitation and recovery
  framework to guide national and local government and other stakeholders. However, this framework
  should allow flexibility in consideration of varying types of disasters, its scale and impact, and capacity of
  national and local mechanisms for response, recovery and rehabilitation. The framework should also
  ensure that resilience and disaster risk reduction is integrated as an overarching principle in all the
  rehabilitation and recovery interventions and processes.

  The framework should be anchored on relevant global frameworks such as the Sendai Framework for
  Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, the Sustainable Development Goals, the United Nations Framework
  Convention on Climate Change and national policies such as RA 10121 the Philippine Disaster Risk
  Reduction and Management Act, National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Framework,
  NDRRM Plan 2011-2028, the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) and other similar frameworks.

  The disaster rehabilitation and recovery framework should adopt the goals of the medium-term plan of
  the government and ensure that there is an alignment between the disaster rehabilitation and recovery
  efforts and the national development plan. It would enable the monitoring of the impact of recovery
  activities towards achieving the goal of fully restoring economic and social conditions in disaster-
  affected areas.

  The framework would link inputs to outputs, outputs to outcomes, and outcomes to the overall goal of
  the national development plan. It is also recommended that the framework should include an

                                                                                                              5
implementation for results strategy and/or framework that is also linked to the results matrices of the
national DRRM plan and national development plan to ensure that targets are aligned and could easily
be factored in the rehabilitation and recovery targets.

In addition, sector outcome, strategies and cross-cutting policy issues should also be identified. Common
sector outcomes include livelihood and business development, agriculture, housing and settlement,
social services, and physical infrastructure. Some examples of cross-cutting policy issues that the
framework needs to consider are gender, vulnerable groups, environment, poverty, and disaster risk
reduction and mitigation. While there are sectoral outcomes, the framework, to the extent possible
could also include area-level or household-focused recovery. Institutionalizing a disaster rehabilitation
and recovery framework with the basic elements mentioned above will facilitate faster recovery and
rehabilitation of the disaster-affected areas. A more detailed discussion on the proposed disaster
rehabilitation and recovery framework for the Philippines is found in Annex B.

The Framework should be complemented with guides and systems to operationalize the Rehabilitation
and Recovery Framework and plans. Depending on the magnitude, impact of the disaster and the
capacity of the affected communities, the entire process for the preparation of the post disaster
rehabilitation and recovery plan may take place over a period of three to six (3-6) months once most of
the emergency response activities are done even as long as 24-48 months in the case of major disasters.

To ensure faster and effective planning and implementation of interventions, it is important to develop
operational guides for disaster rehabilitation and recovery planning with simple, flexible and
contextualizing templates to facilitate the process at the national, regional, and local levels in all
dimensions of the recovery framework (institutional, financial, operational, DRRM, monitoring and
evaluation, and communications). In parallel, a work plan for Pre-Disaster planning should be prepared
and implemented in all key recovery agencies to include area/spatial planning by the affected
communities. The details of the proposed activities such as database build-up for rehabilitation and
recovery, developing science-based scenarios of disaster events, and pre-identification of NGA and LGU
programs and projects for scale up are presented in Annex C.

The preparation of post disaster rehabilitation plan/program covers key processes as: (i) Conduct of
Rapid Post Disaster Assessments; Preparation of Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan or Program; and (iii)
Approval of the Plan or Program. The disaster rehabilitation and recovery framework/guide will
streamline these processes and provide templates for faster and inclusive rehabilitation and recovery
planning. Details are discussed in Annex D.

Example of a disaster rehabilitation and recovery framework:

        Australia (Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangement NDRRA) – provides funding to
        States and Territories to help pay for natural disaster relief and costs when recovery
        expenditures for a disaster exceed a given threshold, calculated as a percentage of State output.
        This enables regional governments to mobilize financing quickly once a disaster strikes. It also
        includes pre-defined assistance packages, targeting community support. NDRRA defines the
        disasters and measures eligible for funding. It has outlined the categories of assistance namely:
        (a) emergency assistance provided to individuals; (b) restoration or replacement of essential
        public assets, concessional loans and counter disaster operations; (c) community recovery

                                                                                                          6
          packages for community facilities and/or clean up and recovery grants for small business and
          primary producers; and (d) other exceptional circumstances assistance. (Administration of the
          Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements by Emergency Management Australia
          NDRRA Report No.24 2015-2016)

C. Institutionalize an Effective Coordination Structure and Mechanisms

Institutionalizing a structure for coordination is critical for the success of any rehabilitation and recovery
effort. The preferable arrangement for post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery is to have a pre-existing
entity to manage the core planning and oversight functions required to meet rehabilitation and recovery
objectives. In the absence of such arrangements or depending on the impact and scale of the disaster, it
is important to designate an agency to lead the rehabilitation and recovery planning and coordination. It
is critical to ensure that the lead agency has a clear mandate with effective political leadership and
technical expertise.

Based on global and Philippine post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery experiences, the government
could decide on several institutional arrangements based on the: (i) characteristics of the disaster, (ii)
existing governance structure, (iii) prior disaster rehabilitation and recovery experience of the lead
agency, (iv) agency’s ability to reach out and work with other stakeholders and communities, and (v)
overall coordination, monitoring, and oversight in operations among different departments and
agencies, local governments and non-government stakeholders3.

In the Philippines, it is important to institutionalize an effective coordination structure and mechanisms
that seamlessly integrates the roles and responsibilities of the following:

    1. Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Councils
Under the Philippine DRRM Law and Framework, there are delineated responsibilities, structure for
coordination and roles of national, regional, local government and other stakeholders. There are
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) Councils at the national, regional, local levels where
the law provides for the composition of the council. The head (Chairperson) of the National DRRM
Council is the Secretary of National Defense and the vice-chair of the Rehabilitation and Recovery
thematic area is the Secretary of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA). Details of
the mandated coordination structure is provided in Annex E.

    2. National and Local Government Interface
Both the national government and LGUs are the primary players in the rehabilitation and recovery of
affected areas depending on the magnitude and impact of the disaster. In the Philippines, the local
government in the affected areas is the first line of support with the national government providing
assistance, financial or technical, as needed. Depending on the capacity of the LGU and the scale and
impact of the disaster, there is great value in letting the LGUs lead in the response and recovery efforts
post-disaster. The LGUs familiarity of the area, population, challenges and effective solutions is

3
    GFDRR Guide to Developing Disaster Recovery Frameworks, March 2015, p.27.

                                                                                                             7
invaluable. The NGAs and LGUs follow certain guidelines and set parameters in the conduct of post-
disaster assessments, recovery planning, implementation, and monitoring of recovery and rehabilitation
Programs, Projects and Activities (PPAs). For the detailed discussion on the interface of the national,
regional, and local government based on existing laws and practice, please refer to Annex F.

For an effective post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery intervention, the capacity of the LGUs and
NGAs should be strengthened, coordination mechanisms at the national, regional and local levels are
set-up, and policies and frameworks are institutionalized even before a disaster happens. Review and
updating of policies, frameworks, and systems should be done regularly to incorporate lessons learned
and experience from recent disasters.

    3. Task Forces and Designated Rehabilitation and Recovery Heads (Lead Agency)
The Philippine experience in previous disasters show that for disasters with major impact such as
Typhoon Yolanda, Pablo, Mount Pinatubo eruption, 1992 Luzon Earthquake, task forces or special
commissions were formed to address the rehabilitation and recovery efforts. A senior official or Cabinet
Secretary was designated to lead the relevant departments and line agencies and coordinate all the
recovery interventions. The designated agency and task force was also tasked to coordinate with non-
government stakeholders such as the private sector, civil society organizations, development
partners/donors, academia, and the communities. In creating task forces for rehabilitation and recovery,
there are usually two-types of agency structures or models to consider:

                                                                                                            4
           Table 4. 1 Pros and Cons of Recovery-Specific and Planning Agencies' Participation in Recovery

                                                   Pros                                  Cons

        Reconstruction Agency-       Has mechanism to implement            Has insufficient knowledge of
        Led Model                     reconstruction                         long-term development goals
                                     Has mandate to implement              Instability (Czar resigns and
                                      reconstruction                         entity disappears)
                                     Has the capacity to address the       Difficulty recruiting the
                                      scope and magnitude of work            required staff immediately
                                      required                              Need to establish financial,
                                     Does not have a “business as           monitoring, planning systems
                                      usual? approach                        from scratch

        Planning Agency-Led          Has knowledge of planning             Institutional inertia can prevent
        Model                         objectives                             reconstruction from being
                                     Has knowledge of approval              implemented urgently
                                      procedures for planning               Lacks the capacity and
                                      initiatives                            institutional mechanisms to
                                     Has coordination mechanisms to         address reconstruction needs
                                      assist with reconstruction             with speed and flexibility




4
    GFDRR Guide to Developing Disaster Recovery Framework, March 2015, p.29.

                                                                                                                 8
    4. Rehabilitation and Recovery Clusters
Rehabilitation efforts cover various concerns such as employment, infrastructure, housing and delivery
of social services. To facilitate streamlined and integrated planning, implementation, and monitoring of
PPAs, rehabilitation and recovery clusters were created. Each cluster was assigned with a lead where
members were identified from the Council members and other relevant government agencies, GOCCs,
and GFIs. This is a good practice that should be institutionalized to ensure effective coordination in the
planning and implementation of rehabilitation and recovery interventions in affected areas.

Acknowledging that the impact of disasters varies and the sectors affected are not always the same, the
composition and activation of each cluster would depend on the need. Likewise, participation in cluster
discussions shall not be limited to identified members should there be a need to invite other relevant
stakeholders. The Cluster leads shall invite other government agencies, experts, and non-government
stakeholders. All these shall be decided after the initial assessment of damage, loss and needs. Clusters
that may be adopted are included in Annex G.

     5. Non-Government Stakeholders
Non-Government stakeholders are grouped and explained in detail as: (i) Private Sector, Professional
Organizations and Academia; (ii) Civil Service Organizations; (iii) Development Partners and International
Organizations; and (iv) Affected Communities. Their respective roles and some proposed mechanisms
for coordination are described in detail below:

             i. Private Sector, Professional Organizations and Academia
        The private sector can support disaster rehabilitation and recovery in many ways: (i) It can cover
        a significant amount of the cost of rehabilitation and recovery; (ii) It can help design the
        structures and infrastructure to be built, compliant with the government standards on resilient
        infrastructure; (iii) It can supply the materials needed for reconstruction; (iv) It can do the
        construction itself; and it can jumpstart local and regional economies by quickly re-establishing
        their businesses in the affected areas. The role of private sector partners can be classified as:
        suppliers of goods and services participating in an economic transaction and charitable donors
        of goods, services, and expertise.

        Professional organizations and expert groups, such as those for engineers, doctors, professors
        and urban and environmental planners, can serve as focal points for expert advice on
        rehabilitation and recovery planning and operational aspects of the implementation of projects.
        They often have familiarity with contractors of particular industries. The academia/institutions
        and professional associations can assist government in evaluating specific projects and assist in
        other tasks that require widespread industry knowledge. A mechanism for accreditation should
        be put in place for these professional organizations and institutions so they can be deployed in
        affected areas and tapped when necessary.

        Even before a disaster happens PPP arrangements should be established with clear mechanisms
        for coordination and participation of private sector, academia and professional organizations in

                                                                                                         9
post-disaster activities. There should be pre-identified and pre-agreed roles for each stakeholder
during the response/emergency phase and in the rehabilitation and recovery phase. It is also a
good practice to define the contribution of the private sector, academia, and the professional
organizations in the overall disaster preparedness and resiliency programs of government. For a
smooth coordination between NGA or LGUs and non-government stakeholders, a memorandum
of understanding is usually undertaken prior to a disaster.

     ii. Civil Society Organizations (CSOs)
Civil Society Organizations often have well-cultivated links to the affected communities so they
can help ensure community participation and manage implementation if the existing policies
allow it. CSOs can also provide technical expertise, additional knowledge and broader
connections on the ground. It is good practice to identify respected civil society leaders who
represent key sectors to participate in rehabilitation and recovery consultation meetings with
government and other stakeholders. CSOs may also be tapped to help government in
monitoring the implementation of projects. They can do independent third party evaluation
based on existing rehabilitation and recovery monitoring framework. This could help promote
transparency and accountability.

    iii. Development Partners and International Organizations
After a disaster, international agencies and development partners are usually quick to offer
assistance. However, their funding may have conditions or donors may choose to manage their
own rehabilitation and recovery assistance by directly implementing rehabilitation and recovery
projects in their chosen affected areas.

Creating joint ownership of the government-led rehabilitation and recovery process among
development partners enable them to work with government in dealing with specific
complexities of the rehabilitation and recovery efforts. This could help encourage partners to
make long-term commitments to projects that they have pledged to fund and implement.
However, the government must be able to balance the assistance of partners and ensure that
government remains in control of the rehabilitation and recovery program. The national
government should direct the development partners to consolidate their interventions and
coordinate closely with NGAs and/or LGUs.

Establishing a coordination mechanism between and among development partners and
government will facilitate and clarify at the outset the respective roles of development partners.
The government can identify avenues for their participation in the response phase and
rehabilitation and recovery phase. The government should establish clear guidelines on triggers,
protocols, roles and responsibilities, and mandates. They could also be included in the clusters
as needed to facilitate coordination of policies and implementation of rehabilitation and
recovery projects. This would avoid duplication of assistance and support in the affected areas.




                                                                                                 10
            iv. Affected Communities
        Community participation is crucial in the rehabilitation and recovery process. The main
        resource available for rehabilitation and recovery is the affected people themselves and their
        local knowledge and expertise. Affected communities need to be included and consulted
        throughout the rehabilitation and recovery process such as in assessments, defining problems
        and needs, identifying solutions and implementing projects, and giving feedback. There should
        be a mechanism to ensure the participation of the community and the lead agency shall ensure
        that government is working closely with the affected people in the course of the rehabilitation
        and recovery efforts.

        Beneficiary participation will allow those who are vulnerable and usually marginalized within
        their communities (i.e. women, the elderly, the disabled, and members of certain social classes
        or ethnic groups) to participate and influence decision-making for programs affecting them post
        disaster. Incorporating local knowledge and expertise into rehabilitation and recovery and
        ensuring community ownership are effective means to ensure the long-term success of the
        rehabilitation and recovery efforts and to guarantee that it meets real needs and provide
        sustainable solutions.

Non-government Stakeholders have to be viewed as part of the overall rehabilitation and recovery
system. They should coordinate with national and local governments, report on their plans and projects,
and be required to properly report their financial contributions for transparency and accountability. A
coordination mechanism or framework should be put in place and standard agreements be signed by
the government and non-government stakeholders to ensure smooth coordination in disaster
rehabilitation and recovery efforts. To facilitate coordination among non-government stakeholders, it is
important for each of the identified groups to designate their focal persons or pre-identify leads that
government can easily coordinate and communicate with. This would allow government to coordinate
with non-government stakeholders without having to deal with each and every organization.

        Box 4. 1 Examples of Coordination Structures and Institutional Arrangements in Other Countries

A. Pakistan: In 2005 Pakistan’s Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority (ERRA) combined central
   coordination alongside local implementation by creating a tiered coordination and implementation structure.
   The ERRA Council provided strategic direction for policy formulation and adequate funding. The ERRA Board
   ensured implementation of approved policy and projects. It developed and implemented annual plans,
   programs and projects. At the provincial and state levels, the Provincial Steering Committee was partnered
   with the Provincial ERRA same with the State. At the district level, the District Reconstruction and Advisory
   Committees provided work-plan oversight to the District Reconstruction Units (DRUs) within designed
   programmatic interventions. The national government enabled local implementation by allocating
   independent budgets to PERRA and SERRA and the DRUs. The independent budgets enabled the implementing
   organizations to create and manage their own work plans. (GFDRR Guide to Developing Disaster Recovery
   Frameworks p. 36)




                                                                                                             11
B. Indonesia: After the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, the Indonesian government established a framework for
   post-disaster responses. It identified the responsibilities of the central and local governments as well as the
   functions and duties of the national and regional disaster management agencies. The regulations outlined the
   disaster risk financing framework which is a shared responsibility between the central and local governments.
   GFDRR Guide to Developing Disaster Recovery Frameworks p. 32)


D. Identify Implementation Modalities and Strategies to Speed Up Rehabilitation and Recovery
   Interventions

Based on several rehabilitation and recovery programs implemented from previous disasters, the
disaster rehabilitation and recovery framework may identify implementation strategies and modalities
to speed up the government interventions. Based on its general characteristics of: (a) flexibility of
condition and/or can easily be modified to apply after disasters; (b) available funding; (c) linked to
disaster risk reduction and overall resilience; and (d) existing mechanism or is already implemented, the
following are the identified modalities used in the previous post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery:

1. National Government – Implemented Programs (Regular Agency Programs)
Taking into consideration existing policies, operational features, and program or project components,
there are several national government-implemented programs that can be modified and expanded to
quickly provide rehabilitation and recovery interventions in areas affected by disasters. In previous
disasters, the national government has adopted a strategy of realigning regular PPAs of different
agencies to respond to the recovery and rehabilitation needs of an affected area. This is an approach to
address the basic services and infrastructure needs in a disaster affected area. For major disasters, line
agencies can propose a scale up of PPAs to be included in the rehabilitation and recovery plans for
funding and implementation. This approach is only effective for small-scale disasters affecting a few
municipalities or provinces. But for large-scale disasters such as Yolanda or those involving human-
induced disasters, this would not be the most effective strategy.

There are several national government flagship programs that are usually implemented by agencies for
scale up or expansion in disaster affected areas. These are often included in the rehabilitation and
recovery plans because there are already existing mechanisms and policies that allow the quick
implementation of the programs in the affected areas. The implementation modalities range from
nationally implemented PPAs through line agencies, LGU-implemented PPAs, community-driven
development approach in the implementation of PPAs or other similar modalities. These modalities
would help promote the participation of affected communities and LGUs in the planning and
implementation of recovery and rehabilitation PPAs.

2. National Government – Local Government Partnerships (NGA Program for LGU Implementation)
Another implementation modality that can be used for rehabilitation and recovery is the national
government agency and LGU partnerships. There are existing NGA programs where the funds can be
directly downloaded to LGUs for the implementation of PPAs. This usually involves local infrastructure,
small scale programs and projects on basic services, livelihood, school buildings, evacuation centers,
flood control, civic centers, and housing. In this modality, the specific rehabilitation and recovery
budget for the line agency will be downloaded to the LGU for the implementation of PPAs. This allows


                                                                                                                12
strong participation of LGUs in rehabilitation and recovery programs and speeds up the implementation
of projects by sharing the responsibility to LGUs. The role of the national agency in this arrangement is
to provide policy guidance and technical expertise to LGUs. The key to an effective implementation of
this modality is for NGAs to assist LGUs in the preparation of the requirements such as program of
works, project documents and to ensure that LGUs who will be receiving funds to implement
rehabilitation and recovery projects do not have unliquidated expenses from previous programs.

                  Box 4. 2 Examples of NGA Program for LGU Implementation in Other Countries

   In Indonesia, Japan, and Mexico, this is a commonly used implementation modality. National government
   through the lead national DRRM agency will provide block grants to LGUs and communities for the
   implementation of rehabilitation and recovery projects such as infrastructure (roads, bridges, schools,
   hospitals, civic centers, evacuation centers, flood control), livelihood programs, and housing. LGUs will
   prepare proposals for specific rehabilitation and recovery needs and submit to the national DRRM agency
   to qualify for block grants. This is on top of the regular national government PPAs for large scale
   infrastructure reconstruction


In the Philippines, the DSWD, DA, DPWH, and DEPED are some agencies that utilize this arrangement to
speed up the use of their budget and implementation of PPAs.

Some notable examples of the programs using the two modalities are identified in the table below.
These programs were scaled up to cover areas affected by previous disasters. Detailed description is
provided in Annex H.

                      Table 4. 2 Examples of Programs Scaled Up in Disaster Affected Areas

                                                                    National Government – Local
                   National Government Implemented
                                                                   Government Partnerships (NGA
                  Programs (Regular Agency Programs)
                                                                  Program for LGU Implementation)

             a.    DSWD’s Disaster Cash Transfer Program     a.     DILG Funded Repairs of Local
             b.    DILG Assistance to Disadvantaged                 Infrastructure
                   Municipalities (National Government       b.     Disaster Risk Reduction and
                   Program for LGU implementation)                  Resilience Programs
             c.    Community Driven Development              c.     Post-Disaster Shelter Recovery
                   Approach to Implementing DRRM                    Program
                   Programs that builds on the KALAHI-
                   CIDSS National Community Driven
                   Development Program (NCDDP)

3. Local Government Unit (LGU) – Implemented Programs
For affected LGUs (provinces, cities and municipalities), it is common practice to use regular LGU PPAs in
the rehabilitation and recovery programs. These PPAs are already programmed for implementation and
funded by the LGU internal revenue allotment (IRA) or other LGU fund source. After a disaster, it is
quicker to realign existing LGU PPAs for social services, livelihood and infrastructure to address the
needs in the affected areas. LGUs do this because they do not have new or separate funds to finance the
rehabilitation and recovery programs. There are also instances when LGUs have existing agreements

                                                                                                               13
with development partners for the implementation of local PPAs, these projects could also be
immediately realigned for the needs of the affected community.

For disasters that affect several regions and provinces, the implementation of PPAs by national
government agencies are usually slow. It normally takes more than six to twelve months before the
NGAs start the implementation of PPAs in the affected areas. In this case, if a province has regular
programs for social services, livelihood, and local infrastructure, these can be realigned and used to
initially address the early recovery needs of the affected municipalities. The regular provincial programs
and projects can be implemented at the city or municipal level while waiting for the national line
agencies to implement their rehabilitation and recovery PPAs.

4. Local Government Unit “LGU-to-LGU? Collaboration
For LGUs, the Philippine DRRM Law provides a provision for a local DRRM fund that will be used for
disaster preparedness, risk reduction, response and rehabilitation and recovery. Experiences in previous
disaster shows that the LDRRM fund of affected LGUs is not sufficient to cover the needs for response,
early recovery and rehabilitation of the affected LGU. In this case, the LGU, through a resolution
approved by their local council (Sanggunian) can donate funds (a portion of their LDRRM fund) to assist
other disaster-stricken LGUs. This is one example of an LGU-to-LGU collaboration after a disaster.

Another modality practiced among LGUs is an arrangement where an LGU has pre-procured relief goods
(i.e. rice, canned goods, bottled waters, tents) and through a local council approval, one LGU can validly
donate relief goods to other affected LGUs. There are legal and audit requirements that should also be
complied by the LGUs to validly implement this modality. One of the important requirements for this
arrangement to work is a declaration of a state of calamity in the affected area by the proper authority.

                                        Box 4. 3 LGU to LGU Collaboration

    In large scale disasters, LGUs with more funds such as Makati City, Davao City, Quezon City, or Provinces
    like Albay and Bohol usually provide cash donations, provision for relief and in kind donations to hardest hit
    provinces, cities and municipalities. The local Sanggunian approves the donation of cash or non-cash for
    disaster-affected areas and when there is a declaration of a local state of calamity and when there is a
    need. Upon recommendation of the Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Office (LDRRMO) and
    approval of the Sanggunian concerned, the Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Council (LDRRMC)
    may transfer a portion of their LDRRM funds to support disaster risk reduction interventions of other
    LDRRMCs that are declared under a State of Calamity.


5. Public-Private-Partnership (PPPs) National or Local Government and Non-Government Stakeholders
There are different models of public private partnership arrangements that could be explored during the
implementation of rehabilitation and recovery projects. The first one is the regular PPP as mandated
under the law with specific provisions applied based on the law and its implementing rules and
regulations. And for this policy note’s purpose, all other arrangements that government can enter into
with private sector, CSOs, development partners and academia to leverage on resources of non-
government stakeholders to share in the burden of reconstruction and rehabilitation after a disaster.




                                                                                                                     14
Experiences in the Philippines from previous disasters and global good practice points to PPP
arrangements both at the national and local level. It is common to have arrangements for the
implementation of PPAs between an NGA and a private sector contractor for infrastructure projects,
roads, bridges, school buildings, hospitals, civic centers, and housing. The arrangement could be: (i) NGA
provides counterpart funds with the private sector to implement PPAs in the affected areas, (ii) NGA
provides funding and the private sector as contractors implements the PPAs, or (iii) NGA and private
sector agrees on PPAs that the private sector funds, implements, and donates in affected areas. These
PPAs are included in the overall government rehabilitation and recovery program/plan.

In instances where the rehabilitation and recovery program/plan is prepared and implemented by the
LGU, PPP arrangements between the LGU and private sector is a good modality to adopt. In this case,
the arrangements could be: (i) LGU provides counterpart funds with the private sector to implement
infrastructure projects, housing and identified PPAs, or (ii) private sector funds, implements and donates
school buildings, health centers, housing units, civic centers, livelihood projects and other PPAs to the
LGU. This presupposes an agreement with the LGU of its rehabilitation and recovery needs based on the
Local Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan/Program.

In both arrangements at the national and local levels, it is also common to see similar arrangements
between NGAs/LGUs with Development Partners or International Organizations and Civil Society
Organizations (CSOs). Guidelines on the coordination mechanisms, implementation arrangements, and
monitoring should also be in place to leverage on the resources and assistance provided by these
stakeholders in the rehabilitation and recovery efforts.

Another good practice in countries like Japan and Indonesia, the LGU can enter into pre-agreed
framework contracts or ordering agreements with private sector. In case a disaster hits, the private
sector contractor would implement the recovery and rehabilitation PPAs. This usually involves repairs
and reconstruction of roads, bridges, clearing operations, school buildings, civic centers, and
administrative buildings. This speeds up the implementation of civil works in the reconstruction phase.

Even before a disaster hits, it is necessary to create an environment that will foster PPPs for post-
disaster rehabilitation and recovery. It would be beneficial to build the relationships of the national and
local government with private sector and business community. PPPs could enhance the government and
the private sector’s ability to recover from financial losses, loss of market share, and damage to
infrastructure, equipment, products or business interruption by assembling resources and making
preparedness a win-win option. PPPs could also facilitate compliance to regulatory and safety standards
and promote transparency and accountability. The arrangement could also allow government to
leverage on existing private sector resources needed for rehabilitation and recovery. Some PPP
arrangements that can be used in post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery are provided in Annex I.

E. Develop an effective Emergency Procurement Guide

Procurement has been one of the identified bottlenecks in implementation delays of rehabilitation and
recovery interventions due to increase in the volume of transactions and the urgency with which they
need to be completed. For government projects, the general rule is that procuring entities shall use



                                                                                                        15
public/competitive bidding as the main method of procurement. Alternative methods5 of procurement
shall only be resorted to in specific cases.

Under the Procurement Act, negotiated procurement6 is defined as a method of procurement of goods,
infrastructure project or consulting services where the Procuring Entity directly negotiates a contract
with a technically, legally and financially capable supplier, contractor or consultant in specific cases. One
of the enumerated situation is during Emergency Cases7 – in case of imminent danger to life or property
during a state of calamity, or when time is of the essence arising from natural or man-made calamities
or other causes where immediate action is necessary to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or
to restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other public utilities. In the case of
infrastructure projects, the government agency has the option to undertake the project through
negotiated procurement or by administration or, in high security areas, through the Armed Forces of the
Philippines.

However, global and local experience shows that responsible agency officials are often reluctant to use
the simplified procurement procedures even if they exist within the government system. Thus, there is a
need to consolidate all the relevant policies and issuances into a simple and practical emergency
procurement guide for NGAs and LGUs to apply in case of natural and human-induced disasters. This
could then be included in the rehabilitation and recovery framework that the government would
develop. It is crucial that the emergency procurement guide would also include provisions that allow the
use of alternative procurement method for resilience and risk reduction projects as part of the overall
recovery and reconstruction intervention.

In Japan, Australia, Lao PDR, Indonesia, and USA, it is quite common for their disaster management
agencies and/or local government units (state/province/prefecture) to enter into framework contracts
and pre-negotiated agreements for goods and services that would be needed post-disaster. Some of the
civil works include repairs and reconstruction of roads, bridges, other critical lifeline infrastructure and
goods include relief and food packs, construction materials, shelter kits, among others. In the
Philippines, the procurement law and its rules allow a similar arrangement. The framework contracts are
called ordering agreements that national and local government units can utilize to speed up the
procurement process.


                          Box 4. 4 Examples of Fast-tracked Procurement in Other Countries
                             (GFDRR Guide to Developing Disaster Recovery Frameworks p.54)
     a.   Lao PDR has developed an emergency road repair fast-track financing mechanism to ensure a
          timely facilitation of urgent road infrastructure repairs. The Minister of Finance and 17
          provincial governors created the mechanism through an agreement that enabled governors to
          authorize the engagement of road contractors for post-disaster rehabilitation works without
          prior central government approval.




5 Sec. 48 RA 9184 IRR
6 Sec. 53 RA 9184 IRR
7 Sec. 53.2 RA 9184 IRR



                                                                                                          16
    b.   Pakistan was able to streamline its procurement through the services of the Pakistan
         Engineering Council. PEC set up pre-arranged systems of procurement for emergencies with a
         pre-approved list of contractors for reconstruction. It enabled rapid issuing of contracts, pre-
         determined standards for evaluating tender responses, and it ensured transparency at the
         start of procurement process.

The development of an emergency procurement guide would be more effective if the policies and
implementation arrangements would also be integrated to the overall public financial management
system of the government.

F. Identify Funding Options for Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery

Depending on the scale of the disaster and the capacity of the national economy, the government may
either rely largely on its own resources, or appeal to external sources for funding. In every rehabilitation
and recovery effort, it is crucial to pre-identify the funding options and resources to ensure that the
programs and projects would be funded at the time it is needed. Developing a disaster risk finance and
insurance strategy and pre-identification of funding sources for disaster risk reduction, resilience and
reconstruction would ensure faster rehabilitation and recovery after a disaster. In the process of
identifying funding options, an important component that should be included in rehabilitation and
recovery planning is the post-disaster budget review. Figure 4.1 is the flow of the review process.
                                      Figure 4. 1 Post Disaster Budget Review




This is a crucial procedure considering that disasters are usually unplanned and it forces the reallocation
of limited government funds to address response, recovery, and reconstruction needs. The budget
review would facilitate prioritization of needs and sequencing of rehabilitation and recovery activities. It
would allow government to find additional resources and financing options for rehabilitation and
recovery and address issues of re-allocation and realignment of budget and resource sharing between
NGAs and LGUs.

After the post-disaster budget review and based on the initial damage and needs assessment
recommendations, it is crucial to identify the sources of funds domestic and external, national, local, and
international. Some of the options for rehabilitation and recovery financing are the national and local
disaster risk reduction and management fund (NDRRM and LDRRM Funds), allocation from the regular
budget of the agency, Official Development Assistance (ODA) loans, grants, contingent funds, multi-
donor trust funds, private funds, government financial institutions and government-owned and
controlled corporations, municipal development fund, and other similar resources available.

In post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery planning and budgeting, it is important to emphasize that
the financing scheme would focus on (1) public funds to the extent possible are used to leverage private


                                                                                                            17
funds, and (2) public funds are used to finance as much disaster risk reduction components in the
rehabilitation and recovery programs and project. Possible sources of funds and resources for
Rehabilitation and Recovery that have been identified are listed as follow:

    1. National Government and Local Government Fund Source
The common source of funding for rehabilitation and recovery programs is the General Appropriations
Act (GAA) of the national government through the regular budget of the national agencies. Under the
GAA, there is a line item that provides a specific fund for disasters:

                                     Box 4. 5 GAA-Specific Funds for Disasters

       a.   National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Fund (NDRRMF) is an appropriation in
            the annual GAA which shall be used for disaster risk reduction or mitigation, prevention and
            preparedness activities such as but not limited to training of personnel, procurement of
            equipment, and capital expenditures as well as for relief, recovery, reconstruction and other
            work or services in connection with natural or human induced calamities and which may
            occur during the budget year or those that occurred in the past two (2) years from the
                        8
            budget year . DBM administers the fund and releases directly to implementing agencies or
            LGUs upon approval of the President of the Philippines as recommended by the NDRRMC.
                                                       9
       b. Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund – The Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund
          shall be used by the departments, bureaus, and offices of the National Government,
          including Constitutional Offices enjoying fiscal autonomy, State Universities and Colleges
          (SUCs), Government -Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), and LGUs exclusively for
          rehabilitation and reconstruction projects damaged by various calamities which cannot be
          covered by the regular NDRRM Fund. Releases from said Fund shall be made directly to the
          implementing agencies or LGUs in accordance with the approval of the President of the
          Philippines who may take into consideration the recommendation of the NDRRMC. This
          fund is lodged as a line item under the NDRRM Fund in the GAA.

       c.   Quick Response Fund (QRF) serves as the stand-by fund for relief and recovery programs in
            order that situation and living conditions of people in communities or areas stricken by
            disasters, calamities, epidemics, or complex emergencies may be normalized as quickly as
                     10
            possible. Agencies that have built-in QRFs in the 2017 GAA include DSWD, DND-OCD, DoH,
            NEA, DPWH, and DND-AFP. QRFs are automatically released to said agencies while release
            of QRF for other agencies shall be subject to the submission of a favorable recommendation
            of the NDRRMC and approval of the DBM. Additional QRF may be given to the agencies
            with existing QRF allocation when the balance thereof has reached a critical level, subject to
            approval by DBM.

       d. Allocation from Agency Regular Budget – All departments, bureaus, offices and agencies of
          the government are authorized to use a portion of their appropriations to implement
          projects designed to address DRRM activities in accordance with the guidelines to be issued
                                               11
          by NDRRMC in coordination with DBM . Currently, this has not yet been implemented and
          the NDRRMC has yet to issue the guidelines governing this provision.



8 RA 10121, Sec. 3 (v).
9RA  10924
10 RA 10121, Sec. 22 (c).
11
   RA 10121, Sec. 22 (e).

                                                                                                             18
               The implementation of rehabilitation and recovery PPAs usually take more than three years.
               For medium to long-term rehabilitation and recovery programs that cannot be implemented
               within two to three years, the line agencies are required to include the corresponding PPA
               funding requirement to their regular agency program and annual budget. It is good practice
               to integrate the medium and long-term rehabilitation and recovery programs or projects in
               the regular agency program to ensure the mainstreaming of post-disaster rehabilitation and
               recovery PPAs to long-term development programs of the agencies.

         e.    Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Fund (LDRRMF) is an appropriation of not
               less than five percent (5%) of the estimated revenue from regular sources that shall be set
               aside by the LGU to support disaster risk management activities such as, but not limited to,
               pre-disaster preparedness programs including training, purchase of life-saving rescue
               equipment, supplies and medicines for post-disaster activities, and for the payment of
                                                12
               premiums on calamity insurance.

               Undisbursed LDRRM Fund for the budget year shall accrue to a special trust fund and shall
               be exclusively used to support disaster risk reduction and management activities of the
               LDRRMC within the next five (5) years. Any such amount remaining undisbursed after five
               (5) years shall revert to the general fund and will be available for other social services to be
               identified by the local Sanggunian. Upon recommendation of the Local DRRM Office
               (LDRRMO) and approval of the Sanggunian concerned, the Local Disaster Risk Reduction
               Management Council (LDRRMC) may transfer the said fund to support resilience or disaster
               risk reduction work of other LDRRMCs which are declared under a State of Calamity.

         f.    Disaster Risk Finance and Insurance (DRFI) Payout Proceeds. Through the implementation
               of the DRFI strategy at the national and sub-national level, the government has invested in
               risk transfer mechanisms such as insurance (indemnity and parametric insurance) to cover
               national government and local government assets. The payout proceeds of the insurance
               will provide quick liquidity for NGAs and LGUs to finance specific rehabilitation and recovery
               projects. This could be another source of funds for national and local government to
               augment existing sources. Guidelines for the use of the payout proceeds has been crafted
               and circulated to key agencies. The payment of insurance premiums is provided for in the
               GAA under the NDRRM Fund and to sustain this strategy, the LGU (Provinces) are setting up
               a Local Disaster Risk Insurance Facility to pool their premium payment contributions and
               invest in disaster risk insurance and similar risk finance instruments and risk transfer
               mechanisms.

    2. Official Development Assistance (ODA) loans and grants, contingent funds, multi-donor trust
        fund
ODA is a common fund source for the implementation of rehabilitation and recovery PPAs. An ODA can
be classified as loans, grants, contingent credits, and multi-donor trust funds. Depending on the scale
and impact of a disaster, the government has an option to utilize the available ODA.
                                                   Box 4. 6 Types of ODA

              a. Loans and Grants – Official Development Assistance (ODA) come in the form of loans and
                  grants. This can be used to finance the rehabilitation and recovery PPAs. Depending on the
                  impact of the disaster, the government may decide to take on new loans or restructure
                  existing loans to fund the necessary programs/projects. For example, if there are existing


12   RA 10121, Sec. 21.

                                                                                                                  19
            loans to fund flagship programs of national government and a major disaster happens, the
            government through the Department of Finance (DoF), in consultation with the
            implementing agency may decide to realign the implementation of the program to also
            include the disaster affected areas. For grants, the government may request the
            development partner to also reconfigure its scope and target beneficiary to include the
            people in the affected areas. The ODA is useful when government already has existing
            cooperation agreements with donors and or multilateral agencies.

        b. Catastrophe Deferred-Draw-Down Option (Contingent Credit) – In post-disaster situation,
            conditions often change rapidly that government should establish contingency funds to
            respond to disaster needs and early recovery and rehabilitation efforts. Waiting for the
            normal budget cycle will cause delays. The government has an option to draw from a
            contingent credit in the form of a Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Loan with
            a Catastrophe Deferred-Draw-Down Option (CAT-DDO). Upon the declaration of a State of
            National Calamity by the President, the government has an option to draw upon this
            contingent credit. The proceeds will be for budget support and government can in turn use
            to finance rehabilitation and recovery PPAs. This was done in Typhoons Sendong in 2011
            and Yolanda in 2013 through World Bank and Japan International Cooperation Agency
            (JICA) CAT-DDO contingent credits, respectively. Currently, the Philippines has a standby
                                                                     nd
            credit with World Bank worth US$500 million from its 2 DRM Development Policy Loan
            with a CAT-DDO. When the country is hit by a natural disaster and there is a declaration of
            a state of national calamity, the DoF has an option to draw the contingent credit to provide
            budgetary support and quick liquidity.

        c. Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) – Another flexible funding source can be in the form of a
            multi-donor trust fund. This is pooled funds from donors that are administered by a
            trustee, characterized by their flexibility to finance rehabilitation and recovery needs that
            are not attractive to bilateral donors or do not fit within the government’s budget. In
            Yolanda, a Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) was set up by international donor agencies for
            off-budget project fiscal allocations and implementation. The ADB was the designated
            Trustee and Implementing Partner for this facility with the DoF as chair, and NEDA and
            OPARR (Office of the Presidential Assistant for Rehabilitation and Recovery) as co-chairs, in
            the Steering Committee. A minimum contribution of USD 5 million entitles any donor to
            become a member of the Steering Committee. Inter-agency coordination has been set out
            to obtain the President’s approval. At first, a total of USD 68.5 million in commitments
            would be managed through the MDTF.


3. Private Funds
Private sector entities may have corporate social responsibility (CSR) programs and funds that they can
tap to finance rehabilitation projects. They have access to alternative donor pools to fund innovative
recovery projects. Another source of funding may come from NGOs that are well-funded domestically or
globally. Common projects funded by private sector and CSOs include education, housing, livelihood,
and school buildings. Continuous engagement and collaboration between the public and private sector
is essential to maximize and optimize the non-government sector’s role in funding rehabilitation and
recovery projects that are consistent with government’s rehabilitation and recovery plan/program.

In Yolanda, the private sector organized a Private Sector Multi-Donor Fund (PSMDF), housed within the
Philippine Disaster Recovery Foundation (PDRF), to avail of PDRF’s tax-exempt status. The fund was used


                                                                                                            20
to pool private sector cash donations to fund Yolanda reconstruction efforts, including the most critical
projects as identified by the private sector focal person in coordination with government and local
communities and in accordance with the recommendations of the RAY and PDNA. PDRF implemented
the projects in coordination with the Yolanda Rehabilitation and Recovery lead agency, OPARR.

Based on experiences in other countries and in the Philippines, a large portion of rehabilitation and
recovery is funded using private funds, for example companies, SMEs and households paying for their
own rehabilitation and recovery. Thus, it would be important for public expenditures to be targeted in
such a way to encourage and support own-recovery programs.

4. Government Financial Institutions (GFIs) Land Bank of the Philippines and Development Bank of
    the Philippines and Government-Owned or Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) PAGIBIG, SHFC, GSIS
The GFIs such as Land Bank and DBP could be an alternative funding source for rehabilitation and
recovery efforts of LGUs, home buyers, SMEs, cooperatives and NGOs and CFIs. The Land Bank has
allotted P30 billion to aid rehabilitation efforts and to help victims recover from destruction brought
about by natural disasters through its Calamity Rehabilitation Support (Cares) program. Land Bank aims
to support government’s continuing effort to restore economic and social activities and accessibility in
calamity-affected areas after typhoons, floods, earthquakes and other calamites.

Eligible borrowers of Land Bank may avail of loans for repair, construction or acquisition of houses,
facilities or equipment at a fixed interest rate. SMEs in need of financial assistance for repair of existing
facilities and purchase of new ones may avail of loans at a fixed interest rate. Cooperatives and NGOs,
may avail of either livelihood financing to augment their credit fund for on-lending to small farmers and
fisherfolk (SFFs) or MSME members and sub-borrowers or home lending, to provide them with
additional credit fund for the housing loan requirements of their members/borrowers. CFIs may avail of
short-term or long-term loans to augment their working capital for on-lending and rediscounting to SFFs
and MSMEs and other types of borrowers. Interest rate for the term loan is also fixed. DBP, on the other
hand, has developed products for SMEs to finance rehabilitation and recovery efforts and expand access
to finance to recapitalize enterprises in affected areas.

For post-disaster shelter recovery and housing repairs or reconstruction, GOCCs such as PAGIBIG and
SHFC, could provide additional source of financing through loans with lower interest rates. These
institutions could also provide communities or individuals alternative sources of financing through the
community mortgage program or loans for acquisition of land. For GSIS, affected government
employees could avail of certain loans for individual/self-recovery. On the other hand, the insurance
proceeds from property indemnity insurance of government assets and facilities insured under the GSIS
products could provide additional funding for the reconstruction, repairs and rehabilitation of certain
assets or facilities. GSIS has also developed loan packages and products for LGUs after a typhoon,
flooding, or earthquake depending on the type of disaster being insured.

    5. Municipal Development Fund (MDF)
The MDF, a special revolving fund for re-lending to LGUs could be another source of financing to
implement LGU rehabilitation and recovery PPAs. It is a mechanism for LGUs to avail of financial
assistance from local and international sources for the implementation of various social and economic

                                                                                                          21
development projects. The MDF is administered by the Department of Finance – Municipal
Development Fund Office (MDFO).

In line with its thrust of promoting LGU self-reliance in undertaking socio-economic development
programs through an effective system of making ODA available to LGUs, assisting low income LGUs in
financing development projects, and establishing LGU creditworthiness to help access private funds, the
MDF could be an additional source of funding for LGUs. The figure below provides financing windows
that could be tapped by the LGUs to fund their rehabilitation and recovery PPAs that could also lead to
medium and long-term development programs/projects.

                  Figure 4. 2 List of Municipal Development Fund - Second Generation Fund




Given the multiple sources of financing, government should ensure that all the funds are allocated in
accordance with the national rehabilitation and recovery priorities, whether or not the funds are
channeled on or off the national budget system. This would promote transparency and accountability
and facilitate the tracking of the use of funds for rehabilitation and recovery. Figure 4.3 details the
elements of financing from various domestic and external fund sources.
                        Figure 4. 3 Elements of Rehabilitation and Recovery Financing




                                                                                                          22
Disasters impact public finance which forces reallocation of tight government budgets and search for
supplemental source of funds. The initial budget review should focus on allocating resources for the
humanitarian and relief efforts. Subsequent reviews can be based on the recommendations of the
PDNA or similar rapid assessments. These findings involve prioritizing of rehabilitation and recovery
PPAs including indicative timeline of implementation for appropriate budgeting and allocation of funds.

Disaster rehabilitation and recovery is an activity that is usually post-budget or outside the typical
budget processes. Funds allocated for implementation of post-disaster projects come from lump sum
funds like the NDRRM Fund or realigned budget from regular agency programs. There is no system that
tracks the process and breakdown of lump sum funds and data is not captured at source – from
proposal to approval, before it goes to execution.

In the post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery process, it is crucial to determine the gaps and
duplications between public financing and private financing followed by how to prioritize and allocate
limited public resources – matching of sources and uses of funds. The figure below highlights some
examples of sectors in which overlap in financing may exist.
                          Figure 4. 4 Overlap between Public and Private Funding




After undertaking the budget review process and identifying the overlap between public and private
funding, it is equally important to ensure that there is coordination among relevant oversight and
implementing agencies and the LGUs for the actual allocation of resources that happens through a
budgetary process. Fig. 4.5 highlights the different timeframes for resource allocation. Typically,
rehabilitation and recovery expenditures will be heavy in the medium to long term as destroyed or
damaged infrastructure needs to be replaced.
                           Figure 4. 5 Timeframe for Use of Allocated Resources




Considering that government budget is never sufficient to finance rehabilitation and recovery, use of
funds from the private sector and NGOs outside the government budget are critical. The programmatic

                                                                                                         23
approach can help coordinate funding sources, ensure effective monitoring among different sources of
funds, and ensure that the budget spent do not duplicate efforts. For example, private sector funds may
be allocated to a specific sector or area. Funds coming from CSOs could be allocated to social needs of
the affected communities.

One of the recurring issues/challenges in previous disasters is ensuring transparency and accountability
in the use of disaster funds and the role of the COA in promoting accountability vis-à-vis timeliness in
the implementation of rehabilitation and recovery programs and projects. The inherent nature of quick
disaster response, recovery and rehabilitation involves procedures that deviate from normal processes
which would have audit implications. Hence, it is crucial to involve COA in the development of the
framework and guides. Currently, COA is developing a specialized audit manual for the audit of DRRM
Funds and Programs/Projects/Activities. This will provide clear guidelines on how to audit the use of all
disaster-related funds regardless of source. It will also clarify the policies and accounting and audit
systems involved in the use of funds for all disaster-related activities.

G. Develop Standards for Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Communications

A simple but effective communications strategy is a crucial component that would help determine the
success of the government’s rehabilitation and recovery efforts. The communications strategy is a
platform for government and stakeholders to share information, provide updates on progress, serve as a
feedback mechanism, and issues management. It is a tool that can help manage expectations of the
affected communities and stakeholders all throughout the rehabilitation and recovery phase. It would
also be an effective tool for resource mobilization and donor coordination. In developing a disaster
rehabilitation and recovery communications strategy, the lead agency or LGU should include the
following components: (i) key principles, (ii) key messages, (iii) spokespersons, (iv) forms/medium of
communication (i.e. posters, radio ads, television ads, video clips, blogs, editorials), and (v)
communication channels (television, radio, social media, print, digital media). Details of these
components are provided in Annex J.

Considering that rehabilitation and recovery is a whole-of-government and whole-of-society
intervention, it is important that the actors and stakeholders are aware of what is happening and how to
address the problems and issues. A snapshot report or a matrix of the key components in the
communications strategy will be helpful to provide a quick look of the rehabilitation and recovery issues
and its source, key message and suggested reply, the spokesperson or focal person tasked to interface
with media, the forms of communication that would be used to address the issue, and the actual
communications channels for maximum impact and reach. The communications snapshot report can be
shared to the agencies so that decision-makers and spokespersons from the NGAs or LGUs would have
the same information and reference point.




                                                                                                       24
Annex A. Findings on the Assessment

An assessment of specific aspects of the country’s short and medium-term recovery from Typhoon
Yolanda was done through a review of official reports, studies and analytical work done by key agencies
of government, development partners and other stakeholders. Several roundtable discussions were
organized with NEDA and concerned government agencies, and other stakeholders to identify
rehabilitation and recovery issues and bottlenecks experienced in Typhoon Yolanda and previous
disasters and to validate findings from the assessment.

The assessment resulted in the following findings:

                               Box AA. 1 Findings on Relief/Emergency Phase

1. Coordination is essential at every phase of the disaster intervention. Good coordination will lessen
   duplication and gaps in the assistance provided by the various stakeholders during relief, recovery
   and rehabilitation. This is also fundamental in managing a smooth transition from each phase.
2. The Government’s leadership and ownership of the planning process is vital. Adhering heavily on
   external mechanisms is not sustainable because it does not build the national and local capacities,
   but rather undermines government ownership of the plans and programs.
3. Yolanda recovery highlighted the global debate on how to define “recovery?. Disaster response,
   rehabilitation and recovery, and development should be seen as overlapping processes instead of
   defined rigid and sequential steps. These definitions affect every process of recovery, from
   response, to planning, financing, implementation and monitoring.
4. A transparent and unified system for monitoring of donations and pledges is very critical. It is
   important that all stakeholders including the public can refer to a unified platform that provides
   consistent and updated information on the sources and uses of donations both cash and non-cash.

  Box AA. 2 Findings on Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework, Institutional Arrangements and Other Cross-
                                               cutting Policies

5. The impact of Typhoon Yolanda has forced the Government to rethink its institutional framework
   to effectively deal with large-scale disasters. Establishing a permanent institution whose capacity
   and knowledge can be built over time has advantages rather than creating ad hoc entities or task
   forces with time bound existence. It also revealed the institutional bottlenecks (e.g., national-local
   government coordination and inter-governmental transfers, coordination with private sector,
   development partners, non-government organizations) that needed to be addressed for effective
   implementation of rehabilitation and recovery activities. The need for coordination mechanisms
   between and among stakeholders to interface with national and local government is crucial.
6. A streamlined process for post-disaster assessment and recovery planning is critical to set and
   sustain the momentum for recovery implementation. Timelines in the preparation of the RAY,
   PDNA and CRRP showed that, RAY was conducted in five (5) weeks; PDNA was conducted in five (5)
   months; and CRRP was prepared in five (5) months. The procedure and methodology in conducting
   post-disaster assessments as well as adopting a simple/flexible rehabilitation and recovery
   framework and planning templates should be done to speed up the planning and implementation of

                                                                                                         25
   rehabilitation and recovery projects.
7. Availability of baseline data is necessary. Gathering of relevant baseline data before a disaster will
   speed up the post-disaster interventions. Quick access to baseline data especially in post-disaster
   situations is very important. This will facilitate the effective allocation of resources in the response,
   assessment of post-disaster recovery needs, planning, implementation and monitoring of the
   recovery plan and program. It is best that collection and updating of baseline data and information
   be done regularly.
8. There is a need to develop a strategic disaster recovery framework that will guide recovery. The
   Post-Disaster Recovery Framework should also include among others, an institutional and policy–
   setting for recovery; guidelines on prioritization and programming based on inclusive and
   transparent process that ensures participation of stakeholders considering national and
   international best practices; recovery financing; and implementation monitoring and evaluation
   systems for recovery programs.

                        Box AA. 3 Findings on Use of and Access to Government Funds

9. There is a need to put in place a system that provides a real time information on available
    resources, fund allocation and use. For post-disaster recovery, it is important to immediately
    identify the available resources at the planning stage so NGAs and LGUs can plan better and
    implement faster. Equally important to maintain information updated as recovery proceeds. While
    the CRRP and its budget was approved, information on sources of funds (i.e. NDRRM Fund, LDRRM
    Fund, GAA, resources from private sector, NGOs, loans and grants from Development Partners) was
    not readily available nor regularly communicated to the agencies. This caused delays in the budget
    requests and releases. There were tracking systems within agencies but use of these systems was
    not sustained.
10. There is a need to simplify, clarify and harmonize existing policies and procedures for quick access
    of funds by line agencies and LGUs to implement post-disaster programs and projects.
    Enhancements in existing policies, systems, and processes are needed to allow NGAs and LGUs quick
    access to funds for post-disaster recovery and rehabilitation projects. Downloading of funds to LGUs
    remain to be challenging post-disaster. Thus, there is a need to adopt streamlined policies and
    procedures to allow the timely download of funds to LGUs and NGAs for recovery and
    reconstruction.
11. Given the scale of the funding requirement to recover from Yolanda, the National Government
    assumed responsibility for funding majority of the recovery requirements within its own budget.
    There is a need to leverage on other funding sources by tapping the available resources from
    government’s Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (DRFI) program. However, the bigger challenge
    lies in mobilizing available local resources to address the LGU recovery needs, especially for low-
    income municipalities. The LDRRM Fund is not enough to cover reconstruction needs. In the
    aftermath of Yolanda, there were no effective mechanisms for direct downloading of funds from the
    national government to LGUs.




                                                                                                         26
Box AA. 4 Findings on Output of Selected Programs and Projects and the Successful Implementation Modalities

12. There is a need to identify implementation strategies and modalities that can easily be adopted
    (build on existing programs that can quickly be scaled up). A list of implementation strategies and
    modalities based on existing programs and policies that can be modified, scaled up and
    implemented in disaster-affected areas can speed up implementation. Develop new strategies or
    modalities that would speed up the implementation of rehabilitation and recovery projects.
13. There is a need to develop a straightforward policy and coordination framework to harmonize all
    post-disaster shelter recovery interventions that will meet the post-disaster shelter needs. A
    more holistic approach to address not just settlement and infrastructure rehabilitation, but also
    restoration of livelihoods and access to basic services in settlements is critical.
14. There is a need to develop an emergency procurement guide to help NGAs and LGUs in
    implementing post-disaster projects faster. Existing Emergency procurement policies for post-
    disaster recovery should be clarified and other procurement modalities be explored to speed up
    implementation. Delays in implementation were mostly due to regular procurement procedures.
    Identify the role of the Commission on Audit and involve them in the policy discussions on
    rehabilitation and recovery as they develop a specialized guide for audit of DRRM funds and PPAs.
    Integrate the procurement system in the overall public financial management system.

                       Box AA. 5 Findings on Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms

15. There is a need to establish a transparent and unified system for reporting, monitoring and
    evaluation (across oversight agencies and LGUs) for transparency and accountability. It is
    important that all stakeholders – from implementers to general public can refer to a unified
    platform across government that provides consistent information on the progress of rehabilitation
    and recovery. A feedback mechanism should also be considered as part of the monitoring system.
    Having such system is critical to ensure credibility of the recovery process.
16. Rehabilitation and Recovery takes time, the key is to manage expectations through effective
    communication among stakeholders and the general public. There is a need to put in place a
    communications plan and strategy (messaging, roll–out, talking heads, issues, data, etc.). It is
    imperative that communication be accurate, candid, clear, consistent and comprehensive.




                                                                                                         27
Annex B. Philippine Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework based on Global and Local Good
Practice and Experience from Past Disasters

 The Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework is anchored on an overarching principle of disaster
resilience. The following are the main elements of the proposed framework:

1. Long Term Goal and Outcome
The long-term goal of the disaster rehabilitation and recovery framework is to achieve a safer, adaptive
and disaster-resilient Filipino communities that is protected from risks and can cope with and recover
quickly from unfortunate events. It is consistent with the DRRM vision of the country as identified in the
NDRRM Framework and Plan. This also incorporates the medium-term outcome to restore economic
and social conditions in disaster-affected areas and to reduce poverty. The significant infusion of
resources for the post disaster recovery and rehabilitation program also creates a window of
opportunity to build back better and achieve a higher level of development outcomes in some of the
poorest areas of the country.

2. Sector Outcomes
The recovery and rehabilitation program is anchored on the achievement of five sector outcomes in the
medium-term:

                                   Table AB. 1 Sector Outcome (Medium Term)

        a.   Livelihood and Business          Sustainable incomes are restored or established for
             Development                      households and businesses adversely affected by disasters

        a.   Housing and Settlement           Disaster-affected families have access to affordable, disaster-
                                              resilient housing that are located in safe zones

        b.   Agriculture and Fisheries        Agricultural production is restored and farmers/fisherfolk
                                              adversely affected by disasters are able to access
                                              support/services for production increase

        c.   Social Services                  Disaster-affected communities are able to access education,
                                              health, and social protection programs

        d.   Physical Infrastructure          Public and privately-owned infrastructure facilities are
                                              reconstructed or rehabilitated according to improved disaster-
                                              resilient standards


3. Strategies
For each of the five sector outcomes, there will be a detailed set of sectorally- and spatially-based
strategies which will be integrated into the disaster recovery and rehabilitation plan. The strategies
provide detailed information on how various outputs will be achieved as a result of the application of
specific inputs. Outputs for the recovery program cover not only the provision of physical assets (e.g.,
housing unit constructed, roads rebuilt, classrooms constructed) but also intangible assets which are
equally important outputs (e.g. working capital for small businesses, personnel, regulations).



                                                                                                                28
4. Cross-cutting issues
Consistent with national policies, vulnerable groups, culture, gender, environment, poverty, and disaster
risk reduction and mitigation will be mainstreamed in the plans, programs, and activities of the recovery
and rehabilitation program. Disaster resilience will be an overarching principle that cuts across sectors
and groups. Below is a proposed framework that national and local government agencies have
suggested based on domestic experience and global good practice.

                   Figure AB. 1 Philippine Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Framework




                                                                                                      29
    Annex C. Proposed Pre-Disaster Activities

    Pre-Disaster Planning for Rehabilitation and Recovery
    To plan and implement an effective and efficient rehabilitation and recovery program, pre-disaster
    interventions should be undertaken to prepare and develop the necessary capacity of NGAs and LGUs to
    manage disaster impacts, to inform policy decisions, and to guide the formulation and implementation
    of post disaster efforts. Pre-disaster rehabilitation interventions shall be undertaken at multi-level.
    Specific interventions at each level would be based on the designated role and responsibilities of
    stakeholders. Below are some proposed pre-disaster activities:

    1. Database Build-Up for Rehabilitation and Recovery

    National government agencies generate and maintain specific data based on their respective mandates,
    plans and programs while most of the baseline information on the LGUs’ socioeconomic profile and
    hazard profile can be found in the local development and land use plans. Other LGU disaster-related
    information are also available in the local DRRM Plan and contingency plans.

    All this information should be consolidated into a database. A repository of information for disaster
    assessment and rehabilitation planning should be available at the national, regional and local levels. The
    Secretariats of the DRRMCs (OCD at national and regional and LDRRMO at the local) should maintain
    and regularly update the database whether formally or informally.

    As applicable, the data and information should be compiled in text and map forms. At the minimum,
    the data should have geographical disaggregation up to the barangay level. The Table on data
    requirements can be adjusted depending on the need and use.

                                          Table AC. 1 Data Requirements

Core Element     Sector            Data                         Details                       Source

General                            Land area                                                  PSA/CDP/CLUP
Information
                                   Topography                   Topographic map with          PSA/CDP/CLUP
                                                                description

                                   Political subdivision (for
                                   higher-level LGUs)

                                   Income classification                                      DOF-BLGF, LGU

                                   Poverty Incidence                                          PSA

                                   Total population             Disaggregated data by         PSA
                                                                urban/rural, subdivision
                                                                (up to barangay level), age
                                                                group, and gender

                                   Population density                                         PSA



                                                                                                           30
Core Element     Sector            Data                          Details                            Source

Land Use and     Settlement        Settlement areas              Disaggregated data by              CLUP
Physical                                                         subdivision (up to barangay
Environment                                                      level) with corresponding
                                                                 population count by
                                                                 individuals/families; land
                                                                 use/zoning map

                 Production        Utilized land                 Disaggregated data by land
                                                                 resource, as applicable
                                   Idle land                     (agricultural, coastal/marine,
                                                                 production forest, mineral,
                                                                 industrial, tourism, others)

                 Protection        Protected areas (if any)

                 Cross-Cutting     Multi-Hazard Maps             Maps based on 1:50 or 1:10
                                   Exposure data                 scale (if availabile) for the
                                                                 following:                         DENR Mines and
                                                                 floods, landslides, ground         GeoSciences
                                                                 shaking or seismic, storm          Bureau (MGB),
Hazards and
                                                                 surges, typhoons, volcanic         NAMRIA, DOST,
Risks Profile
                                                                 activity, soil liquefaction,       Project Noah,
                                                                 tsunamis, subsidience, etc.        CCC, NDRRMC,
                                                                                                    CLUP
                                                                 Provincial, city/municipal level
                                                                 maps if available

Economic         Agriculture       Labor force participation     Disaggregated data by type         Local Revenue
Activity and                       rate and revenue generated    (public or private), subsector,    Office, Public
Livelihood       Industry                                        subdivision (up to barangay        Employment
                 Services                                        level), age group, and gender;     Service Office
                                                                 include data on existing and
                 MSMEs                                           proposed support facilities

                 Informal sector

Infrastructure   Transportation    Roads (National roads,        Include total length,              DPWH, Local
                                   Provincial roads, Municipal   classification by surface type     Engineering
                                   roads, Barangay roads)        (i.e., paved or unpaved) and       Office (for local
                                                                 condition                          public works)

                                   Bridges                       Include total length,
                                                                 classification by type (i.e.,
                                                                 permanent or temporary) and
                                                                 condition




                                                                                                                     31
32
33
2. Develop Science-Based Scenarios of Disaster Events and Recovery Scenarios

In order to prepare for the rehabilitation and recovery of specific area, it is necessary to draw up and
understand the possible disaster scenarios which will be the reference for the preparation of an
appropriate plan or program. Disaster scenarios are projected situations after a disaster which
describes the potential damages and losses and impact of disaster. It is a realistic narrative that
describes what happens to people, infrastructure and the natural environment within a given set of
disaster conditions.

Disaster scenarios should be based on scientifically acceptable methodology and utilized historical data
on disaster events. It is best to create a series of scenarios that correspond to each hazard and ideally,
to varying magnitudes of a hazard event. At the very least, a worst case scenario may be developed
which shows the most severe possible outcome that can be reasonably projected to occur in a given
situation.

As disaster scenarios are area specific, this should be prepared by the LGUs with technical support from
the Collective Strengthening on Community Awareness on Natural Disasters (CSCAND) agencies which is
composed of the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS), Philippine Atmospheric
Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA), Mines and Geosciences Bureau (MGB),
and the National Mapping and Resource Information Authority (NAMRIA).

3. Identification of critical areas, assets, and population centers and post- disaster recovery activities

The identification of critical assets and population before a disaster aids in the speedy identification of
local rehabilitation and recovery needs and resources in the aftermath of a disaster. Based on the
disaster scenarios, critical areas, assets, and populations which may be affected by the hazard may
already be identified. The identified critical areas, assets, and population would then be considered in
further activities of post disaster rehabilitation and recovery planning specifically on identifying and
prioritizing areas of intervention.

4. Set-up the Rehabilitation and Recovery Organizational Structure

The institutional set-up should already be agreed and put in place even before a disaster. It should be
ready to function when necessary. The coordination mechanisms for planning, implementation and
monitoring should also be established. The organizational structure should be defined with clearly
identified responsibilities of member agencies and key stakeholders. All stakeholders should be
informed of its roles and expected deliverables to facilitate smooth coordination among them. The
identification of roles and deliverables should be done in consultation with concerned stakeholders.

5. Identification of National Government Agency or LGU Programs and Projects for Scale-Up and
   Implementation in Post-Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery

The national and local government agencies are tasked to consolidate a list of their regular and/or
existing PPAs that could easily be implemented/scaled up in disaster affected areas. The specification,
standards, and costs of these PPAs should also be included in the agency or LGU list for reference and
computation of funding requirements in case of scale up and inclusion in the rehabilitation and recovery
plan. The list of PPAs should also be updated by the agencies and LGUs on a regular basis.



                                                                                                              34
Annex D. Guide for Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Planning

To ensure faster and effective planning and implementation of interventions, it is important to develop
a guide for disaster rehabilitation and recovery planning with simple and flexible templates to facilitate
the process at the national, regional, and local levels. The guide would be more effective if it is
complemented with the Pre-Disaster Planning and Preparations.

The preparation of post disaster rehabilitation plan/program covers key processes as: (i) Conduct of
Rapid Post Disaster Assessments; Preparation of Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan or Program; and (iii)
Approval of the Plan or Program. The guide will streamline these processes and provide templates for
faster and comprehensive rehabilitation and recovery planning.

1. Conduct of Rapid Post Disaster Assessments

The Rapid Post Disaster Assessment provides initial assessment of the overall impacts of disasters,
estimates of economic damages and losses and needs, its impact on the macro economy, poverty,
incomes and employment and short and medium-term recovery and reconstruction needs. This is
usually done within a month after the disaster using the pre-disaster baseline data as reference vis-a-vis
the best qualitative and quantitative post disaster data and information available. This is in recognition
that detailed field assessments will be conducted on the ground by relevant agencies based on country-
specific procedures and methodology. The rapid post disaster assessment contains government’s
strategic plan designed to guide the reconstruction and recovery of the economy and livelihood in the
areas affected by disaster including the rapid action plan to address the critical and urgent needs, to aid
in the development and implementation of identified recovery and reconstruction interventions over
the short to medium-term.

The Rapid Post Disaster Assessment includes the following main elements:
    a. Description of the disaster, human impact and immediate response;
    b. Estimated overall and by sector damage and loss;
    c. Estimated overall and by sector recovery and reconstruction needs;
    d. Overall impact on macro-economy, fiscal, poverty and livelihoods;
    e. Recovery and Reconstruction Strategy with outline of the guiding principles, programming
       priorities, and policy implications for implementation

Multi-level assessment may be undertaken depending on the areas affected. At the minimum, rapid
assessment will be conducted by the affected LGUs through its DRRMC. When government decides to
conduct a rapid post-disaster assessment, NEDA/OCD shall take the lead in the conduct of the
assessment at the national and regional level in coordination with concerned agencies. The assessment
will use the internationally recognized post-disaster assessment methodology initially developed by the
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UN ECLAC)13 and improved
and enhanced by various international organizations and development partners. Assistance from
development partners could be tapped by the government through the provision of sector specialists for

13
 Handbook for estimating the socio-economic impact and environmental impact of disasters, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean, second edition, 2003.

                                                                                                                                         35
the conduct of the Sector Assessments. In the assessments, it is equally important to apply the Social
Impact Analysis (SIA) guidelines to measure the social impacts of the disaster.

The outputs of the assessment shall (a) inform the preparation of a Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan;
and (b) serve as the basis for resource mobilization and coordination of local and international
efforts/assistance, as needed.

All PDNA documents shall be approved by the NDRRMC. Its results shall inform the identification of
strategic interventions and programs/projects/activities in the Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery
Plan. The methodology for the conduct of PDNA, detailed activities, timeframe and composition of
assessment teams are provided in the PDNA Guidelines of the OCD.
                                 Table AD. 1 Rapid Post Disaster Assessment

       Lead Agency     NEDA/OCD
       Approach        Best available data (top down) NGA/LGU data validation
       Timeframe       5 to 8 weeks
       Data Set         Recovery and reconstruction needs based on the application of ratios (derived
                         and benchmarked against those used in comparable post-disaster assessments
                         in the Philippines and other countries) of public to private ownership and
                         medium-term recovery and reconstruction needs by sector
                        Data collected would be field validated and assessed by experts and
                         professionals with cost valuation based on standard costing, local assessment
                         and agreed assumptions
       Output           Initial calculation of the overall recovery and reconstruction needs for further
                         refinement
                        Accounted for damages and losses of both the public and private sector
                        DaLA and HRNA
                        Recovery and Reconstruction Framework
                        Accounted for damages and losses of public sector

2. Preparation of a Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan or Program
This covers the identification of the plan objectives, targets, strategies and programs/projects/activities
in consultation with key stakeholders. The need for a Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan is informed by
the results of the rapid post-disaster assessment and its formulation relies on the assessment and
recommendations in the PDNA.

The LGUs affected shall prepare the Plan/Program through its DRRMC. The RDRRMC and/or NDRRMC
shall also formulate its Plan should assistance from regional line agencies and national government
agencies, respectively, be extended to LGUs and affected communities. NEDA shall oversee the plan
formulation process of the RDRRMC and NDRRMC.

Template of Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan
       a) Background and Description of Affected Area/s – This includes the description of the area
           affected to include location, topography and climate, natural resource, economic activities,
           and social and demographic data. The information for this section may come from the

                                                                                                            36
     existing plans of the LGUs and/or from relevant agencies i.e. DOST, DENR-MGB, NAMRIA,
     etc.

b) Description of a Hazard Event – This provides the description of the hazard and its
   immediate effects. The data for this section may come from the Situational Reports and
   Weather Bulletins provided by the OCD and other relevant agencies as may be necessary.

c) Assessment of the Effects of the Disaster – This includes summary of damage and losses
   based on the PDNA and physical assessment such as changes in the landscape of affected
   areas brought about by the impact of accompanying hazards, internal displacement of
   affected families, etc. This section shall also highlight the rehabilitation and recovery needs
   and framework which will come from the PDNA.

d) Objectives of the Plan – This identifies the objectives of the Rehabilitation and Recovery
   Plan. The objectives should capture key development outcomes and targets for the sectors
   to be covered. This should also be linked to the National Rehabilitation and Recovery
   Framework.

e) Rehabilitation and Recovery Strategies – This contains the guiding principles for the
   rehabilitation efforts and specific sector strategies in order to achieve the Plan objectives for
   the short (within 6 months) and medium-term (within 3 years).
                            Box AD. 1 Example of Guiding Principles

The crafting of the Rehabilitation and Recovery Program shall be guided by the following principles:
   Improve the community’s physical, social and economic resilience, consistent with the
       principle of “building back better?;
   Redirect development outside danger zones to minimize loss of lives and structures resulting
       from typhoons, flooding, landslides, and other hazards;
   Consider local conditions such as culture, security situation and existing capacities of
       communities in identifying programs and projects; and
   Ensure access to public transport, health services, markets, and schools in planning for
       settlement areas.


f)   Proposed Land Use Framework – For disasters with major physical impact, there may be a
     need to propose a new land use framework to consider changes in the topography and the
     land use of the area after a disaster. The land use framework will guide in the identification
     of locations for infrastructures to be constructed, settlement sites to be built and economic
     activities that will arise after a disaster. The land use framework should be guided by the
     updated development and land use plan of the area and risk assessment to take into
     consideration impending risks brought about by changes in landscape.

g) Phasing of Activities (Timeframe) Short-Term, Medium-Term and Implementation
   Arrangements – This covers specific programs, projects and activities phased to be
   implemented as follows:


                                                                                                       37
         Short-Term. Programs and projects implemented in the short-term are geared towards
          providing for the basic needs and social services to affected communities to return to a
          state of normalcy.
         Medium-Term. Medium-Term programs and projects are mostly continuation of
          programs/projects initially implemented in the short-term. These also include
          interventions that give emphasis on enhancing the resiliency of the communities against
          disasters, integrating concepts and principles on disaster prevention and mitigation as
          well as disaster preparedness.

                        Table AD. 2 Sample Timetable for Phasing of Activities

     Objectives                        Strategies, Major Program, Projects and Activities
                                       Short Term                             Medium Term
Rehabilitate and              Debris Clearing & Mgmt. in            Continue assistance in the
protect typhoon-               farm affected areas                    rehabilitation of coconut
damaged agro-                 Rehabilitate damaged coconut           plantations and damaged farm
forestry plantations,          plantations                            facilities/equipment
livestock and fishery         Rehabilitate flatbed dryers and       Replanting of coconuts
industries.                    warehouses                            Rehabilitation of flatbeds
                              Provide equipment and tractor         Provide cash crop inputs (e.g.
                              Build shallow tube wells &             vegetable seeds, rice,
                               surface pumps                          Hybrid/OPV corn seed;
                              Rehabilitate irrigation projects       distribution of pre/post
                                                                      harvesting equipment/
                                                                      machinery


h) Financing and Investment Requirements – This section provides details on the funding
   requirements of identified PPAs and fund source. Details should include:
    Projects to be covered by existing agency budgets
    Projects proposed to be funded under the National DRRM Fund
    Projects that need additional/supplemental funds from DBM

                  Table AD. 3 Sample of Total Investment Requirement per Sector

                                                   Investment Requirement
              Cluster
                                Short Term               Medium Term             Total
        Infrastructure
        Social Services
        Settlement
        Livelihood
        Agriculture
        TOTAL




                                                                                                       38
               Table AD. 4 Sample List of PPAs with Funding Source and Implementation Period

                                                                                             Timeline/
     Major Programs, Projects and           Location/     Implementing
                                                                           Project Cost   Implementation
              Activities                       Site         Agencies
                                                                                           Period (Year)
     AGRICULTURE & FORESTRY
     Cash for Work for debris            Compostela       DA, DOLE,       Php 100M        2013
     clearing and rehabilitation of      Valley           DENR
     farms / forests                                      DSWD

       i)   Mechanism for Monitoring and Evaluation – This section provides the coordination
            mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of the rehabilitation and recovery programs and
            projects, templates for reporting and timeframe for submission. For national government
            funded projects, monitoring and reporting shall be done at the regional level. The current
            existing mechanism for monitoring which is the Regional Project Monitoring Committees
            (RPMCs), a Committee under the Regional Development Council (RDC), can be utilized.
            NEDA as Chair of the RPMC can coordinate and oversee the monitoring in coordination with
            the concerned implementing agency.

                                      Figure AD. 1 Sample Monitoring Template




3. Approval of the Plan or Program

This involves the finalization and approval of the draft Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan. At the local
level, the LDRRMC shall endorse the draft Local Rehabilitation Plan to the Sanggunian for approval and
to the NDRRMC through the RDRRMC should it require funding assistance from the national
government.

The draft Regional Rehabilitation Plan, on the other hand, shall be endorsed by the RDRRMC to the
NDRRMC for approval and funding, while the nationally coordinated Rehabilitation Plan shall be
approved by the President.




                                                                                                           39
Annex E. Coordination Structure and Institutional Arrangement for Rehabilitation and Recovery

Working within the existing Philippine DRRM legal framework, the following are the delineated structure
and responsibilities for coordination including the roles of each stakeholder involved.

                      Figure AE. 1 Coordination Structure for Rehabilitation and Recovery




Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) Councils
The coordination structure at each level of administration shall be the Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management (DRRM) Councils at the national, regional and local levels pursuant to Section 15 of RA
10121 or the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction Act. The lead DRRMC shall depend on the geographical
areas affected. The more affected areas, the higher level of administration takes the lead. (See Figure 1)

At the national and regional levels, the Technical Management Group (TMG) of the NDRRMC and
Committee of RDRRMC for Rehabilitation and Recovery shall support their respective Councils in
coordinating and overseeing the over-all management of rehabilitation and recovery efforts. NEDA as
Vice-Chair of the NDRRMC and RDRRMCs shall lead the TMG. The Office of Civil Defense, as the
Secretariat of the said Councils, shall assist NEDA in carrying out its responsibility. At the local level, the
Local DRRM Officer shall assist the Local Chief Executive in overseeing the over-all rehabilitation efforts.
LGUs may also create committees under its DRRMC that will handle all the activities on rehabilitation.

For several major disasters in the last decade, Presidents resort to creating task forces and appointing
cabinet officials to spearhead the rehabilitation and recovery efforts of government. Learning from
those experiences, the delivery of the rehabilitation and recovery programs would be more effective if
such were anchored on the institutional mandates of concerned agencies and LGUs in affected areas
were involved in the process. The LGUs shall lead the planning, coordination, implementation, and
monitoring of the PPAs in the rehabilitation and recovery program. The NGAs, depending on the need,
shall provide technical, financial, and logistical support to the affected LGUs. Tapping key stakeholders
such as private sector, academia, CSOs, development partners, and communities would speed up the
delivery of projects, promote transparency and accountability and share the responsibility of financing
the cost of rehabilitation and recovery.

                                                                                                             40
Annex F. Interface of the National, Regional, and Local Government

The LGUs of affected areas are the first line of support with the national government providing
assistance, financial or technical, as needed. The assistance provided by NGAs to LGUs considers the
capacity of the LGU to finance and implement the required interventions and cope with the impact of
disasters. The national government should play an active role when the impact of the disaster requires
interventions from the NDRRMC and/or the RDRRMC based on its initial assessment post disaster. In
general, the region where the affected LGUs are situated extends the immediate assistance when the
LGU’s capacity is overwhelmed. The following are the interface of the national, regional, and local
government based on existing laws and experience:

        The local DRRM offices (LDRRMOs) shall provide leadership in the planning, implementation,
         and monitoring14 of post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery projects in their respective
         localities and shall coordinate, with the N/RDRRMC and NGAs implementing national
         government projects in their areas. To support this function, the LDRRMOs, through their
         respective policy and planning units, shall endeavor to develop a comprehensive local disaster
         risk information system which shall include, among others, baseline data on natural hazards,
         vulnerabilities, and climate change risks.

        The NGAs, in line with its regular mandates, or as requested by the concerned LGU, shall provide
         assistance in the crafting of a local rehabilitation and recovery plan and identifying appropriate
         programs with specific implementation and financing mechanisms.

        Should the impact of a disaster require interventions from the NDRRMC and/or the RDRRMC
         based on the initial post-disaster damage assessment, national government shall play an active
         role in the rehabilitation and recovery of affected areas through the implementation and
         coordination mechanisms outlined above. However, when the concerned LGUs have already
         recovered, they shall play a key role in the rehabilitation and recovery efforts. They are expected
         to support and complement the national government particularly in ensuring smooth and
         efficient implementation of projects in their localities.

The specific roles of NGAs in the implementation of rehabilitation and recovery PPAs shall depend on
their regular agency mandates and as identified in the NDRRM Plan. However, this does not preclude
agencies from being assigned to undertake and/or lead in other rehabilitation and recovery activities.




14
  LDRRMOs are expected to “take the lead in the (monitoring and evaluation) process by looking into their
progress vis-à-vis their local DRRM plan targets? (NDRRMP 2011-2028).

                                                                                                          41
Annex G. Rehabilitation and Recovery Clusters
Clusters are created to facilitate streamlined and integrated planning, implementation, and monitoring
of PPAs, rehabilitation and recovery clusters. Each cluster should be assigned with a lead where
members are identified from the Council members and other relevant government agencies, GOCCs,
and GFIs.
The following Clusters with specific functions may be adopted:

   Infrastructure Cluster – The Infrastructure Cluster shall be in charge of the rehabilitation and
    reconstruction activities relative to physical infrastructures that were damaged or destroyed. This
    shall include, among others, the coordination for the construction, reconstruction, repair and
    restoration of roads, bridges, ports, airports, government buildings, and other public structures.
    Infrastructure Cluster shall also oversee the enforcement of relevant building code provisions and
    ensure that standards for resilient infrastructures are strictly followed in both public and private
    sector rehabilitation and recovery initiatives.

   Shelter Cluster – The Shelter Cluster shall be responsible for the provision of housing assistance to
    affected families and individuals. The Cluster shall coordinate all the relevant shelter initiatives from
    the response/relief phase to the early recovery and rehabilitation phase. It shall prepare a menu of
    options that key agencies and LGUs can adopt and implement. This covers the provision for
    emergency shelter assistance, construction of temporary/transitional and permanent housing, social
    preparation programs, development of sustainable settlement communities and as a last resort, the
    relocation of families that are living in identified high risk or danger zones to resettlement sites.
    Shelter Cluster shall ensure that all public and private housing related interventions in affected
    communities, whether government or private sector led, are in accordance with the post-disaster
    shelter recovery policy framework formulated by the HUDCC.

   Social Services Cluster – The Social Services Cluster shall be in charge of the programs, projects and
    activities relative to resumption of regular social services in the affected communities. This includes
    the provision of continuing relief assistance to the most vulnerable groups, rehabilitation of facilities
    and procurement of supplies for health and education, and psychosocial program for the victims.
    The Cluster shall also be responsible in ensuring a smooth transition and delivery of services from
    the relief and emergency phase to early recovery and rehabilitation phase.

   Livelihood Cluster – The Livelihood Cluster shall be responsible for the livelihood programs, projects
    and activities including emergency employment assistance to the affected families. It shall focus on
    the re-establishment of the affected families’ sources of income by increasing opportunities for
    employment, reinvigorating micro, small and medium enterprise (MSME) development in the
    affected areas, and paving access to financing for businesses.

   Agriculture Cluster – The Agriculture Cluster shall be responsible for the programs, projects and
    activities relative to the agriculture sector production recovery. This shall include the provision of
    adequate farm and fisheries inputs and equipment, and access to fisheries and crop financing

                                                                                                          42
    mechanisms for affected workers in the agriculture and fisheries sector. It shall closely coordinate
    with the Livelihood Cluster to ensure complementation of interventions throughout the entire
    agricultural, fisheries and/or agribusiness value chain.

   Support Cluster – The Support Cluster is in charge of addressing and/or facilitating the discussion on
    cross-cutting policy concerns and issues among the different clusters. These concerns/issues include
    those on funding, procurement, audit, implementation arrangements, private sector interventions,
    development partners’ assistance, integration of relevant programs among the four Clusters (i.e.
    livelihood and social services in resettlement communities), and policy concerns that require
    intervention from the Congress and the President. The Support Cluster shall also ensure efficient
    coordination among Clusters as well as between and among affected LGUs, and relevant non-
    government stakeholders.
                       Table AG. 1 Rehabilitation and Recovery Clusters - National Level

    Infrastructure Cluster
        Lead                      DPWH
        Member Agencies           DA, DAR, DepEd, DOE, DENR, DTI, DOH, DOST, DoTr, DICT, DoJ, DILG, OCD,
                                  LWUA, CHED, NIA, and NEA
       Other Stakeholders         LGUs, Private Sector, Development Partners, Professional Organizations, Academia
    Shelter Cluster
       Lead                       HUDCC
       Member Agencies            NHA, DPWH, DA, DAR, DepEd, DENR, DILG, DoH, DoST, DSWD, OCD, HLURB,
                                  NCIP, OPAPP, NAPC, LWUA, LGU, DTI and NEA, GOCCs, GFIs
        Other Stakeholders        LGUs, Private Sector, Development Partners, Professional Organizations,
                                  Communities, CSOs, Academia
    Social Services Cluster
        Lead                      DSWD
        Member Agencies           DND, DA, DAR, DepEd, DENR, DoH, OCD, HUDCC, HLURB, NCIP, OPAPP,
                                  NAPC, NHA, and CHED
        Other Stakeholders        LGUs, Private Sector, Development Partners, Professional Organizations,
                                  Communities, CSOs, Academia
    Livelihood Cluster
        Lead                      DTI
        Member Agencies           DSWD, DOLE, DA, DoT, DAR, DENR, DoST, OCD, HUDCC, NCIP, OPAPP, NAPC,
                                  NHA, TESDA, PCA, SB Corp., and GFIs (Landbank, DBP) and GOCCs
        Other Stakeholders        LGUs, Private Sector, Development Partners, Communities, CSOs, Academia
    Agriculture Cluster
        Lead                      DA
        Member Agencies           DAR, DENR, PCA, BFAR, NFA, NIA, PCIC, GFIs, GOCCs

       Other Stakeholders         LGUs, Private Sector, Development Partners, Communities, CSOs, Academia
    Support Cluster
       Lead                       DBM and NEDA
       Member Agencies            DFA, DoF, DoJ, DSWD. OCD, PCOO, PMS, OES, OCS, OPAPP, COA, DENR,
                                  DILG, HLURB and DPWH


                                                                                                                     43
Annex H. Modalities of Programs Scaled Up in Disaster Affected Areas

1. National Government – Implemented Programs (Regular Agency Programs)

                               Box AH. 1 Examples of Regular Agency Programs

         a.   DSWD’s Disaster Cash Transfer Program – This existing national government program is
              quicker to scale up because there are already existing policies and legal bases,
              implementation mechanisms and guidelines, staff complement in areas where it is
              currently being implemented, agency capacity, and beneficiary participation. For this
              flagship program, there is already an underlying policy, infrastructure and system in
              place that can be easily adjusted to expand in areas that are affected by disasters. There
              is also a mechanism to quickly add funds as needed to respond to the needs in the
              affected areas. The Pantawid Pamilya Pilipino Program (4Ps) is a nationwide conditional
              cash transfer (CCT) program that was used in the aftermath of Typhoon Yolanda.
              Ahead of future disasters, a scalable emergency cash transfer program could be
              developed in order that post-disaster cash transfers would be able to reach additional,
              non-4Ps affected households. The scalable emergency cash transfer would have the
              explicit objective of providing income support to affected households. This instrument
              would better equip DSWD to deliver a more equitable, broad based post disaster cash
              transfer intervention that reaches the affected households. This could also help to
              supplement some of the substantial burden of in-kind / food pack delivery with a cash
              based response, once immediate food based needs have been met and beneficiary
              needs transition away from survival to asset re-accumulation and livelihood restoration.

         b. DILG Assistance to Disadvantaged Municipalities (National Government Program for
            LGU implementation) – The ADM program provides a "catch-up mechanism" to assist
            municipal governments in increasing citizens' access to basic facilities and ensures
            participation of civil society organizations (CSOs) in local governance. Currently, it
            covers 1,373 municipalities nationwide that funds projects such as water system,
            evacuation facility, local access roads, small water impounding, and sanitation and
            health facilities. The ADM/AM Program with its existing mechanism could be an
            implementation modality that can be used for small scale repairs and reconstruction of
            infrastructure projects that the LGUs, CSOs and POs can be involved in. The utilization of
            this existing mechanism for rehabilitation and recovery would speed up the planning
            and implementation process and address the basic needs of the affected LGUs and
            communities.

         c.   Community Driven Development Approach to Implementing DRRM Programs that
              builds on the KALAHI-CIDSS National Community Driven Development Program
              (NCDDP) – An effective implementation modality to speed up the rehabilitation and
              recovery process is the community-driven development approach. Due to its geographic
              coverage, community based participatory approach, pre-existing networks of facilitators
              and volunteers, existing capacity and mechanisms/systems, it allows the affected
              communities to fully participate in the planning, implementation, monitoring and
              evaluation of the rehabilitation and recovery PPAs in their areas. Area Coordinating
              Teams can support municipal authorities in conducting rapid needs assessments and
              initiating post disaster activities with communities. Financial management,
              procurement, facilitation, monitoring and evaluation and structures for the
              disbursement of community grants are likewise in place that can be used in the
              disbursement of disaster response grants. Under the CDD approach, small infrastructure

                                                                                                           44
              and livelihood projects can be implemented by the communities themselves. DSWD
              applied this modality in the Yolanda-affected areas. The Disaster Response Operational
              Modality, is a built-in component of the NCDDP program that already covers procedures
              specific to disaster response, early recovery and rehabilitation. It was designed to
              simplify procedures in case of disasters, triggered by the government’s declaration of a
              state of calamity. For example, the contingent component allows for certain types of
              projects and activities that are otherwise not permitted under regular NCDD rules, in
              order to “better address the recovery needs of communities?. Additionally, basic
              operational procedures are modified to hasten implementation. This includes
              adjustments in facilitation, participation rate, amount of block grants, fiduciary rules,
              types of sub-projects, and municipality or barangay local government roles.

2. National Government – Local Government Partnerships (NGA Program for LGU Implementation)

                  Box AH. 2 Examples of Philippine NGA Programs for LGU Implementation

       a.   DILG Funded Repairs of Local Infrastructure through the Reconstruction Assistance on
            Yolanda (RAY) DILG Program, the DILG and affected LGUs have identified projects for the
            rehabilitation or repair of partially damaged LGU-owned facilities such as
            provincial/city/municipal buildings, public market, and civic centers for implementation by
            the LGUs. The DILG national budget will be downloaded to the LGUs.

       b.   Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience Programs - Disasters can also serve as opportunities
            to build resilience. LGUs will have an opportunity to propose and implement comprehensive
            disaster risk reduction and preparedness programs through their DRR Plans and Programs.
            As LGUs plan and implement their rehabilitation and recovery programs, they can
            incorporate key pillars to build resilience to disasters such as reducing the vulnerability of
            key public infrastructures such as hospitals, schools, and transportation systems through
            physical strengthening and ensure resilient construction, integration of disaster risk into
            development planning including better codes and land use enforcement. The menu of
            options for disaster risk reduction and resilience programs at the local level could be
            included by the provinces, cities and municipalities in their local DRRM plans/programs for
            funding and implementation depending on their capacity, need, exposure and vulnerability.
            These are simple and comprehensive DRRM programs that can complement the existing
            development programs at the national and local level. These DRR and resilience programs
            can be co-financed by the national and local government or LGUs could leverage on other
            financing mechanisms (loans from GFIs or development banks).

       c.   Post-Disaster Shelter Recovery Program - For post-disaster shelter recovery programs, past
            experiences have shown that several PPAs have been implemented by various national
            government agencies such as DSWD, DPWH, HUDCC, NHA and LGUs at different stages of
            the post-disaster intervention. The key is to develop a menu of options that will clearly
            identify who will do what specific PPA at a certain period. All these options will then be
            consolidated and monitored by a designated agency to ensure that the beneficiaries in the
            affected areas are all served. HUDCC, being the Shelter Cluster lead is working on a post-
            disaster shelter recovery policy framework that would provide policy guidance and
            implementation modalities for post-disaster shelter rehabilitation and recovery. These
            options could speed up the planning and implementation process of programs and projects
            related to shelter and settlements. The proposed menu of options is based on existing
            programs as well as previous programs implemented for past disasters.




                                                                                                             45
Below are some options for post-disaster shelter recovery that NGA and LGUs can collaborate on:

                                                                                           15
                            Figure AH. 1 Menu of Post Disaster Permanent Shelter Options




15
     Working Draft Post Disaster Shelter Framework, 16 August 2017

                                                                                                  46
47
Housing is one of the most prominent post-disaster rehabilitation and recovery. The range of housing
issues involve government policy directive, land use, nature of shelter assistance, relocation and
resettlement, financing, delays in implementation, quality of housing, availability of materials, and mode
of implementation. Considering the nature of shelter or housing which is a private good, the best
approach for this sector is to provide various options that can be implemented by the LGU, community,
or homeowner themselves. This will diminish the burden of national government to construct
permanent houses after every disaster. Based on global good practice, housing owner-driven approach
is one of the most effective and efficient modality for post-disaster shelter recovery. It is inclusive and it
could promote and mainstream resilient recovery among house owners and communities. This has been
massively implemented in Indonesia and Pakistan post tsunami and earthquake, respectively.




                                                                                                           48
Annex I. Public-Private Partnership Arrangements

During the rehabilitation and recovery phase, the government can tap the Private Sector for their
resources, technical expertise and business operations in the affected areas. Below are some PPP
arrangements that can be used in rehabilitation and recovery program after a disaster:

a. PPP as defined under the Law – Under the law, the Government recognizes the indispensable role
   of the private sector in the country’s growth and development. This partnership is equally
   important in times of disaster response,
                                                                1 PPP Guidelines for National and Local
                                                        Box AI. 2
   rehabilitation and recovery. It covers all private
                                                                           Projects
   sector infrastructure or development projects
    undertaken by NGAs or LGUs.                          The use of this implementation modality will be
                                                         subject to the approval and reporting procedure
    The key aspects of the partnership and its           specified under the law in accordance with the
    management are detailed in the law, its Revised      following:
                                                         A. National Projects - The projects must be part of
    Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) and
                                                               the Agency’s development programs, and shall
    other relevant issuances. The IRR covers all               be approved as follows:
    private sector infrastructure or development                i.  Projects costing up to PhP 300 million shall
                                                                    be submitted to ICC for approval;
    projects undertaken by NGAs or LGUs in
                                                               ii.  Projects costing more than PhP 300 million
    accordance with such contractual arrangement                    shall be submitted to the NEDA Board for
    or scheme authorized under the legislation. For                 approval upon the recommendation of ICC;
    LGU projects, the concerned LGUs may                            and
                                                              iii.  Regardless of amount, negotiated projects
    formulate additional guidelines and procedures                  shall be submitted to the NEDA Board for
    not in conflict with the Act and the IRR.                       approval upon recommendation by the ICC.

                                                         B.   Local Projects - Local projects to be implemented
b. National Government funded PPAs to be                     by the LGUs shall be submitted by the concerned
   implemented by Private Sector or                          LGU for confirmation, as follows:
   International Organizations – There is a                   i.   To the Municipal Development Council for
                                                                   projects costing up to PhP 20 million;
   recognition that in massive reconstruction                ii.   To the Provincial Development Council for
   efforts of national government, there are                       those costing above PhP 20 million up to
   inevitable delays in the implementation of                      PhP 50 million; and
                                                            iii.   To the City Development Council for those
   PPAs. This is due to the slow procurement                       costing above PhP 50 million
   process, capacity and staff complement of line
   agencies to implement specific rehabilitation
   and reconstruction projects, availability of
   materials, etc. The government in this case can
   explore the possibility of setting up pre-arranged contracts with Private Sector partners or
   International Organizations before a disaster and providing clear parameters/guidelines for the
   implementation of rehabilitation and recovery PPAs needed when a disaster hits a specific area. This
   kind of arrangement is commonly done in other countries.

    For example, for repairs, reconstruction or rehabilitation of roads, bridges, schools, hospitals, civic
    centers, and public markets, there are pre-agreed contracts with certain private sector contractors
    or international organizations and the line agency mandated to do infrastructure works (i.e. DPWH,

                                                                                                                   49
    DILG, DEPED, DOH). Policy triggers can be pre-agreed and certain cost estimates for civil works that
    will be done will also be included in the framework agreements or ordering contracts and
    memorandum of understandings or agreements. This will speed up the implementation of PPAs and
    allow government to focus on other policy and coordination concerns post disaster.

c. Private Sector, Development Partners, CSO funds and implements PPAs – Private Sector,
   Development Partners, CSOs can also enter into an arrangement where national government
   identifies the overall needs for rehabilitation and recovery and the non-government partners will
   use their own funds to implement specific PPAs. In this modality, the NGA/LGU has already
   identified certain PPAs under the Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan that can be funded and
   implemented by partners in affected areas. Common projects under this arrangement are
   construction of school buildings, evacuation centers or daycare centers. This could also include
   livelihood projects and provision of micro or small businesses with capital, donation of motorboats,
   farm and fishing equipment. This could reduce the number of PPAs that government will directly
   implement and speed up the process considering that Private Sector partners, CSOs and
   Development Partners usually have business presence in different regions and provinces that might
   be affected by disasters.

    The role of NGAs or LGUs in this arrangement is to facilitate the smooth implementation of PPAs
    and provide a conducive environment for partners to implement the projects. It should also ensure
    that the PPAs implemented are included in the overall rehabilitation and recovery program and
    affected communities are served. The assistance provided by the Private Sector, Development
    Partners, and CSOs in this type of arrangement would be significant if it lessens the financing
    requirement of government and reduces the implementation bottlenecks.

d. Private Sector donates funds and National Government or LGU implements PPAs – There are also
   instances where the Private Sector partners donate funds for the rehabilitation and recovery
   program and the NGA or LGU implements the PPAs. The donation in this case could be specific (i.e.
   for implementation of sectoral interventions such as construction of schools or houses, provision of
   livelihood such as farm and fishing inputs and implements, start-up capital for micro and small
   business enterprise, or distribution of shelter kits or education materials). This modality is used
   when private organizations or individuals based in other countries would like to donate the
   proceeds to certain NGAs, LGUs, or communities for the implementation of projects. The
   government should have a mechanism in place to ensure that funds donated are accounted for and
   actually implemented. The monitoring and reporting of the PPAs and implementation arrangement
   should be clear and established to ensure accountability and transparency.




                                                                                                      50
Annex J. Standards for Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery Communications

A simple but effective communications strategy is a key component that would help determine the
success of the government’s rehabilitation and recovery efforts. The disaster rehabilitation and recovery
framework shall include a communications strategy based on the following key principles:

Key Principles
Establish communication protocols between national and local governments, and other relevant
stakeholders to discuss rehabilitation and recovery programs, projects and issues for regular updating
and reporting. Identify focal persons/talking heads who can provide information and communicate well.
Manage expectations by providing proactive messages to address/clarify recovery issues and delays in
the implementation of programs and projects. Establish a feedback mechanism at the national and local
level that allows various sectors and the affected communities to be heard. Establish transparency and
accountability throughout the recovery process.

Involve the public and affected communities in the recovery process through constant updates,
feedback on issues, and plans and timeframes for implementation. Establish the regularity of releases of
information. This will facilitate public understanding and sympathy.

Key Messages
The Lead Agency or LGU together with other stakeholders shall craft straightforward and consistent
messages outlining the following: (a) key roles of government, the community and other stakeholders;
(b) recovery priorities; (c) flagship programs and targets; (d) recovery policies; (e) available recovery
funds; (f) timeframes for completion; (g) implementation issues and progress in the recovery; and (h)
how the communities can be more involved in the recovery process.
Clear, simple and relatable key messages will help put all the recovery stakeholders on the same page.
Proactive and uplifting messages will help reinforce the trust of the public in the rehabilitation and
recovery efforts. The identification of specific audience and crafting specific messages directed to them
is also important.

Spokespersons - the messenger is equally important as the message. It is necessary to identify the focal
persons or spokespersons for the rehabilitation and recovery efforts at the national and local levels. The
talking head has to be calm, knowledgeable and credible.

Forms of Communication - the use of posters, comics, hand-outs, videos, radio clips, and other relevant
media can be used to package the key recovery messages. This will catch the attention of the public and
keep them engaged in the process. Audio and video materials are creative ways of presenting the
Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan and its progress. This complements traditional presentations/reports.

Communications Channels - the Communications Strategy will focus on using channels and methods
which are efficient and practical for government and effective for the target audience. It will also focus
on using communication channels capable of establishing an open communications venue among all
stakeholders involved in the recovery efforts. Channels for communicating the recovery initiatives
include, but are not limited to:


                                                                                                         51
                                Box AJ. 1 Various Communication Channels

        Website. An accessible rehabilitation and recovery website will serve as a vehicle to
         disseminate information and provide updates on recovery efforts. It is a tool that allows
         stakeholders to monitor progress in the delivery of flagship projects, and participate in,
         and/or pledge additional support.
        Television, Radio, and Newspapers. The government will also utilize traditional media
         such as television, radio, and newspapers to disseminate information or clarify issues
         relating to the recovery. The government media channels can also be tapped.
        Social Media. Government can use social media to provide information, monitor public
         perceptions, and receive feedback from stakeholders and the public. This will help the
         Government reach out to more audience within the country and abroad.
        Community Meetings. Community meetings are effective to communicate with target
         audiences who are not reached through traditional media or where the information that
         needs to be communicated are best explained through personal interaction. This can be
         done with the LGUs and affected communities and other stakeholders.
        Rehabilitation and Recovery Newsletter: “Easy to Read Materials?. These simple and
         easy to read materials written in the language and style understood by the people in the
         affected communities can help inform people about the rehabilitation and recovery
         progress. This can be distributed during community consultation meetings.

All the components of a Communications Strategy can be packaged into a snapshot or communications
grid that will allow officials and talking heads to have a quick look of the issues, key messages, focal
person and the medium of communications.




                                                                                                       52
           Figure AJ. 1 Sample Communications Snapshot for Rehabilitation and Recovery Issues
Issue/Concern (Source)                 Explanation                  Talking Head          Medium

Recovery Plan is taking    Thorough vetting and consultation      Lead Agency, LGU,   TV, Radio, Social
a long time to prepare     with stakeholders, consolidating all   NEDA                Media, Print
                           PPAs, addressing sensitivities         spokesperson
S: Philstar, Rappler                                                                  Press Briefing
                           Cite global good practice and                              national/local
                           contrast with other disasters

Transitional Shelters      Standards and designs followed,        DPWH, HUDCC,        TV, Radio, Social
are substandard            availability of materials, monitor     NHA, LGU, lead      Media, Print
                           construction, ensure financial         agency
S: ABS-CBN, GMA7                                                                      Press Briefing
                           integrity, provide solutions           spokesperson
                                                                                      national/local
                           correcting the issue (inspection of
                           hardware and suppliers)

Where is the P20B          Explain funds pledged, committed,      Lead Agency, LGU,   TV, Radio, Social
Fund for Rehabilitation    and given to GoP, clarify fund         DoF/DBM/DFA         Media, Print
and Recovery               source, explain in simple terms        spokesperson
                                                                                      Press Briefing
                           funding, call on partners to
S: CNN, Rappler, INQ                                                                  national/local/
                           properly report assistance
                                                                                      international

Delay in the repairs of    Apologize, explain reasons of delay,   DPWH, DEPED,        TV, Radio, Social
school buildings           provide new timeframe, propose         LGU, Lead Agency    Media, Print
                           options for alternative learning       Spokesperson
S: Sunstar, PIA, Rappler                                                              Press Briefing
                           venues
                                                                                      national/local

Rape and Violence in       Condemn the act of violence, rape      DSWD, PCW, NYC,     TV, Radio, Social
Evacuation Centers         ensure that investigation is done,     Lead Agency, LGU,   Media, Print
                           prevention and solutions, deploy       DoJ Spokesperson
S: BBC, ABS-CBN,                                                                      Press Briefing
                           doctor and psycho-social therapy
Bombo Radyo, INQ                                                                      national/local/
                                                                                      international




                                                                                                          53
References

 1.    Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda (GoP, 2013)
 2.    RAY I4R – Implementation for Results (GoP, 2013)
 3.    GFDRR Philippines Yolanda Recovery Case Study
 4.    WBG Recovery and Reconstruction Planning in the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
       Summary of Knowledge Brief (2014)
 5.    Open Reconstruction Final Report submitted to DBM
 6.    WB Legal and Institutional Review of the DRRM in the Philippines (TA to NEDA 2016)
 7.    WB CAT-DDO2 TAs to help agencies meet the results indicators (Policy Framework for Post-
       Disaster Shelter Assistance, Program for Emergency Income Support, Revisions of NBCP, Socio-
       economic resilience methodology)
 8.    Typhoon Yolanda Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan (GoP, 2014)
 9.    UN Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation of the Typhoon Haiyan Response
10.    ADB Knowledge Sharing on Post-Disaster Reconstruction Report
11.    NDRRMC Coffee Table Book: Yolanda, Y it Happened
12.    Social Watch: Tracking the Yolanda Reconstruction Fund
13.    Social Protection and Disaster Risk Management in the Philippines (The Case of Typhoon
       Yolanda) by Thomas Bowen (World Bank Group)
14.    ASEAN Disaster Recovery Reference Guide (April 2016)
15.    UNISDR/IRP Guidance Note on Recovery – Pre-Disaster Recovery Planning (2013)
16.    World Bank “Resilient Recovery: An Imperative for Resilient Development? (2014)
17.    Strong, Safe and Resilient: A Strategic Policy Guide for DRM in EAP, Jha and Stanton Geddes




                                                                                                54
