CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED USE ONLY (NOT TO BE USED BY THIRD PARTIES)




ARGENTINA
DEVELOPING DEEP AND SUSTAINABLE HOUSING FINANCE MARKETS


JUNE 2017




                                                                        THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                                                          FINANCE AND MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
                                                        LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN REGION
                                                       TABLE OF CONTENTS
                         Developing Deep and Sustainable Housing Finance in Argentina


  Introduction and Context .......................................................................................................................... 3
  Inflation Indexation and Associated Risks................................................................................................ 9
  Development of a UVA-CER Hedge ...................................................................................................... 11
  Mortgage Insurance ................................................................................................................................ 12
  The Need and Conditions for Capital Market Funding of Mortgage Loans ........................................... 12
  Capital market solutions for housing finance ......................................................................................... 15
  Recommendations ................................................................................................................................... 17




                                         ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

                      ALM                    Asset/Liability Management
                      BCRA                   Banco Central de la Republica Argentina
                      CER                    Reference Stabilization Coefficient
                      CVS                    Coeficiente de Variacion Salarial (Wage Index)
                      FGS                    Fondo de Garantia de Sustentabilidad (Funded Pension Fund)
                      FRECH                  Fondo de Reserva de la Cartera Hipotecaria
                      IIBB                   Impuesto a los Ingresos Brutos (Tax on Gross Income)
                      NSFR                   Net Stable Funding Ratio
                      RMBS                   Residential Mortgage Backed Securities
                      SCP                    Solucion Casa Propia (credit-linked housing subsidy program)
                      STC                    Simple, Transparent and Comparable (IOSCO norm)
                      SVH                    Secretaria de Vivienda y Habitat
                      UVA                    Unidad de Valor Adquisitivo (CER based Price Index)
                      UVI                    Unidad de Vivienda (Cost of construction Index)

This report was produced by a team comprising Steen Byskov, Senior Financial Sector Specialist and co-TTL; Olivier Hassler
Senior Housing Finance Consultant; and Loic Chiquier, Global Lead/Senior Adviser, Housing Finance. John Pollner was TTL of
the Task. The Practice Manager was Zafer Mustafaoglu and the Country Director, Jesko Hentschel.


                                                                  Page 2 of 20
Introduction and Context

The housing deficit in Argentina is estimated to affect 6 million out of the 24 million
households nationally. Three quarters of this deficit is qualitative, but the quantitative shortage
increases every year. Approximately 230,000 new households are formed yearly in the country,
but only 190,000 new formal sector units are produced annually, and this figure is decreasing.
The result has been the growth of informal housing areas in most urban areas, as well as a sharp
deterioration of living conditions, in particular through a rise of overcrowding - sharing units
between more occupants being one way to deal with the unaffordability of dwellings. As
everywhere, this situation primarily affects low and moderate income households.

Macro-economic turmoil has contributed to this imbalance in two ways. First, the
continuous inflation and currency depreciation made real estate a refuge investment protecting
the capital value of investors. Housing prices in large cities, and in particular in Buenos Aires,
have been steadily increasing in peso terms over the last 15 years. They are typically
denominated in US dollars. Second, rapid inflation acts a strong deterrent to the provision of
long term finance and in particular mortgages. Housing supply of course has been directed
towards customers who can afford high prices and do not need credit to buy, and has become
unaffordable for the majority. There is hardly any new commercial supply in the capital area at
prices affordable for the majority of households, especially if lending is done with interest rates
significantly above 20%. Market-based renting has been affected by the same affordability
issues, in particular because of ways to circumvent in practice the prohibition of indexation.

In addition to its social impact, the dire situation of the housing sector also has negative
consequences on the Argentinean economy. This is due to the multiplier effect of housing
investment, which was estimated in 20061 to be around 1.8 in monetary terms, and 1.6 in terms
of employment, per new unit. The decline of housing construction, now below the 5 percent
GDP then estimated, has therefore had a significantly negative spill-over effect on overall
economic activity. As the housing market enables households to close the current housing gap,
housing investments should be greater than 5 percent of GDP. For comparison, in the mature US
market, residential housing investments have historically2 been around 5 percent of GDP and in
Mexico around 6 percent of GDP.

The government overhauled the public housing assistance policy by launching a 2016-2019
“Integrated Housing and Habitat Plan? (plan integral de Vivienda y Habitat). This plan aims
to stimulate the production, or to provide 1 million housing solutions through two programs: a
neighborhood improvement program targeting informal settlements, and a credit-linked subsidy
program, “Solucion Casa Propria,? through which up-front subsidies are granted to first time
home buyers who contract mortgages, thus leveraging the impact of public intervention with


1
    Review of Argentina’s Housing Sector World Bank Policy Research Paper November 2006
2
    The contribution has been lower since the global financial crisis.

                                                 Page 3 of 20
bank credit. The program,3 targets households earning between two and four times the minimum
wage, or 16,000 to 32,000 pesos (US$1,000 - $2,000). Approved families approach banks to
finance up to 70 percent of the value of the homes. SCP has received applications for subsidies
from 250,000 families. In practice, the selection results in a drastic reduction of eligible
applicants,4 but still the new program seems to meet a strong demand. However, its success is
contingent upon the availability of bank lending for housing.

The broad prohibition of indexation has for a long time stunted the provision of long term,
finance. Historically, the prohibition stemmed from two sources: First, indexation was forbidden
by the convertibility law of 1991 that instituted the peg of the national currency with the US
dollar. Second, its reintroduction to offset the partial pesoification of loans formerly denominated
in dollar in 2002 at the peak of the crisis was done at the worst possible time, when inflation,
measured by the newly created CER, surged – with a 40% peak in 2002. This resulted in a wave
of delinquencies despite a mitigating measure by BCRA – long term lenders had to offer
borrowers the option to extend the maturity of loans by up to 50% if the payment increase from
one month to another exceeded 1 percent;5 leading the government to freeze foreclosure
procedures. The prohibition was reinstated from the second quarter of 2004 onwards –except for
use in Treasury bonds.

Housing finance in Argentina has been depressed since the 2001/2002 financial crisis
(Figure 1). In the late 1990s, the market had grown to almost 4 percent of GDP facilitated in part
by foreign currency lending. During the crisis, foreign currency assets and liabilities were
forcibly converted into pesos, generating significant losses to lenders, and banned for most types
of consumer credit. With the crisis, mortgage lending came basically to a halt, and since then
higher inflation brought peso interest rates to levels exceeding 25%. As a result, residential
mortgages outstanding fell to barely 0.4 percent of GDP in (2016)6. Very deep mortgage markets
are mostly a high-income country phenomenon, but nevertheless, many countries at similar
income levels have markets worth as much as 15-20 percent of GDP (Figure 2). In 2015,
basically only three banks, all State-linked, were effectively offering housing loans: Banco
Hipotecario, Banco de la Nacion, and Banco Ciudad (Buenos Aires).




3
  The pilot phase of the programs is supported by a World Bank Project, “Argentina Integrated Habitat and Housing
Project.?
4
  Early May 2017, that is, 8-9 months after effective launch, 45,000 applications had been sanctioned.
5
  Decreto 905/02 of July 2003
6
  Reflects bank credit, without the State PROCREAR I program (below market lending funded by the pension
fund’s central structure, FGS, through Banco Hipotecario).

                                                  Page 4 of 20
     Figure 1. Housing loans/GDP and interest rate                                                                      Figure 2. Mortgage credit/GDP, latest
4%                                                                                60%                          100
                                                       Pesos (left axis)




                                                                                         Mortgage credit/GDP (%)
                                                                                  50%                              80
3%                                                     FX (left axis)
                                                                                  40%
                                                       Bank lending rate                                           60
2%                                                                                30%
                                                       (right axis)
                                                                                  20%                              40
1%
                                                                                  10%                              20
0%                                                                                0%
                                                                                                                    0
     1994

            1996

                   1998

                          2000

                                 2002

                                        2004

                                               2006

                                                      2008

                                                             2010

                                                                    2012

                                                                           2014
                                                                                                                        0             20              40           60
                                                                                                                            GNI per capita, '000 US$, atlas method
Source: BCRA, World Bank, and IMF.
                                                                                        Source: Hofinet.org and World Bank.
Note: Bank lending rate is in local currency and
                                                                                        Note: Argentina indicated with a large circle/dot.
reported by the IMF.


Indexation has recently been revived, and applied to mortgage lending which will become a
contributor to economic growth. Besides the obvious benefits of home ownership, the
accumulation of wealth and collateral it implies also helps to secure additional financing for
investment once the mortgage loan is substantially paid off. The possibility of indexing loans
was introduced by a new law (S-976/16) and by the BCRA (communication A 5945 of April 8,
2016). Indexation to foreign currency or lending to households directly in foreign currency
remain prohibited reflecting a relevant prudential approach following the negative experience of
the past. The policy of taming inflation, now measured by a new and credible CPI, creates a
conducive environment for this move. Argentinean and international experience shows that if
inflation remains out of control, indexation can in fact be a destabilizing factor for banking
systems.

While inflation and interest rates remain high, indexation is facilitating a more
accommodating repayment profile and hedging of risk. In the high interest rate environment,
nominal interest rate loans require high                 Figure 3: Inflation and Expectations
repayment rates in the early years of the loan.    50
Inflation indexed loans provide for level                  40.0
                                                   40
payments in real terms, which implies
payments growing with inflation and starting       30
                                                                                                          Percent




                                                                       21.6
at a low level, making credit affordable for       20                              15.0
many more households. The indexation of                                                       10.2
loans changes the repayment profile and            10
reduces payments in the early years by more         0
than half, thus considerably improving the                2016         2017       2018        2019
affordability of credit. The indexation also Source: BCRA.
facilitates the supply of finance as it shields Note: Median value, as of May 2017.

                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
investors from inflation risk. Inflation is expected to decline in the next few years (Figure 3), in
which case the use of indexation would be a temporary transitional arrangement. However,
market players’ expectations can be slower to adjust to the new context than the actual speed of
this decline.

The extension of UVA mortgages was an immediate success. The stock of UVA mortgage
loans reached about 7 billion pesos (US$ 450 million), and banks, including those that are for all
practical purposes new entrants in the mortgage market, have rapid expansion plans – the
consolidated market forecast is a volume outstanding of 50 billion pesos at the end of 2017.
These types of mortgages should represent the vast majority of housing loans, the stock of which
grew from 25.3 to 35.9 billion pesos between December 2015 and April 2017 (annualized
growth of 30%).

With benign economic conditions, the mortgage market as a share of GDP may deepen by
as much as 1 percent of GDP per year (Figures 4a-4b). Although many countries at similar
income levels have much greater credit depth, the most successful countries have grown their
credit depth only around 1 percentage point of GDP per year. This has been the case in Chile,
Colombia’s market grew even faster for a short period, and many countries in Central Europe
experienced similar growth since the mid-2000s.

A fairly strong mortgage market infrastructure including for securitization, was developed
in Argentina during the prior era of financial stability. A founding housing finance law
24.441 of January 1995 was passed to this effect. The infrastructure includes: (1) the option of a
non-judicial foreclosure proceedings, (2) a strong securitization regime, (3) a legal instrument,
Cedulas Hipotecarias, consisting of easily transferable mortgage loans that entitle lenders to the
fast track foreclosure route and are the basic element of securitization structure; and (4) the legal
concept of a trust –fideicomiso financiero- involving fiduciary duties in line with international
standards. Fideicomisos are actively used, including as an instrument of secured lending
(fideicomiso de garantia).

The securitization of mortgage loans had been well tested until the 2001-2002 crisis, and
this funding tool continues to be used for shorter term financial assets today. Argentina also
“faithfully implemented? the standardized Basel regime for securitization.7 Once the mortgage
market takes off and mortgage bond securitizations are implemented, such structures could have
knock-on effects in other parts of the capital markets to develop a broader set of asset-backed
securities with longer maturities.

Still, overly fast credit deepening may strain institutional capacity and in more mature
markets raise concerns about pricing bubbles and financial stability. Initially, institutional
capacity for making good loans will be the main question. At low levels of credit depth, price
bubbles and stability are not material concerns. If housing prices grow consistently for a

7
    BCBS Assessment of Basel III Risk-based capital regulations in Argentina September 2016

                                                   Page 6 of 20
sustained period, increasing housing credit and prices may mutually support each other and
contribute to a pricing bubble. Financial instability has often been associated with housing
bubbles, and it will require monitoring as the market develops. In Argentina, demand for houses
has at least in part by driven by investments in a relatively safe store of value while inflation has
been high. As lower income parts of the population gain access to housing loans, a responsive
supply of housing will be important to mitigate the risk of price increases.

                 Figure 4a: Mortgage credit/GDP – Latin America                               Figure 4b: Mortgage credit/GDP – Europe
                 25
                                                                                      25
                                                   Chile                                                                 Poland
                 20
                                                                                      20




                                                                         Percent of GDP
Percent of GDP




                         Colombia
                 15                                                                   15                                          Slovenia


                 10                              Mexico
                                                                                      10                                     Turkey
                                                          Brazil
                  5                                                                       5     Czech Rep.
                                         Peru                                                                      Romania
                                                    Argentina
                  0                                                                       0
                                                                                               2000
                                                                                               2001
                                                                                               2002
                                                                                               2003
                                                                                               2004
                                                                                               2005
                                                                                               2006
                                                                                               2007
                                                                                               2008
                                                                                               2009
                                                                                               2010
                                                                                               2011
                                                                                               2012
                                                                                               2013
                                                                                               2014
                                                                                               2015
                                                                                               2016
                      2006
                      1990
                      1992
                      1994
                      1996
                      1998
                      2000
                      2002
                      2004

                      2008
                      2010
                      2012
                      2014
                      2016




Source: Hofinet.org based on national sources and the World Bank.
Note: The time scale for Europe is shorter than for LAC.


To successfully grow the mortgage market, banks need funding and tools to manage
interest rate and liquidity risks – i.e., in the absence of significant derivative markets,
funding from the capital market. While the mortgage market is small relative to bank balance
sheets, these risks can easily be managed. Private sector deposits are by far the largest source of
funding for banks, which in the case of mortgages creates liquidity, and possibly interest rate,
and asset /liability mismatches. However, the small size of the Argentinean banking sector
combined with expected strong growth in mortgage lending makes it urgent to manage the risks.
This is a requirement of the prudential framework. Very early on (with 2003 regulation), the
BCRA imposed a capital requirement for ALM mismatches and interest rate risk in the banking
book.

The Basle III regime is being implemented progressively since 2013 and a new Liquidity
Coverage Ratio is in force since 2015. The Net Stable Funding Ratio, which requires that the
funding of immobile assets should be long enough to withstand a one year market disruption
with no access to new refinancing and will limit the use of short term funding, is currently
monitored by BCRA and should be fully implemented in 2018. Its actual coverage will depend
on the weighting given to the various balance sheet items. In particular, retail deposits can be
considered in general as largely stable. But in the case of Argentina, the historic experiences

                                                                   Page 7 of 20
should lead to exercise caution in this respect. The eventual development of a mortgage bond
market based on housing loan portfolios, will also help to increase the supply of stable long term
funding instruments.

The volume of institutionally managed financial assets is low in Argentina - only about 20
percent GDP- compared to other middle income economies (Figure 5). The pension funds
were nationalized in 2008. Their assets, which are managed by a dedicated public entity, the
Fondo de Garantía de Sustentabilidad (FGS), are the main source of institutional investment in
Argentina. Pensions are based on a pay-as-you go system, which limits the resources available
for investment. FGS acts more or less as a sovereign fund with the objective of strengthening the
foundations of the national economy and stimulate its growth. Its fiduciary duties towards
pensioners have been reaffirmed and strengthened – as illustrated by a 2016 law of “historic
reparations toward pensioners? that facilitates pursuing claims of pensioners whose interest s are
deemed to have been hurt by the nationalization. Insurance companies and mutual funds, each
with assets of about 4 percent of GDP, could potentially invest in mortgage securities although
mutual funds in particular have a short investment horizon.
Figure 5: Assets of Institutional Investors in Argentina




Source: BCRA Boletin de estabilidad Financiera First semester 2016


A tax amnesty to repatriate funds led to US$116bn (21% of GDP) of repatriated financial
savings that may create new volume resources available for long term investments,
including to finance housing loans. The amnesty is contingent on the use of funds, and

                                                 Page 8 of 20
investments in housing and mortgages are eligible8. The Tax Amnesty Program will help current
financial needs and expand the tax base. The results achieved by the program, which lasted 8
months, are well above the recent international experiences of Chile, Brazil and Italy (8%, 3%
and 4% of GDP, respectively), though below Indonesia initiative of 2016-2017 (40% of GDP).

Furthermore, in terms of tax collection the Argentine experience reached a worldwide
record of 1.8 percent of GDP, almost doubling Indonesia’s figures (0.9% of GDP). Close to
half of the declared assets in the program were financial investments (48%), followed by bank
accounts (29%), properties (17%) and other assets (6%). Only 20 percent of the total declared
assets were settled within Argentina. In fact, 95 percent of declared financial investments and 47
percent of the declared properties were settled in foreign countries. Accordingly, the overall
foreign assets declared (US$96 bn.) represents close to 40% of the estimated assets held by
Argentinians in foreign countries, according to the latest International Investment Position
(US$232 bn.; INDEC, 2015), which further illustrates the significance of these results.


Inflation Indexation and Associated Risks

High inflation, combined with the fact that even if it is progressively tamed markets will
keep such inflation among possible scenarios for some time, means indexation will facilitate
the market in a transitional phase – until expectations are adjusted. Fixed interest rates are
high and with the lending rate currently above 25 percent, the payments in the early years are
prohibitively expensive for many. Indexation to inflation allows for level payments in real
terms, which implies lower payments in the early years of the loan.

Inflation indexation however bears risks for the borrowers should consumer prices grow
faster than incomes. The indexed loans are structured to create constant payments in real terms
over the life of the loan. Thus, if inflation grows faster than incomes, the loan repayments will
become less and less affordable over time. The risk is of course higher for lower income
households whose earnings cannot cushion large repayment increases. Lack of credible official
inflation data makes it complicated to analyze the historic performance of real wages (Figure 6).
A construction cost index has been proposed and created by law, but its monthly variation may
substantially differ from the inflation index. International experience (Figure 7) suggests that
negative real wages frequently happen, but declines of more than 5 percent are unusual.
Considering the starting point of high inflation, the risk in Argentina is likely to be greater than
the international experience would suggest.




8
    Ley de Sinceramiento Fiscal y Reparación Histórica a los Jubilados, June 29, 2016, Chapter II.

                                                     Page 9 of 20
                                Figure 6: Price and wage indices, levels                                                                                                                        Figure 7: Real annual median wage growth
                             2,500                                                                                                                                                            Frequency distribution for available data points
                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50.5
                                                                Construction prices
                             2,000                                                                                                                                                            50
    Index, Oct. 2001 = 100




                                                                Wages
                                                                                                                                                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                    Percent
                                                                Official consumer prices                                                                                                                           28.2
                             1,500                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                              20                                  11.7
                             1,000                                                                                                                                                            10     2.1    4.1                            3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   <-10%   <-5%    <0%     <5%    <10% 10% or
                              500                                                                                                                                                                                                       more
                                                                                                                                                                                    Source: International Labor Organization and World Bank.
                                0                                                                                                                                                   /1 Based on median nominal earnings of employees
                                                                                                                                                              Jul 2015
                                                                      Jul 2005




                                                                                                                  Jul 2010
                                                           Apr 2004




                                                                                                       Apr 2009




                                                                                                                                                   Apr 2014
                                                Jan 2003




                                                                                            Jan 2008




                                                                                                                                        Jan 2013
                                     Oct 2001




                                                                                 Oct 2006




                                                                                                                             Oct 2011




                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 2016
                                                                                                                                                                                    available from ILO deflated by the consumer price index. 47
                                                                                                                                                                                    countries are represented with 436 observations between
                                                                                                                                                                                    1994 and 2015.

Sources: Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Censos (INDEC).
Notes: The wage index is measured by Coeficiente de Variación Salarial (CVS), and construction prices are measured by the
Indice del Costo de la Construcción (ICC). Consumer prices are measured by the official consumer price index. After the break
in the series, the index was reset to equal the wage index to help illustrate the evolution between the two.



The emergence of indexed lending products requires that specific consumer information
and protection measures be taken. There is a fairly well developed BCRA framework for the
protection of the users of financial services.9 But unsurprisingly, this framework does not include
any provision regarding indexed mortgages, a very new type of lending. New principles should
be established to ensure that borrowers are duly informed of, and well understand, the
consequences of indexation on the nominal repayment amounts.

A mitigation measure known as the “prorroga? (postponement) is provided for by the UVA
regulation to limit the risks incurred by borrowers, but is of limited impact. The mitigation
measure consists of the option given to borrowers to request a lengthening the repayment period
in case the CER exceeds by more than 10 percent, the increase in wages. The maturity extension
is limited to 25 percent of the initial tenor, or 5 years, and provides only a very partial protection.

For banks, inflation indexation creates asset-liability management (ALM) risk as well as
potential credit risk. When banks lend at an inflation indexed rate, they need a matching
liability to avoid assuming inflation risk. Although the Government is issuing inflation indexed
instruments, the banks have not, nor do they have inflation indexed deposits. The index,



9
        Last updated in March 2017

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20
Coeficiente de Estabilización de Referencia (CER)10 is well-established, and the challenge is to
develop the deposit or capital market linked to the instrument. Whereas the ALM risk is
acceptable for small amounts, it must be addressed to develop a deep and sustainable housing
finance market. The above-mentioned affordability risk for borrowers could translate into credit
risk for the banks if wages rise faster than inflation and borrowers must allocate a larger share of
their income to loan repayment.

In spite of the economic rationale for inflation indexation and an apparent legal basis, legal
risk associated with the indexation remains. The abovementioned law (S-976/16) specifically
mentions another price index, Unidades de Vivienda (UVI), based on the cost of construction in
Buenos Aires. The team has not conducted a legal analysis, and national observers indicate
confidence in the UVA/CER based lending. However, borrowers might challenge, legally or
politically, the validity of loans based on CER rather than UVI should inflation substantially
exceed construction prices increases.

Indexation is an interim solution, and adjustable rate mortgage as currently offered by a
couple of banks including Banco de la Nacion may become an important product over the
medium term. Until switching to UVA mortgages, Banco de la Nacion offered, a product
combining a rate of 14 percent for the first three years, then a floating rate with installments
capped by the wage index (CVS) evolution. However, this type of program is only economical
for this bank because it has special access to low cost funds, and private banks cannot match it.
As inflation and market interest rates decline over time, a similar product may become a more
important alternative to indexation.

Development of a UVA-CER Hedge

The risk of a discrepancy between wages and inflation, borne by borrowers, is clearly a
credit risk for the financial system. If the debt burden-to-income ratio increases above certain
levels, borrowers will not be able to sustain it and will default. This is not only a risk for lenders,
but also a strong obstacle to securitization by creating an uncertainty of cash flows from the
underlying loan assets, detrimental to the valuation of portfolios backing bond securitizations.

The government and BCRA are therefore contemplating a hedging mechanism, similar to
schemes developed in the past in Mexico and Colombia (Box 1 below). A fund would be
created that assumes the gap between CPI and wages, thus removing of declining purchasing
power for borrowers while leaving loans and their funding indexed to inflation. This could be an
important trigger of a large scale revival of the mortgage market, including the secondary
market, and in particular a critical factor for banks to participate in the new credit-linked housing
subsidy scheme that combines down payment assistance with market based mortgages, the SCP.


10
 The CER is provided daily, which allows for daily valuation. It is the basis of the index Unidad de Valor
Adquisitivo (UVA), which in turn is based on a consumer price index.

                                                  Page 11 of 20
To ensure the sustainability of the scheme, sufficient financial resources must be secured
for it. First, borrowers would contribute charges similar to insurance premiums. But given the
macro-economic nature of the covered risk, which is out of the control of lenders or borrowers,
the government should be also a contributor. Providing a capital endowment from the onset
would establish the credibility of the coverage. The 2016 law that instituted the cost of
construction based UVI index stipulated that the government should allocate 50 billion pesos to
fund UVI loans, a sum by far higher than what would be needed for an initial capitalization of a
hedging mechanism.

             Box 1. The hedging experience of the Mexican and Colombian mortgage markets

There have been successful experiences of indexation as a transition instrument. Mexico and Colombia
developed as transition instruments, mechanisms to reduce market risks of long term housing loans that applied
until the macroeconomic environment improved and financial markets could offer adequate instruments for
coverage. In Mexico, the investment unit swap was applied and protected mortgage creditors against differences
in indexes (on the asset side, the minimum wage and on the financing side, the inflation rate). In the late 1990s,
Colombia’s banking system suffered a substantial crisis, largely linked to inflation, the change in variable
mortgage rates, and a real estate bubble. Among multiple factors, the management of indexation to try to
reconcile the interests of borrowers and lenders initially aggravated the turmoil. A hedging mechanism
implemented by the central bank, the FRECH fund, allowed borrowers to obtain a contract with a maximum
floating interest rate, allowing them to cover themselves against differences that might exist between their
obligations based on the interest rates, and loans indexed to inflation. In all cases, the governments provided a
form of macro coverage against “catastrophes? if the selected indexes followed unanticipated worsening trends.
These types of interventions were essential so that private investors and borrowers could return to participate in
the market.



Mortgage Insurance

To encourage lending to lower income segments as well as to facilitate the securitization of
such loans, credit default insurance or guarantees could potentially be considered. The risk
transfer would encourage lenders to cater to lower income segments, or households with
insufficient prior savings, and would facilitate securitization. At this stage of the market re-birth,
such mechanisms appear premature. First, the priority objective must be to multiply the number
of institutions re-engaging durably in housing finance. Second, the main factor of credit risk, the
decline of incomes in real terms should be addressed by the hedging mechanism. Third,
delinquencies must be experienced and measured before setting up coverage mechanisms and
calibrating their cost.

The Need and Conditions for Capital Market Funding of Mortgage Loans

Capital market solutions have been basically excluded from the financial landscape since
the 2001/2002 crisis due to macro-financial instability and institutional policy. Macro-

                                                  Page 12 of 20
financial instability made long term finance transactions impossible. In addition, pension funds
were nationalized, and they diverted funding to the government, which needed to cover big
budget deficits without access to international markets. In the new macro-economic and political
context, the capital market has again become a funding option for both the Government and for
housing finance. The emergence of new indexed instruments – for a long time prohibited or
limited to Treasury Bonds - provides investors with a way to immunize capital against inflation.
In Chile, the re-development of the unused covered bond framework (letras de credito
hipotecario) in the late 1970s combined with a new and reliable inflation index (Unidad de
Fomento –UF) gave a strong boost to the provision of long term housing loans. The volume of
housing finance loans quickly reached 20 percent of GDP, one of the highest levels in emerging
economies.

This example illustrates how much this funding source is needed to spur the re-birth of
mortgage lending in a sound and sustainable way by helping lenders to manage liquidity
and interest risks. Conditions are however required to fulfill this potential role – in particular
by reconciling the aspirations of borrowers and investors in terms of pricing and characteristics.

The interests of the relevant participants are summarized below (Table 1). Lenders in
Argentina will at least in the near term be banks. Funding is currently from depositors, but
capital market investors should become a significant source over time as the market grows.


                 Table 1: The interests of borrowers, banks, depositors and investors.
        Borrowers                      Banks                      Depositors                     Investors
Pricing
Very high nominal           Loans are currently            Real interest rate products   Argentinean sovereign
interest rates (28%-30%     profitable with deposit        are not developed.            bonds pay 3-4 percent
until recently, currently   funding, a risk factor if it   Nominal rates are above       over inflation. Risk and
paying 5-8.5 percent over   is the single source of        20 percent.                   liquidity premiums must
inflation on indexed        funding (volatility of                                       be added to lend to banks.
loans.                      deposits, floating interest
                            rates) and the volume is
                            large.
Credit risk
                            Banks assess and can                                         Investors are not ready to
                            assume the credit risk.                                      take over the risky
                            The system appears well                                      tranches of securitized
                            capitalized and solvency                                     portfolios today. Some
                            is not a near term                                           may eventually assume
                            constraint.                                                  part of the credit risk as
                                                                                         the mortgage market
                                                                                         matures and good data are
                                                                                         developed on default and
                                                                                         recovery rates. Argentina
                                                                                         has a securitization
                                                                                         framework that was well


                                                    Page 13 of 20
                                                                                             tested in the 1990s for
                                                                                             mortgages, only for short
                                                                                             term assets since the 2002
                                                                                             crisis
Interest rate risk
Interested in fixed interest   Interested in matching         Interested in earning          Willing to assume interest
rates.                         interest rates on assets       positive interest rates in     rate risk depending on the
                               and liabilities, and           real terms                     type of assets they
                               locking in margins in real                                    manage
                               terms
Inflation risk
A complex question, but        Will accept only a small       The market for inflation       Very interested in indexed
are averse to payments         mismatch between assets        linked savings is not well     instruments. Are already
growing faster than            and liabilities.               developed, but could           investing in inflation
income. Debt growing                                          grow (one of the               linked sovereign bills and
despite capital                                               objectives of the law that     bonds.
repayments can be an                                          created the UVI).
issue
Liquidity risk
                               Will accept liquidity risk     Interested in liquidity and    Market liquidity
                               to a certain extent, based     will not tie their funds for   importance depending on
                               on the stability of core       the duration of a mortgage     the category of investor.
                               deposit bases, as long as      loan.                          Some liquidity always
                               the yield curve makes                                         required for proactive
                               term transformation                                           asset management.
                               profitable, after taken into
                               account the cost of capital
                               required by the regulation
                               applicable to asset-
                               liability mismatches.
Prepayment risk
Interested in being able to    Will take the risk in return   n. a.                          May assume prepayment
repay the loan early           for compensation,                                             risk for a price as the
without excessive penalty      depending on consumer                                         mortgage market matures
                               protection rules.                                             and good data are
                               Low awareness today of                                        developed prepayment
                               the prepayment risk                                           behavior and interest rates
                               generated by indexed long                                     are relatively stable.
                               term loans, once                                              Valuation difficult today.
                               refinancing in Peso
                               becomes cheaper.


Thanks to the 2017 BCRA decree, banks can now issue UVA-indexed corporate bonds,
which was not allowed before. Three banks have been recently issuing UVA bonds of a limited
duration (between 2 and 5 years) at good conditions (UVA+2% to UVA + 2.9%) but the amounts
are quite limited and the duration is insufficient to cover the funding needs of expanding
mortgage markets. Still, in the perspective of market-based funding, banks increased the price of



                                                      Page 14 of 20
mortgage credit (range between UVA + 5.9% to UVA +8.5%)11 above the 5 percent limit
required to comply with the BCRA “productive lending? criteria that lending policies initially
sought to meet.

However, only a couple of banks have started to prepare an actual securitization program.
Banco de la Ciudad, a state owned bank, has proceeded the furthest. As the UVA portfolio
remains untested and unseasoned (RMBS typically apply to seasoned loans), rating agencies will
apply a conservative methodology, stress testing the resilience of these UVA mortgages to severe
inflation shocks. However, once the securitization market does take off, this will have a positive
impact on other sub-sectors in the capital markets and encourage additional asset/bond
securitizations which will generate increased market depth. By the same token, mutual funds
based on property or mortgage portfolios (REITS) could also develop and expand once a critical
mass is reached.

Capital market solutions for housing finance

In concept, several options exist for capital market solutions (Table 2). These are all used
globally, and multiple solutions often co-exist in mature markets. Because there are advantages
to scale, the development of the market can depend on which solutions are promoted when the
market is taking off.


                        Table 2. Capital Market Solutions in the Mortgage Market
Name                             Issuer               Mortgage loan         Investors’ security
                                                      Credit risk
Unsecured bonds                  Individual bank      Bank                  Bank
Mortgage covered bonds           Individual bank      Bank                  Bank and mortgage loans
by banks
Mortgage covered bonds           Centralized          Bank                  Liquidity facility (supervised) own
by centralized liquidity         facility                                   funds and mortgage loans
facility
Mortgage backed                  Centralized          Bank                  Bank and mortgage loans
securities with recourse12       facility
Mortgage backed                  Individual bank      Investor              Mortgage loans
securities without
recourse




11
   In Mexico and Colombia indexed mortgage rates were at 8-11 percent over inflation originally, making their
securitization possible.
12
   Various models could be contemplated including (i) direct sale of portfolios by a lender to an investor, with
recourse; (ii) securitization as a mere funding tool with junior tranches kept by the lender; (iii) an external credit
enhancement (wrap) of MBS by a specialized insurer or an agency as done by the US Fannie Mae.

                                                     Page 15 of 20
Until the UVA portfolios are seasoned, however, and have reached a critical mass, credit
risk cannot be transferred to investors. As well, primary loan originations by mortgage
lenders will need to ensure their standardization in loan contracts and terms, to pave the way for
securitization instruments which rely on uniform underlying asset characteristics. The valuation
of UVA mortgage portfolios including risk transfer provisions would be difficult today in the
absence of history and data on borrowers’ behavior. Moreover, the types of bond investors in
Argentina - mainly FGS, are restricted in their investment policy by fiduciary duties, and banks
and mutual funds do not have the profile to assume risky instruments, even if pricing were not an
obstacle. As such, FGS needs to be seen as a prudent investor that could participate if the
conditions are right, but not assume the role of policy maker in any way. In any event,
securitization can be used as a funding instrument and an important balance sheet management
tool, but not as a risk transfer instrument that would alleviate capital requirements.

In addition, prepayment risk, as well as the prorroga feature add an element of uncertainty
to the cash flows structure and timing. The possibility of maturity extension, as well as the
option to repay early UVA denominated mortgages when peso loans would become attractive
again, make the profile of future cash flows uncertain. This exacerbates valuation issues, and is
likely to be resolved by an additional premium on the return required by investors on
securitization transactions.

Another hurdle to overcome for securitization is the current imposition of an “Impuesto a
los Ingresos Brutos (IIBB) tax. This tax is in the purview of provincial governments. It is
typically of 7 percent of incomes stemming from financial assets, and it is paid by the holders of
these assets. The capital federal district lowered the rate of IIBB to 2 percent, a very positive
move for securitization. The taxation is based on the nominal gains, meaning that the
appreciation of capital as a result of indexation is taxed. This clearly affects the profitability of
investing in mortgage portfolios and is a strong obstacle to securitization.

The most viable capital market options include:

      Issuance of individual UVA indexed bonds by lenders is now allowed by BCRA. This
       solution would offer better security to investors if done by using the covered bond
       concept, i.e., bonds secured by high quality mortgage pools that ensure they will be
       serviced even in their issuer is insolvent, but such pools are not sold or taken off the
       balance sheet of the issuing bank. This instrument being first a general obligation of its
       issuer, overcomes the obstacles linked to the sale of portfolios to investors and the
       valuation of a new type of loans. It would be an intermediate instrument between
       corporate bonds – with more security – and securitization – with less complexity.

      Covered bonds would in addition immunize investors against the prepayment risk
       of indexed mortgages. This can materialize if, and when, the indexed repayment level
       exceeds the debt burden of peso denominated loans – a phenomenon that occurred in

                                           Page 16 of 20
         Chile, drastically affecting the securitization market. There are some elements in the legal
         framework that may be used as foundations for a covered bond regime, possibly the
         guarantee trust structure (fideicomiso de garantia) that exists in the civil code, and the
         form of “letras hipotecarias? created by the fundamental Housing Finance Law 24-441 of
         1995 that are today a key component of securitization.13 This option, however, would
         require adjustments to the legal framework to allow secured creditors to rank over
         depositors in a bankruptcy situation or at least a revised policy stance regarding the
         ranking of depositors. The latter condition raises banking policy issues, but numerous
         countries’ experience shows that they can be solved. A resolution regime including bail-
         in-able debt instruments, which Argentina as a member of G20 and of the Financial
         Stability Board may eventually develop, would in particular help reconcile secured
         creditors rights with the protection of depositors.

        Pooling of funding needs of several institutions by a centralized structure that
         consolidate their funding needs and issues bonds to cover them. This kind of funding
         structure exists both for debt and mortgage back securities issues - many countries in the
         former case, less in the latter one – but with the successful example in Latin America of
         Titularizadora Colombiana. Such a structure can be very beneficial to help structure the
         primary mortgage market while inducing economies of scale through larger issuance
         volumes and related benefits in terms of cost and liquidity. Creating an institution,
         however, is a relatively long undertaking. Establishing a multi-issuer trust for
         securitization purposes would be simpler, and has been proposed before by the banking
         community, but raises delicate issues such as the distribution of credit risk among
         participants.

        Securitization of UVA mortgages limited to the sale of senior tranches is an easier
         short term solution. Once the development of indexed mortgage lending matures and
         reliable data on the performance and profile of these portfolios become available, partial
         risk transfers could be envisaged - while ensuring that lenders keep “skin in the game?. In
         order to accelerate this process, relevant time series for loan analysis should be built as
         soon as possible.

Recommendations

FGS’s dominant investor position should be used to leverage other domestic and global
investors. FGS should be considered an investor serving its members and not a source of
subsidies. On the contrary, the first funding transactions by FGS should pioneer the opening of a
compartment of private sector, inflation –proofed fixed income instruments and aimed at its

13
   Letras Hipotecarias are a form of mortgage loans that are easily transferable through nominative endorsement.
These loans entail the right to enforce mortgage security through an out-of-court foreclosure proceedings. They are
transferred to fideicomisos in securitization structures

                                                  Page 17 of 20
sustainability through conditions attractive to other investors. This implies an economically
realistic pricing of long term bonds.

The new capital markets law is an opportunity to lift some ambiguities stemming from the
diversity of legal sources and to diversify indexed funding instruments. In particular, this is
an opportunity to validate at the legislative level the use of UVA. The UVA is said by to be well
grounded on a 2002 decree14 later confirmed by a law, but still raises questions given the
different index (UVI) included in the recent 976/16 law. Market acceptance is for the BCRA
regulated inflation based UVA only, but the law refers to a construction price based index, UVI.
Transactions will be based on UVA, and should the UVA grow faster than the UVI, the former
may be challenged – legally or politically. Clarifying the validity of the UVA will lower risks in
UVA based transactions. The main elements that the law could include in this respect are:

          Allow the issuance of indexed bank bonds, currently not allowed (in contrast to
           securitization) and specifically authorize the application of the UVA index for this
           purpose
          Confirm the possibility of indexing Letras Hipotecarias, the legal instrument used for
           securitization, which is considered by some stakeholders as excluded by the law 24.441
           (that set the securitization framework), and explicitly allow using the UVA index
          Ideally, lay the ground for a future covered bond framework by defining the instrument
           and include it among the securities that can be indexed to UVA
          Waive stamp duties or notary fees related to securitization that may currently impede this
           capital market funding tool

The new funding instruments should standardized, safe and liquid to be successful in the
market and facilitate the diversification of the investor base. They should be simple to avoid
valuation difficulties and facilitate a minimum degree of market liquidity that even long term
investors such as life insurance companies like to see to conduct active assets/liabilities
management strategies. Some of the main measures to consider in this respect could be the
following:
          Design simple securitization products (cedulas hipotecarias and certificados de
           participation). The Basel Committee and IOSCO developed in 2015 the concept of
           “Simple, Transparent and Comparable? (STC) securitizations with the view to re-
           dynamize the securitization market drastically affected by the last global financial crisis.
           The concept could be introduced in Argentina15, where securitization is a well-known and
           tested instrument. Standardization of loans should be pursued jointly by the BCRA and
           the Securities Commission.


14
     Art 27 of Decree 905/02
15
     It has been introduced in the EU market.

                                                Page 18 of 20
          Alternatively, or in parallel, develop a centralized structure. A multi-issuer platform
           would in itself achieve the required standardization and simplicity. Some technical and
           institutional issues would have to be addressed however. For instance: rule for
           distributing the credit risk between primary mortgage originators, nature and cost of the
           structure, definition of a master servicer’s responsibilities, identification of potential
           back-up servicers

          Promote investments by banks in the new mortgage-related securities. Banks are
           large investors in this type of instruments in developed markets, and could be a valuable
           new class of investors in Argentina. Two kinds of conditions need to be met in this
           perspective: 1) a favorable prudential treatment, such as the low risk weights attached to
           covered bonds and STCs (meeting quality criteria) in the European market; 2) the
           eligibility of the securities as vehicle for BCRA’s liquidity interventions. BCRA only
           accepts government securities as collateral today. Including well-designed mortgage
           related securities would provide the liquidity banks need, and would enable them to be
           eligible to the Basle III liquidity coverage ratio.
          Review, and amend to the extent needed, the investment rules applicable to
           institutional investors.
A better developed sovereign CER yield curve would facilitate UVA 16 mortgage loans. A
liquid sovereign yield curve enable issuers and investors to more easily price their less liquid
instruments. Currently sovereign CER yields ~3.25 - 3.5 percent for 5 years and ~4 percent for 8-
10 year duration. As confidence strengthens the sovereign yields may decline making housing
loans cheaper as well.

The provincial gross income tax on interest income is costly for housing finance and
consideration should be given to exempting low income households. The Impuesto sobre los
Ingresos Brutos is a gross tax on interest income applied by Argentinean provinces. If mortgage
loans were securitized, the investors would have to pay the tax. Under current conditions, the tax
if applied to both the real interest rate and to the negative amortization, securitization would be
unviable. The Government could consider negotiating tax exemptions with the provinces for
future SCP batches.

The near term risk management and funding solution may include Certificates of Deposits
(CD) to institutional investors to hedge the UVA index/real interest rate risk, and
unsecured bonds may be the easiest next step, but work should also begin on the longer
term solutions. Time deposits may hedge the UVA real interest rate risk up to perhaps a year or
two. Bonds may do the same for longer period, but require legal amendments. More sustainable
solutions including mortgage covered bonds or securitization and the potential establishment of


16
     CER and UVA are substantially equivalent.

                                                 Page 19 of 20
centralized facilities for their issuance require greater preparation, and that work should therefore
also start soon.

A formal task force could be charged with leading the housing finance development
agenda. The ad-hoc working group currently providing a forum for policy makers could be
turned into a formal Task Force led at a senior level by the authorities. The BCRA and the
Finance Ministry are the most relevant candidates to lead the Task Force. High level leadership
will help ensure that the relevant parties convene. The Task Force could help prioritize and
sequence reforms, analyze the different options for funding solutions outlined above, and interact
with lenders and investors to identify viable solutions.

The Task Force priorities could include: (i) deciding on viable capital market solutions and the
need for a centralized facility, (ii) develop standardization of instruments using the IOSCO STC
framework, (iii) devise a hedging solution for inflation growing faster than wages, (iv) review
taxes, stamp duties and notary fees for mortgage lending and associated securities; (v) consider
policy on allowing banks to issue mortgage covered bonds and on repo eligibility.




                                            Page 20 of 20
