Frontiers in Government
Big Data and Predictive Analytics
World Government Summit
Workshop Session
Session Title:          Redesigning the role of government in the big data economy

Event Type:          This workshop session is part of the 2017 World Government Summit in Dubai,



leaders to discuss key governance issues facing the international community.




Location:          Mina Al Salam - Sunset Lounge, Madinat Jumeirah Resort, Dubai


Address:         6 Al Sufouh Rd - Dubai - UAE


Time:       February 11th, 10:00 AM - 1:00 PM


Organizers:          UAE Government and the World Bank Group




Description:

Harnessing the power of big data is the next frontier for governments. Big data analytics uses data
science and machine learning for better understanding, tracking and prediction of trends to improve
government delivery of existing public services in education, procurement, public safety, transporta      -
tion, taxation and civic engagement, without compromising citizen rights and privacy. In this technical

analytics will inform and transform government decision-making and help solve complex problems
that were once impossible.

Governments around the world are beginning to utilize big data to solve a range of pressing policy
problems. The Australian Ministry of Finance, for instance, has developed a Big Data Strategy, which
provides a whole-of-government approach to use big data in order to enhance existing services,
deliver new services and provide better policy advice, while incorporating best practice privacy pro      -
tections and leveraging existing ICT investments.

In one case, the Australian Department of Human Services is utilizing big data analytics to improve
health service delivery, including creating more personalized services and detecting fraud and
compliance issues. In 2016, the Ministry of Energy of Chile released an open data portal that is
enabling advanced analytics of energy data, citizen engagement and local-level predictions on
energy demand and pricing. Uber’s “surge pricing” data is being utilized to inform transportation
policy based on local demand and supply conditions, and in India analysis of geospatial data is
utilized to monitor the provision of energy. Both public and private sectors will play a major role in
enabling the use of big data analytics at scale given the variety of data sources utilized and
interconnected challenges.


                                                                                                              1
The UAE Government is convening this workshop to advance government adoption of big data
applications and predictive analytics internationally, towards effective public service delivery and in
support of the UN Sustainable Development Goals.


Format:

The Big Data and Predictive Analytics workshop will bring bring together leading stakeholders from
the public and private sectors working to advance the use of big data towards informing policy-
making and improving the delivery of public services across sectors. The format will be a dynamic
and action oriented half-day workshop where the following items will be explored:

1.	 Collectively define how governments can more effectively work through the use of big data;
2.	 Sharing of experiences and innovations by big data practitioners;
3.	 Identify shared challenges, needs and opportunities to improve public service delivery and the
    development of new services through big data in 3 specific sectors; and
4.	 Discussion on how to encourage links and partnerships between the public and private sectors to
    research new methods and pilot their use


Participants:

The workshop will be attended by about 20 participants, including among others:

•	 Brandon Barnett, Director of Corporate Strategy, Intel Corporation
•	 Brooke Partridge, CEO, VitalWave
•	 Bruno Lepri, Chief Data Scientist, DataPop Alliance
•	 Chan Cheow Hoe, Government CIO of Singapore
•	 Christian Quesada, Big data and digital government specialist, Costa Rican Ministry of Science,
   Technology and Telecommunications
•	 Elena Panaritis, Senior Economic Advisor, Greek Government, Former Greek Parlamentarian
•	 Rhiannan Price, Director of DigitalGlobe

Agenda:

10:00 - 10:20 am - Introduction

10:20 - 10:50 am - Lightning Talks - Big Data in Government Case Studies

10:50 - 11:00 am - Coffee Break

11:00 - 11:30 am - Visioning and Issue Prioritization

11:30 - 12: 15 pm - Group Discussions: Challenges Exploration (solutions, opportunities)

12:15 - 1:00 pm - Lunch

1:00 - 1:30pm - Reflection and Final Thoughts

                                                                                                          2
Contact:

Please contact Trevor Monroe (tmonroe@worldbankgroup.org) or Neisan Massarrat
(neisan.massarrat@secondmuse.com) for any questions regarding this session or your logistical
arrangements, including accommodation, flights and visa requests.

Besides being invited to attend this workshop session on Big Data and Governance you are also
invited to attend the entire World Government Summit during the days February 12 - 14th. By filling
out the registration form you will receive a pass to the summit and will have access to all sessions. A
summit agenda will be shared with you in due course.




                                                                                                      3
