    Report No: AUS8661
.




    Republic of the Philippines
    Labor Market Review
    Employment and Poverty

.
    January 22, 2016


.
    GSP02
    EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
.




.   Document of the World Bank
.
    Standard Disclaimer:
.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
    interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
    Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
    boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
    World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:
.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
    violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of
    its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance
    Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
    1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                      Contents
Acknowledgements................................................................................................................................. 4
Abstract ................................................................................................................................................... 5
Abbreviations .......................................................................................................................................... 6
Main Concepts Used in the Report (Definitions) ................................................................................... 7
OVERVIEW ....................................................................................................................... 8
ANNEX Philippine Labor Market review v. Philippine Development Report ......................................... 25
CHAPTER 1 ..................................................................................................................... 26
Nature of Jobs and Employment in the Philippines .............................................................................. 26
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 26
I.     Main labor market trends and employment structure ................................................................ 27
II.    Utilization of labor resources........................................................................................................ 32
III.   Wage distribution and its determinants ....................................................................................... 36
ANNEX 1A Non-agricultural employment by formality status and worker characteristics .................. 42
ANNEX 1B Profile of low-paid employment .......................................................................................... 44
ANNEX 1C Wage Regressions................................................................................................................ 45
ANNEX 1D Defining Formal Employment.............................................................................................. 46
CHAPTER 2 ..................................................................................................................... 47
Labor Market Determinants of Poverty in the Philippines ................................................................... 47
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 47
I.     Worker and job characteristics and poverty ................................................................................ 47
II.    Household characteristics and poverty ........................................................................................ 55
III.   Can minimum wage policy reduce in-work poverty in the Philippines? ...................................... 60
Conclusions and policy implications ..................................................................................................... 62
ANNEX 2A Incidence of poverty by labor force status .......................................................................... 65
ANNEX 2B Incidence of poverty by employment status ........................................................................ 66
CHAPTER 3 ..................................................................................................................... 67
Labor Regulation and Employment Programs ...................................................................................... 67
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 67
I.     Labor Regulations ......................................................................................................................... 68
II.    Active Labor Market Programs ..................................................................................................... 77
ANNEX 3A The Philippines ranks low in labor market efficiency .......................................................... 91
ANNEX 3B Description of major labor market programs in the Philippines ......................................... 92
References ............................................................................................................................................ 94




                                                                                                                                                            3
                                   Acknowledgements
The report was prepared by a World Bank team led by Jan Rutkowski and comprised of Yuko Okamura,
Rosechin Olfindo and Jorge Avalos. Kat Dinglasan provided research assistance. The team worked
under the guidance of Jehan Arulpragasam as Practice Manager, and Aleksandra Posarac as Program
Leader in the EAP Social Protection and Labor Global Practice. The report was prepared under the
overall direction of Motoo Konishi, Country Director for the Philippines. Peer reviewers were Truman
Packard and Erwin Tiongson. Comments were also provided by Rogier van den Brink, Carolina Diaz-
Bonilla, and Pablo Acosta. The team is grateful for the extensive comments, advice and support
received throughout the preparation of the report from Aleksandra Posarac. The report also benefited
from comments on its earlier version provided by the participants of workshops at the Institute of
Labor Studies, and at the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE). In particular, the team
acknowledges comments of Ms. Katherine Brimon, Assistant Secretary at DOLE.




                                                                                                  4
                                              Abstract
This study analyzes labor market performance in the Philippines from the perspective of workers’
welfare. It argues that pervasive in-work poverty is the main challenge facing labor policy. Poverty is
primarily due to low earning capacity of the poor and to their limited access to regular and productive
jobs. Behind these are the two interrelated root causes of in-work poverty—low education of the
poor, and the scarcity of productive job opportunities. The labor market is segmented into “good”
and “bad” jobs, with the poor working in the latter. They hold jobs that are informal, temporary or
casual, and low-paid. Widespread informality means that the poor neither benefit from the minimum
wage policy nor from employment protection legislation. They do not benefit from wage growth
either, because their bargaining power is weak. “Good” jobs are so few, especially in rural areas, that
even better educated workers are often forced to take unskilled jobs and work as low-paid laborers.
The reduction of in-work poverty hinges on removing constraints to gainful employment in both
supply side (better education and skills) and demand side (better jobs). It is critical that the young
poor have improved access to quality education, and be equipped with skills required in the modern
sector of the economy. But in parallel, better jobs need to be created, which can be attained from the
growth of the formal and higher value added sector of the economy. The process of structural
transformation should be supported by effective labor policy. Labor regulations need to be made
simpler and more flexible to facilitate the reallocation of labor from less to more productive activities,
and from informal to formal sector. Targeted training programs have the potential to address the
problem of low skills among the poor workers, especially the young ones. Such programs should be
developed on a pilot basis and expanded if proven to be cost-effective.




                                                                                                        5
                             Abbreviations

ALMPs   Active Labor Market Programs
ALS     Alternative Learning System
ASEAN   Association of Southeast Asian Nations
BLES    Bureau of Labor and Employment Studies
CCT     Conditional Cash Transfer
CBEP    Community-Based Employment Program
DOLE    Department of Labor Employment
DSWD    Department of Social Welfare Development
FIES    Family Income Expenditure Survey
GIP     Government Internship Program
IWBs    In-work Benefits
ISS     Informal Sector Survey
ILO     International Labour Organization
LFS     Labor Force Survey
MIS     Management Information Systems
M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
NCR     National Capital Region
NEET    Not in Education, Employment or Training
NWPC    National Wages and Productivity Commission
OECD    Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PDR     Philippine Development Report
PSA     Philippines Statistics Authority
PES     Public Employment Services
PESO    Public Employment Service Offices
SPES    Special Program for the Employment of Students
SLP     Sustainable Livelihood Program
TVET    Technical-Vocational Education and Training
TESDA   Technical Education and Skills Development Authority
WEF     World Economic Forum
WDI     World Development Indicators




                                                                 6
                         Main Concepts Used in the Report
                                  (Definitions)
“Bad” jobs. Jobs are considered “bad” if they are low-paid and informal, and thus, are not covered by
labor regulations. Jobs can also be “bad” if they are involuntarily part-time, temporary or casual. As
a rule, jobs that are deemed as “bad” are associated with an elevated risk of poverty. “Good” jobs are
jobs that pay above the low-pay threshold or are formal, unless they have some characteristics that
render them “bad” (e.g. are involuntarily part-time or temporary). As a rule, “good” jobs are
associated with low risk of poverty.

Earning capacity. A household’s earning capacity is proxied by the household’s labor income per
earner.

Informal employment. Wage workers are categorized as formal if they meet at least two of the
following three criteria: have a written employment contract, have employer-provided social
insurance, or are protected from arbitrary dismissal. Otherwise, they are categorized as informal. Self-
employed workers are formal if they maintain a proper bookkeeping system; otherwise, they are
informal. Unpaid family members are informal by definition.

Low-paid jobs. A job is low-paid if it pays wage that is lower than two-thirds of the median wage. A
job is very low-paid if it pays less than 50 percent of the median wage. The concept of low-pay refers
to wage and salaried jobs, but could be extended to include self-employment jobs. However, there is
no information on earnings of the self-employed in the Philippine Labor Force Survey (LFS).

Underemployment. Workers are categorized as underemployed if they would like to work more
hours. They are categorized as visibly underemployed if they work less than full time (less than 40
hours per week). Otherwise, they are categorized as invisibly underemployed.

Poverty. This Note focuses on the bottom 20 percent (quintile) of income distribution. It aims to
determine the differences in the risk of poverty faced by different worker groups, rather than to
determine poverty headcount. The risk of poverty is the likelihood that a person falls into the bottom
20 percent of income distribution, rather than that the person’s income is below the official poverty
line. The bottom 20 percent of the population is a subset of the population below the official poverty
line, which is estimated at about 25 percent (2012 data).

Unemployment. According to the standard International Labor Organization (ILO) definition, a person
is unemployed if he/she meets the following three conditions: (a) did not work in the reference period,
(b) is available for work, and (c) is looking for work. In the Philippines, a broader definition is used
whereby a person is considered unemployed when he/she meets the first two conditions, but not
necessarily the third one.

Work intensity. Work intensity is measured as the product of (a) the proportion of the number of
earners to the number of household members of working age, and (b) the average number of hours
worked by the earner.




                                                                                                      7
Overview
This report sets out to analyze labor market performance in the Philippines from the perspective of
workers’ welfare. Its main goal is to identify labor market constraints to reducing poverty and sharing
prosperity, and to suggest ways to address them. To this end the report focuses on three areas. First,
it looks at the nature of jobs and employment in the Philippines, and how it has changed during the
course of economic growth. Second, it examines the links between labor market outcomes and
poverty. Finally, it analyzes the effectiveness of labor market policies and programs, and suggests
measures to enhance their performance.

The report finds that in-work poverty is pervasive in the Philippines. On the one hand, it is caused by
low labor productivity, which reflects low education and skills of the workforce. On the other, it is
caused by lack of productive job opportunities. This may give rise to a vicious circle: workers have
little incentives to invest in skills because there are few jobs requiring advanced skills. At the same
time, skill-intensive jobs are not being created because workers lack the required skills. The economic
growth in the last decade has not improved this situation much. It has created jobs, but it has hardly
brought about structural change. The newly created jobs are still “bad” jobs—they are informal and
precarious, pay little and often do not lift workers out of poverty. Although younger workers are
better educated than older ones, there is still a large fraction of youth, especially those with poor
background, who lack education and skills that would allow them to take more productive and better
paying jobs. But even better educated workers often end up in low-skilled and “bad” jobs, implying
that there is not enough “good” jobs. Strikingly, real wages remained flat despite growth in labor
productivity, in a stark contrast to strong wage growth in other countries in the region. Labor market
segmentation and large productivity differentials between sectors give rise to earnings inequality and
impede the attainment of shared prosperity objective. The urban/rural and formal/informal divides
are particularly pronounced. Rural and informal workers earn little, and are at a high risk of poverty.
To reduce poverty and promote shared prosperity, the Philippines needs to address the twin problems
of low skills and low productivity jobs. A mechanism also needs to be put in place to ensure that gains
in labor productivity translate into higher wages. Poverty in the Philippines will not be reduced
without growth in real wages, especially at the bottom of the wage distribution.

These problems cannot be addressed by means of labor policy alone. To improve labor market
outcomes fundamental reforms are necessary in the areas of education, investment climate and
business environment. The recent Philippine Development Report (World Bank 2013), and the
Philippines Skills Report (World Bank 2010) discuss these reforms in detail, while the East Asia Pacific
at Work (World Bank 2014a) provides a regional perspective. This report builds on these studies, but
concentrates on the role of labor policy in improving workers’ welfare. Annex Table A summarizes
main differences between this report and its predecessor, the Philippine Development Report.

The report focuses on the domestic labor market at the national level. As such, it does not cover
important issues of international migration, and of regional variation in labor market outcomes in the
Philippines. The issue of migration was addressed in World Bank (2013) and will be addressed in the
upcoming Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) labor migration study. The regional
variation in labor market conditions will be covered in the upcoming Mindanao Jobs Report.

This overview follows the structure of the main report, and is divided into three parts. Part I looks at
the nature of jobs and employment in the Philippines and their changes during the course of economic


                                                                                                      8
growth. Part II examines the links between labor market outcomes and poverty. Part III discusses the
effectiveness of labor market policies and programs.

I.       Nature of jobs and employment
Most people work in the Philippines and few are unemployed. Economic growth creates jobs, but
hardly improves their quality. It largely reproduces the existing traditional employment structure,
with a high share of low-skilled and informal jobs. Reals wages do not grow, despite growth in labor
productivity. Wage inequality is high, with a large share of the workforce in low-paid employment.
On a positive note, young workers move to more productive activities. They are better educated than
the older generation, although the share of poorly educated, low-skilled youth is still relatively high.
Moreover, many youth are idle, neither in employment nor in education.

Economic growth created enough jobs to absorb the increase in population of
working age but failed to improve jobs quality
Economic growth during the last decade created enough jobs to absorb the growing labor force. In
the last 10 years employment grew at the same rate as the population of working age, meaning that
the labor market fully absorbed the increase in the supply of labor. New entrants to the labor market
were finding employment, and there was no increase in unemployment. Contrary to what was
claimed in some earlier studies, economic growth was not jobless (Figure O.1).

Economic growth did not bring about wage growth. Although labor productivity was growing at a
relatively high pace, real wages remained stagnant in the last decade.1 Economic growth created jobs,
but failed to improve their average quality. Most workers, especially informal ones, have not
benefitted from growth in terms of higher real wages. This is in sharp contrast to developments in
other Asian countries, which saw a considerable increase in real wages. Why labor productivity growth
did not translate into wage growth in the Philippines is an important question. This is intriguing given
the growth of the minimum wage relative to labor productivity. One possible explanation is the weak
bargaining power of low-skilled workers vis-à-vis employers in a large segment of the economy,
especially in the informal sector. Another possibility is a downward pressure on wages exerted by
new labor market entrants (see Box O.1).2 As such, employment growth came at the expense of the
lack of real wage growth.




1
  Changes in the average wage mask substantial diversity in wage dynamics by industry and occupation. In many
occupations and industries, wages were rising, while in others they were falling. Highly skilled workers such as
engineers (computer, electrical, mechanical, chemical, etc.) and accountants saw considerable real salary
increases during the period 2006-2014. In contrast, unskilled and low-skilled workers, such as freight handlers,
saw their wages fall. The picture is mixed for middle-skilled occupations. For example, motor vehicle mechanics
and heavy truck drivers experienced large wage hikes. At the same time, production clerks, salespersons, tailors,
etc. saw some decline in their real wages. (Source: Structure of Earnings Survey, various years).
2
  We also looked at changes in the international migration flows of Filipino workers to see if they could impact
domestic labor market conditions. Preliminary analysis suggests that the recent slight fall in overseas
deployment was too small to exert a discernible additional downward pressure on wages.


                                                                                                               9
 Figure O.1. Dismal wage performance despite growth in labor productivity




 Sources: National Accounts, Philippine Statistics Authority (various years); Yearbook of Labor Statistics (various years),
 Current Labor Statistics, Bureau of Labor and Employment Statistics; Global Wage Report 2014-2015, International Labor
 Organization; World Development Indicators, World Bank.
 Note: 2014 real wage data is average of January and April 2014.


 Box O.1 Demographic pressure on the labor market
 Each year almost 2 million young people, below 20 years of age, enter the labor market in the Philippines.
 About 55 percent become economically active, either already employed or looking for jobs, by the time they
 reach the age of 20. The labor market absorbs them remarkably quickly—44 percent of the cohort are
 employed by the age of 20, 65 percent by the age of 25, and 70 percent by the age of 30. Unemployment
 falls fast with age. Over 6 percent of youth aged 20 are looking for work, compared with less than 3 percent
 of those aged 30.
 While the large cohort of new labor market entrants finds employment quickly, it is likely to exert a substantial
 downward pressure on wages. This may partly explain the lack of real wage growth despite the growth in
 labor productivity that is observed in the Philippines during the 2000s. The increase in employment has come
 at the price of the lack of wage growth.



“Bad” jobs are widespread, but young workers move to better jobs
Employment structure remains traditional, and the modern sector of the economy is still relatively
small. The service sector is the largest employer (about half of total employment), followed by
agriculture (one-third of total employment), while industry plays a relatively minor role (World Bank
2013). The size of the wage-and-salary sector is still modest. Wage and salary workers represent
about 60 percent of total employment, whereas the self-employed and unpaid family members
account for the remaining 40 percent.

Informality looms large. Around three-quarters of all jobs, and two-thirds of urban jobs are informal.
Among wage workers, 6 out of 10 are hired informally. About 50 percent of the informal workers are
wage workers, the rest are self-employed and unpaid family workers. Informal wage workers lack
employment contract and social insurance, and are not protected against unfair dismissal. All else
being equal, their wages are significantly lower.

Many jobs require little skills, and laborers are the largest occupational group. One in three workers
is employed as a laborer in a job that requires no skills (farmers are separate category). Even outside
agriculture and in urban areas, unskilled workers account for nearly one-fourth of total employment.
The prevalence of low-skilled employment reflects both the scarcity of skilled jobs, and the relatively


                                                                                                                         10
low educational attainment of the workforce. As many as 44 percent of workers have less than
secondary education, which is substantially higher in rural areas (57 percent) and is high even in urban
areas (30 percent).

There is a shortage of skilled jobs. Educated workers are often forced by necessity to take unskilled
jobs, and work as laborers. About 30 percent of workers with secondary education hold unskilled jobs,
and 35 percent of laborers have at least secondary education. This suggests that the scarcity of “good”
jobs is not caused by an insufficient supply of middle-skilled labor. Instead, there seems to be not
enough “good” jobs because the demand for skilled labor is weak in the Philippines.

Young workers move to better jobs. Young workers are better educated and are more likely to be
employed outside agriculture and in the wage-and-salary sector. But they hardly migrate to urban
areas: the share of urban employment among younger age cohorts is only marginally higher than
among older ones. Although not dramatic, the changes in the employment structure by age are
noticeable. Young workers are more likely to be employed in the services and industry, and to hold
wage and salary jobs than older workers. For example, the share of wage-and-salary employment
among the 20 to 29 age cohort is 20 percentage points higher than among the 40-49 cohort. Young
workers are more likely to hold both highly-skilled (professional) and low-skilled jobs, than older
workers.

Low educational attainment among youth from poor background remains an issue
Younger workers are better educated than older ones, but there is still a sizable group of poorly
educated youth. Nearly 30 percent of workers in the 20-29 age cohort have not completed secondary
education (Figure O.2, Panel A). This proportion is substantially lower than among older age cohorts.
This indicates an improvement in access to education among the youth. Nonetheless, the pool of
poorly educated young workers remains large.

The problem of low educational attainment is particularly pronounced among youth from poor
families, most of whom live in rural areas. In the bottom income quintile, 60 percent of young
workers lack full secondary education (Figure O.2, Panel B). This data is startling because workers with
less than secondary education face substantially worse labor market prospects than those who
completed high school. Their earnings are significantly lower, and the risk of poverty is much higher.

 Figure O.2. Younger workers are better educated but education agenda is unfinished
 Panel A                                        Panel B




 Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.




                                                                                                     11
Most Filipinos are employed, but many of them are underemployed
On the face of it, labor resources are almost fully utilized in the Philippines. Employment rate, as
defined by the ratio of employment to working age population, provides a summary measure of the
utilization of labor resources. The 60 percent employment rate (Table O.1) is average by international
standards, but is lower than most ASEAN countries, where employment rate is above world average.
The modest employment rate is primarily due to the low labor force participation rate among youth
and women. Only one in two women is economically active in the Philippines. There is a 27 percentage
point difference between the labor force participation rate of women and men.

Among the employed, one person in five is underemployed. The underemployed would like to work
more to increase their earnings. Close to 60 percent work less than full-time, largely because they do
not have access to regular full-time jobs. The unemployment rate is relatively low. The standard ILO
unemployment rate, which includes only the jobless who are actively looking for work, is less than 3
percent. The unemployment rate is around 6 to 7 percent (Table O.1) using a broad measure of
unemployment, which includes persons available for work, but not actively looking for work. In
addition to underemployment and unemployment, outmigration of Filipino workers and substantial
overseas employment indicate that labor resources are not domestically utilized to their full potential
(World Bank 2013).

 Table O.1. Employment and unemployment rates, 2013.
                                   Total       Urban                         Rural            Male              Female
                                                                              Percent
 Employment/Population 15+                   59.5           57.5             61.0             71.9               47.3
 Unemployment ratea                          7.1            8.6               6.0             7.5                6.5
 Underemployment rateb                       21.0           16.0             24.5             23.6               16.8
 Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 a Broad definition of unemployment, including persons who are available for work, but not looking for a job.
 b Underemployment rate is the share of workers who want to work longer hours in total employment.



A large fraction of Filipino youth is idle. One out of four persons aged 15 to 24 is not in education,
employment or training (NEET). This is a high proportion by both international and regional standards
(World Bank 2014a). Only 14 percent of young people who are NEET are actively seeking employment.
The high NEET rate is associated with poverty. The percentage of idle youth is the highest in the first
two income quintiles (bottom 40 percent). This undermines the hypothesis that the Filipino youth are
idle because of the high reservation wages due to remittances. Discouragement from the lack of
productive job opportunities is a more convincing explanation of youth idleness. The NEET rate is
virtually the same in urban and in rural areas.

Persistently high wage inequality and high incidence of low-pay
Wage inequality is moderately high in the Philippines by international standards. Wage inequality
is higher than in most developed European countries, but in the middle of the developing economies
range. High earners (top decile) earn about seven times more than low earners (bottom decile). In
the most equal countries, this ratio is less than four, and exceeds 10 in the most unequal countries.
The relative earning status of low-paid workers is modest. The bottom decile worker earns about 40
percent of the median wage. This is much less than in low inequality countries, where the bottom
decile worker earns over 60 percent of the median wage. However, it is more than in very high
inequality countries, where the bottom decile worker earns around 20 percent of the median wage.


                                                                                                                         12
Wage distribution changed little in the last 15 years. Economic growth did not improve the relative
status of low-paid workers and hardly reduced the incidence of low-pay. If anything, wage inequality
slightly increased, which resulted from an increase in relative wages of the top 10 percent of wage
earners rather than from a decrease in wages of the bottom 10 percent of wage earners.

Incidence of low-pay is high. As many as 30 percent of all wage workers earn less than two-thirds of
the median wage, which is a standard low-wage threshold. In countries where wage inequality is
lower than in the Philippines, the incidence of low pay is within the 10 to 20 percent range. The high
incidence of low-pay translates into the high incidence of in-work poverty.

Low-pay and informality go hand-in-hand
Incidence of low-pay is particularly high in the informal sector. In the informal sector 56 percent of
workers are low-paid, while in the formal sector, 7 percent. Low-paid employment is almost
tantamount to informal employment. About 90 percent of all low-paid jobs are informal.3 The high
incidence of low-paid employment is thus an upshot of widespread informality.

High incidence of low-pay among informal workers is closely related to the characteristics of
informal jobs. Informal wage jobs are concentrated in rural areas in the services sector, and in low-
skilled occupations. Over 50 percent of all low-paid jobs are in the services sector, and 36 percent of
service and sales workers have low paid jobs. The incidence of low-pay among skilled manual workers
is three times lower.

Incidence of low-pay is significantly higher among women than men. As many as 37 percent of
women are in low-paid employment compared with 25 percent of men. This large difference may be
due to women being more likely employed in low wage industries and occupations. Almost 80 percent
of women are employed in the service sector compared with less than 50 percent of men, who are
more often employed in the better paying industry sector. However, discrimination seems to play a
role. All else being equal, women earn less than men.

Wage inequality is driven by labor market segmentation. The low-paying lower tier of the labor
market is informal and casual, and mostly rural. The well-paying upper tier is formal, secure, and
mostly urban. Workers in the lower tier are poorly educated and hold low-skilled jobs, while those in
the upper tier have at least secondary education and hold middle- and high-skilled jobs. Wage
differentials between labor market segments are large, with average formal workers earning more
than twice than informal workers. Urban workers earn 50 percent more than their rural counterpart.
Workers with tertiary education earn 3.4 times more than those with primary education, and skilled
manual workers earn 70 percent more than laborers. Results of regression analysis indicate that
urban/rural residence, formality status, education, and skills level (proxied by occupation) are the four
most important factors that independently contribute to wage inequality.

II.      Labor Market Determinants of Poverty
People are poor in the Philippines because they earn little, not because they do not work. Having a
job does not provide a pathway out of poverty, and in-work poverty is pervasive in the Philippines. It
is the quality of a job that matters. Workers employed in low-productivity jobs run a higher risk of

3
 The reverse is not true. Many informal jobs are relatively well-paid. For example, one informal job in four pays
more than the median wage.


                                                                                                              13
poverty than the unemployed. Such “bad” jobs are common. They tend to be informal and casual,
and do not pull workers out of poverty. The prevalence of low-productivity jobs means that the
earning capacity of many households is low, which is the primary cause of poverty in the Philippines.
Contrary to a common myth, poverty is not a result of idleness. Members of poor households are not
jobless; they do work, but they hold casual, low-paying jobs. Hence, the reduction of poverty in the
Philippines hinges on increasing the earning capacity of the poor by investing in their education and
by improving their access to productive jobs.

Worker characteristics and poverty
In-work poverty is pervasive in the Philippines. The working poor are characterized by having low
educational attainment, residing in rural areas, and having informal jobs that are often temporary,
casual, or part-time. The majority of the working poor work as laborers in unskilled occupations. In-
work poverty is not limited to rural areas; it also occurs in urban areas and outside agriculture. The
key factor behind urban poverty is informality, where the vast majority of low-paying jobs are.
Informal workers, both wage workers and the self-employed, face an elevated risk of poverty.

High incidence of in-work poverty
Labor force status has little impact on the risk of poverty in the Philippines. The employed are as
likely to be poor as the economically inactive, and paradoxically, more likely to be poor than the
unemployed (Figure O.3, Panel A). Because low-paying jobs are plenty, having a job by and of itself
does not protect one from poverty. The majority of the working-age poor are employed, while the
unemployed account for a tiny fraction of the working-age poor.

Unemployment does not mean poverty. The unemployed are often well-educated young persons
from better-off families, who look for jobs that meet their professional aspirations. This does not
mean that unemployment is not a social problem in the Philippines. It is a problem because it lowers
the returns to investment in human capital, and implies underutilization of the well-educated labor
force. It also entices some of the well educated workers to seek job opportunities abroad rather than
at their home country.

 Figure O.3. Employment does not lower the risk of poverty, and the quality of employment that matters
 Panel A                                                     Panel B




 Note: Poverty = bottom quintile of individual per capita income distribution.
 Visible underemployed = work less than full-time (40 hours per week) and would like to work more.
 Invisible underemployed = work full-time but would like to work more.
 Source: Family Income and Expenditure (FIES)–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.




                                                                                                                14
From the perspective of poverty, underemployment is a bigger problem than unemployment. The
underemployed (those who want additional work) face the highest risk of poverty (World Bank 2013).
The visibly underemployed (those who work part-time) are the most vulnerable to poverty. They are
twice as likely to be poor as the fully employed (Figure O.3, Panel B). Underemployment is more
pronounced in rural than in urban areas. The underemployed represent about one-third of the
working poor.

Rural workers and are agricultural laborers represent majority of working poor
In-work poverty is mostly, although not exclusively, a rural and agricultural phenomenon. Rural
workers, who account for the bulk of the working poor, run a much higher risk of poverty than urban
ones. The average rural workers are almost four times more likely to be in the bottom income quintile
than their urban counterparts. As a result, 84 percent of all working-poor live in the rural areas.

Contrary to common perception, industrial workers are somewhat more likely to be poor than
service workers. The difference in poverty risk between industrial workers and service workers is
rather small (3 percentage points), but still significant. Service jobs are not necessarily worse than
manufacturing jobs, and not all manufacturing jobs are “good”. The industry and service sectors are
heterogonous in the Philippines as elsewhere, providing both “good” and “bad” jobs.

Non-wage workers are predominant among the working poor. The self-employed and unpaid family
workers represent 52 percent of the bottom income quintile (Figure O.4). The self-employed also run
a higher risk of poverty than wage workers, in both urban and rural areas. The rural workers are
predominant among the poor wage workers. Almost 40 percent of rural wage workers fall into the
bottom income quintile, compared with less than 10 percent of urban ones. This characteristic of in-
work poverty has important implications for the minimum wage policy (see below).

 Figure O.4. Wage workers in rural areas are the single largest group among the working poor




 Source: Family Income and Expenditure –Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.




                                                                                                          15
Poor education and lack of skills are key factors behind in-work poverty
Workers with higher educational attainment and more skills face a substantially lower risk of
poverty than their less educated and less skilled peers. Figure O.5 illustrates the pattern of the
poverty risk falling with improvements in education and skills, in both urban and rural areas. This
suggests a clear policy implication that investment in access to and quality of education is the most
effective way to combat in-work poverty.

 Figure O.5 Incidence of in-work poverty falls with increases in education and skills
 Panel A                                           Panel B




 Sources: Family Income and Expenditure–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.


Completing secondary education is critical. Workers with less than secondary education face a high
risk of poverty and are preponderant among the working poor. Altogether, they represent nearly 80
percent of the working poor. The completion of secondary education dramatically lowers the risk of
poverty. Less than 10 percent of workers with secondary education are in the bottom income quintile,
compared with nearly 25 percent of workers with primary education (Figure O.5, Panel A).

Equally critical is the acquisition of occupational skills. Nearly 30 percent of unskilled workers
(laborers) fall into the bottom income quintile, and account for close to 60 percent of all working-poor
(Figure O.5, Panel B). In contrast, workers with mid-level vocational skills are much less likely to be
poor. Less than 10 percent of skilled manual, or service and sales workers are in the bottom quintile.
The acquisition of higher-level technical skills lowers the risk of poverty still further.

In-work poverty and informality are closely linked
As expected, in-work poverty is closely linked with low wages. Workers who earn less than two-
thirds of the median wage face a significantly higher risk of poverty than those who are above the low-
pay threshold (Figure O.6, Panel A). These are not surprising results, but imply that reduction of in-
work poverty in the Philippines hinges on growth in real wages, or on reduction in wage inequality, or
both. Unfortunately, none of these conditions was met in the 2000s.

With low paid jobs concentrated in the informal sector, in-work poverty is closely related to
informality. Over 90 percent of all low-paid jobs are informal, and as a result, informal workers are
disproportionately represented among the poor. The high incidence of in-work poverty is thus just a
mirror image of pervasive informality. However, while the majority of the working poor are informal
workers, informal employment does not necessarily lead to poverty. Many informal workers earn
above the low-pay threshold and avoid poverty (Figure O.6, Panel B).



                                                                                                          16
    Figure O.6. Strong link between low-pay, informality, and poverty
    Panel A                                        Panel B




    Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013, Informal Sector Survey 2008, National Statistics Office; Bank staff calculations.
    Notes: Very low pay = less than 50 percent of median wage; low pay = less than 67 percent of median wage; middle pay
    = less than 15 percent of median wage; high pay = less than 3 times the median wage; very high pay = 3 times the median
    wage or higher. The intervals are right-open and left-closed; the upper endpoint for the lower wage group is the lower
    endpoint for the higher group.

Incidence of poverty is lower among female workers than male workers. Men comprise two-thirds
of the working poor. The risk of poverty faced by a female worker is 5 percentage points lower than
that of a male worker.

Household characteristics and poverty
Philippine households are poor as they are disadvantaged by four factors that determine per capita
income. First, in poor households fewer household members of working age are employed than in
non-poor ones. Second, those who are employed, work shorter hours. Third, they earn less. Finally,
there are more dependents in poor than in non-poor households.

Low earning capacity rather than joblessness is the primary cause of poverty
Differences in earning capacity play the most important role. The impact of differences in earning
capacity is greater than that of work intensity. First, the differences in earning capacity between the
poor and non-poor are larger compared to their differences in work intensity. Second, all else equal,
increases in earning capacity more sharply reduce the risk of poverty than increases in work intensity
(increases in either number of earners within the household or in hours worked). The earning capacity
of poor households is much lower than that of non-poor. On average, earnings of workers from the
bottom quintile households are half of those of their counterparts from the middle income quintile.
These are substantial differences, much larger than the difference in work intensity.

An increase in households’ earning capacity leads to a sharp reduction in the risk of poverty. If a
household moves from the first to the second earning capacity group, the risk of poverty drops by 18
percentage points.4 However, the increase in earning capacity needs to be considerable to have
noticeable reduction in the risk of poverty. To move from the first to the second earning capacity
group, the employed household members would need to double their earnings. For many poor
households such increase is hardly possible given the limited job opportunities that are available to
them.


4
 Households were divided into five groups of equal size (quintiles) that represent different levels of earning
capacity, ranging from low to middle to high.


                                                                                                                         17
Poor households are seldom jobless. In poor households, most family members of working age are
usually employed. Poverty is associated with joblessness in only a fraction of poor households.
However, the proportion of jobless households is somewhat higher among the poor than among the
non-poor. For example, among the poorest households, 11 percent only have one earner per four
household members of working age. This is 4 percentage points more than households in the middle
income quintile (Figure O.7). But the number of poor households, where few of their members work,
is still rather small. Joblessness is not the primary factor behind poverty in the Philippines.

The risk of poverty is only modestly reduced with more earners within a household. The relationship
between poverty and the number of earners in the household is rather weak. For example, if the
number of household members employed increases from 2 to 3, the likelihood of poverty drops just
by a few of percentage points. High work intensity does not necessarily protect households from
poverty.

Workers in poor families work shorter hours than their counterparts in non-poor families. On
average, workers in the bottom quintile work almost 4 hours per week less than those in the second
quintile, and 7 hours less than those in the middle, third quintile. These are substantial differences in
hours worked, which translate into lower total earnings of poor households.

The poor work shorter hours because of lack of opportunities to work full-time. Among the poor,
the percentage of workers who would like to work more is significantly higher than among the non-
poor. For instance, 33 percent of bottom quintile workers would like to work longer hours, compared
with 10 percent in the top quintile. The poor work shorter hours not by choice, but because they have
no other option. There is a shortage of regular—full-time and permanent—jobs accessible to
vulnerable workers.

 Figure O.7. Number of earners in poor households is not markedly lower than in non-poor ones




 Sources: Family Income and Expenditure–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: 1/3 = one of three household members of working age is employed; 1/2 = one of two household members of
 working age is employed; 1/1 = all household members of working age are employed.

Low earning capacity is often accompanied by short work hours. Household members who earn little
also work shorter hours. For instance, members of households with the lowest earning capacity work
13 hours per week less on average than households with the highest earning capacity. The
combination of low earning capacity and shorter working hours pushes households even deeper into
poverty. The poor cannot offset their low earning capacity by working more because of lack of
opportunities for additional work.


                                                                                                           18
Minimum wage has limited potential to reduce in-work poverty in the
Philippines
The minimum wage is a policy tool intended to address in-work poverty, and the Government of the
Philippines is actively using it for this purpose. However, the potential of the minimum wage policy to
reduce in-work poverty is limited for two reasons. First, a large proportion of the working poor are
not wage earners. Second, the working poor who are wage earners are usually employed informally.
Hence, majority of the working poor are not covered by the minimum wage policy.

Workers covered by the minimum wage policy represent a minority among the working poor. The
majority of the working poor are informal or non-wage workers who are not covered by the minimum
wage policy. Wage workers, who are targeted by the minimum wage policy, represent only about half
of the working poor (Figure O.4, while the other half includes the self-employed and unpaid family
workers. Over 90 percent of low-paid workers are employed informally, and thus, are not covered by
the minimum wage policy. As a result, less than 2 percent (sic!) of the working poor benefit from the
minimum wage policy. The minimum wage policy does little to address in-work poverty in the
Philippines.

Workers who benefit from minimum wage are not necessarily poor. Nearly 50 percent of low-paid
workers come from relatively well-off families (top 60 percent), and less than 30 percent from the
poorest families. Accordingly, minimum wage increases benefit many non-poor workers. At the same
time, the high minimum wage may limit the chances of the poor to be employed formally (see Section
III).

III.    Labor regulations and employment programs
Labor regulations in the Philippines, on paper, provide workers considerable degree of protection,
but in reality, benefit only a small group of workers. This is mainly due to the large proportion of non-
wage employment, widespread informality, and non-compliance with labor regulations. As a result,
there is a big discrepancy between the de jure and the de facto coverage of worker protection. The
labor market is segmented—while some workers benefit from regulations, others do not. And by
raising the cost of formal labor, labor regulations contribute to segmentation. There is scope for
reducing the distortionary effects of labor regulations in the Philippines, without compromising the
important objective of worker protection. The relevant measures include better aligning of minimum
wage with worker productivity, and making the regular employment contracts more flexible. Both
measures would strengthen incentives to hire workers formally under regular employment contracts,
and thus, could increase the actual coverage of worker protection. However, because of the
employment structure in the Philippines—largely agricultural, informal, and non-wage—labor policies
have a limited role in expanding coverage of worker protection as the employment structure changes
only with economic development.

Employment programs implemented in the Philippines broadly target vulnerable workers, including
the youth. Programs are numerous and implemented by many agencies. Fragmentation and weak
coordination among agencies are likely to limit the programs’ impacts. However Information on
program performance is limited, making the assessment of program effectiveness difficult.




                                                                                                      19
Labor Regulations
Labor regulations discussed in this report encompass employment protection legislation and
minimum wage policy. Consistent with earlier studies, the report argues that labor regulations are
stringent in the Philippines (World Bank 2013). In addition, it argues that as such, they are likely to
contribute to informality, and segmentation of the labor market into “good” and “bad” jobs. As a
result, the actual coverage of worker protection is limited.

Labor regulations are strict
The Philippines is recognized as having one of the most comprehensive labor regulations in the
ASEAN region. According to the Global Competitiveness Report 2014, the Philippines has a low labor
market efficiency score, mostly due to the rigid hiring and firing practices, high redundancy costs, and
limited flexibility in wage determination. The Philippines ranked 91st among the 144 economies on
the labor market efficiency scale.

Minimum wage is high relative to worker productivity. The minimum wage accounts for about 70
percent of the value added per worker in the Philippines, which is high by regional and international
standards (World Bank 2013). The minimum wage varies by administrative region in the Philippines,
but on average, it accounts for about 80 percent of the median wage in a region. In some regions, the
ratio is still higher. In 9 out of 17 regions, the minimum wage is higher than the median wage. This is
because the minimum wage is set based on labor productivity in the formal sector, with no regard to
productivity in the informal sector.5

Actual coverage of labor regulations is limited
The actual coverage of employment protection legislation is limited because of the relatively small
size of wage employment, and widespread informality. Wage and salary employment represents
only 60 percent of total employment in the Philippines, and only about 40 percent of wage and salary
workers are employed formally. Accordingly, employment protection legislation effectively covers
only about one-quarter of the workforce. There is thus a considerable discrepancy between de jure
and de facto coverage of labor regulations (Figure O.8).

Informality limits the actual coverage of the minimum wage policy. Among employees of private
firms, less than half (45 percent) are employed in firms that are formal. Among those who are
employed in formal firms, about 25 percent are paid less than the minimum wage. Accordingly, only
about one-third of workers in private firms benefit from the minimum wage policy.




5
  The minimum wage is determined through collective bargaining between formal sector employers (mostly
represented by large firms), and trade unions, which represent formal sector workers. The reference wage for
the negotiations is the average wage of formal workers, who are full-time workers with permanent employment
contracts. As a result, the statutory minimum wage in the Philippines does not represent wage conditions in the
informal sector.



                                                                                                            20
    Figure O.8. Informality and non-compliance limit the coverage of worker protection




    Sources: Informal Sector Survey 2008; Bank staff calculations.



Strict labor regulations are likely to contribute to labor market segmentation
While informality confines the effective coverage of labor regulations, strict labor regulations
contribute to informality.6 This is because strict regulations raise the cost of formal labor relative to
informal, and as such, discourage employers from hiring workers formally. This effect is particularly
strong in the case of low-productivity workers. There is thus a trade-off between the strictness of
labor regulations and their actual coverage. By reducing the strictness of labor regulations, the
Government could encourage formal employment, and thus, expand the actual scope of employment
protection and the minimum wage policy.

Strict employment protection legislation leads employers to increasingly use temporary
employment contracts. As such, it contributes to duality within the formal sector. According to the
LFS, about 40 percent of employees in private establishments had non-regular employment in 2013.
A survey conducted among large formal establishments, shows that about 35 percent of employees
were hired either on a non-regular basis, or as independent sub-contractors in 2012. This is 7
percentage points higher than four years earlier.

High minimum wage may exclude low-productivity workers from formal employment. The
minimum wage is not a major problem for formal firms, which tend to be larger and employ more
skilled workers. In the formal sector, the minimum wage accounts for about 60 percent of the sector’s
average wage, which is high, but not dramatically high. However, it is a major problem for informal
firms, which tend to be small and employ less-skilled workers. In the informal sector, the minimum
wage accounts for about 115 percent of the sector’s average wage. This means that the cost of
formalization for such firms could be prohibitively high, because they would have to pay their workers
substantially more than they are paying as informal firms. This is relevant given that as many as 70
percent of informal wage workers are paid less than the minimum wage.



6
  Labor regulations are only one factor behind informality in the Philippines, and not necessarily the most
important one. It is the whole business environment (of which labor regulations are part) plus the culture of
(in)formality that influence firms’ decisions whether or not to formalize.



                                                                                                          21
There is scope to enhance workers’ welfare by reducing the distortionary effects of
labor regulations
Making regular employment contracts more flexible could reduce segmentation. The increasing
incidence of temporary employment contracts indicates that regular contracts are no longer a
satisfactory option for many employers. This report presents for consideration the idea of a Single
Employment Contract (also referred to as Equal Opportunity Contract), which is currently gaining
popularity in Europe as a means to eliminate the duality between open-ended and temporary
employment. The idea is that all contracts are open-ended, but the administrative procedures
governing dismissals are relaxed, and employment protection is instead provided via severance pay
that increases with job tenure.

Aligning minimum wage with worker productivity can improve the chances of less-skilled workers
being hired formally. Setting the minimum wage is a delicate balancing act. On the one hand, the
minimum wage is meant to preclude exploitation of workers by employers, and to prevent in-work
poverty. On the other, it should be linked to worker productivity and should not discourage employers
from hiring workers formally. Set at its current level, minimum wage in the Philippines favors the first
objective, but compromises the second. The policy needs to be rebalanced in order not to exclude
low-productivity workers from formal employment. Finding a satisfactory solution requires an
empirically informed dialogue among main stakeholders, in which the interests of small employers
and informal workers are adequately represented. This report endorses the recommendation made
in the Philippine Development Report (World Bank 2013) to initiate social dialogue on minimum wage
policy.

Improving the enforcement of labor regulations can expand coverage, but only marginally. The
coverage of labor regulations is low primarily due to the low share of employment in formal firms. In
addition, formal firms do employ workers informally—informal workers account for up to 25 percent
of their workforce. Even with perfect enforcement and full compliance, the coverage of labor
regulations would increase only by 6 percentage points to reach the still modest 30 percent. The
coverage of labor regulations will expand only with an increase in formal wage and salaried
employment, which hinges on the structural transformation of the economy.

Employment programs
The two largest groups of programs being implemented in the Philippines are direct job creation
and training programs, which broadly target vulnerable workers and the youth. The size of direct
job creation programs is substantially larger than that of training programs.7 The programs mainly
benefit the better skilled among the vulnerable workers, leaving out the most disadvantaged, who
lack the basic skills. However, the low-skilled workers are often covered by other government
programs targeting the poor, which also aim to improve the employability of the beneficiaries.

Programs are fragmented and information on their performance is scant. It is difficult to assess the
performance of employment programs in the Philippines due to the paucity of data. Different


7
 The so-called livelihood assistance program, which is a small business start-up support program, covered about
500,000 persons in 2014. Among the youth bridging programs, 180,000 persons benefited from a hiring subsidy,
and 20,000 from government internship program in 2014. Public infrastructure programs vary in size. They are
expanded during economic downturns to act as a social safety net. For example, about 400 thousand workers
were hired under the road construction program, and 5,000 under the road maintenance program in 2014.


                                                                                                            22
programs are administered by different government agencies, and coordination among agencies is
limited. This leads to program fragmentation.8 Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of program
performance is underdeveloped, which limits evidence on their actual coverage, targeting efficiency,
cost-effectiveness, and impact.

Instituting program monitoring and evaluation, and using the results to allocate resources to
programs that are best performing could enhance their impact. There is scope for improving the
impact of employment programs by enhancing coordination among implementing agencies, and by
developing an M&E system. The results of M&E should guide the policy and allocation of resources.
One possible policy direction would be to focus resources on cost-effective training programs, which
equip the beneficiaries with employability skills demanded in the labor market, and as such, have the
potential to enhance their long-term employment prospects. This is particularly relevant given that
poor skills of vulnerable workers are the main obstacle to their taking more productive jobs.

Conclusions
Widespread in-work poverty is the main challenge facing labor policy in the Philippines. The working
poor are poorly educated and have informal jobs that offer no workers protection. Most of them live
in rural areas, where productive job opportunities are few. This points to two interrelated root causes
of in-work poverty: low education among vulnerable workers and scarcity of “good” jobs. Addressing
these two constraints requires reforms on both the supply (education and skills) and demand (jobs)
side of the labor market. These reforms have four objectives:

       Improvement in workforce education, especially among young cohorts entering the labor
        market, so that workers have the skills required in the modern sector of the economy.
       Structural transformation, which entails the development of more productive formal wage
        and salaried employment sector, including an increase in agricultural productivity.
       Reallocation of labor from less to more productive activities, which involves labor moving from
        agriculture to services and industry.
       Improvement of the effectiveness of the existing labor policies.

The first three objectives lie beyond the realm of labor policy. Specific interventions to advance these
objectives are extensively discussed in World Bank (2013 and 2010). As regards the fourth objective,
measures to improve the effectiveness of labor policy include:

       Simplification of the Labor Code, including making regular employment contracts more
        flexible could reduce segmentation by lowering the costs of hiring workers formally. The
        introduction of Single Employment Contract could reduce duality within the formal sector by
        making all contracts open-ended.
       Revision of the minimum wage policy to factor in productivity of informal workers. The
        minimum wage better aligned with productivity of all workers would strengthen incentives
        for employers to hire low-productivity workers formally, and would thus increase the effective
        coverage of the policy. Such revision should be based on empirically informed dialogue among
        all stakeholders, including those representing the interests of small employers and informal
        workers.


8
 There are over 45 implementing agencies, of which only 15 report to DOLE. About 50 direct job creation
programs were reported to DOLE in 2014.


                                                                                                     23
   Overhaul of employment programs to enhance their cost-effectiveness and impact. This
    includes programs consolidation to decrease fragmentation; better coordination among
    government agencies; improving targeting so as to better cover vulnerable workers;
    strengthening and instituting program M&E system and using evaluation results to improve
    program performance and expand programs that have the largest impact. This also includes
    strengthening the capacity of Public Employment Office (PESOs) to deliver effective job search
    assistance and counseling services.




                                                                                               24
ANNEX Philippine Labor Market review v. Philippine Development Report
Table A Summary of main differences between the Philippines Labor Market Review and the Philippines
Development Report.
                                     Philippine Labor Market Review     Philippines Development Report:
                                        Employment and Poverty           Creating More and Better Jobs
 Focus                               Worker welfare and labor policy    Jobs and development policy

 Key policy challenge addressed
                                     Reducing in-work poverty           Creating more and better jobs
 in the report

                                     Improve education and skills of
                                     disadvantaged youth.
                                                                        Enhance competition.
                                     Enhance productive job
                                     opportunities available to the     Simplify regulations.
 Reform priorities                   poor (which entails reforms        Secure property rights.
                                     recommended by the PDR).
                                                                        Invest more in human and
                                     Improve efficiency of labor        physical capital.
                                     regulations and employment
                                     programs.

                                                                        Economic growth.
                                     Returns to education and skills.
                                                                        Migration.
                                     Wage inequality and low-pay.
                                                                        Structural transformation.
                                     Profile of in-work poverty.
 Scope                                                                  Sector performance.
 (topic either not or less covered   Labor market determinants of
                                     poverty.                           Investment climate, and business
 in the other report)                                                   and labor regulations (from
                                     Labor regulations and              business environment
                                     employment programs (from          perspective).
                                     worker protection perspective).
                                                                        Political economy.




                                                                                                        25
Chapter 1
Nature of Jobs and Employment in the
Philippines
Introduction
This chapter examines labor market outcomes in the Philippines from the equity perspective. It
focuses on the nature of jobs and employment and its evolution over the last decade. It finds that
economic growth during the last ten years created enough jobs to absorb new labor market entrants.
Growth did not reduce unemployment, but was not jobless (contrary to what is sometimes claimed).
Actually, employment grew at a somewhat higher rate than the population of working age, leading to
some reduction in labor market slack. However, economic growth failed to improve the quality of
jobs. Most strikingly, real wages did not rise during the last decade despite the growth in labor
productivity, and the incidence of low-paid employment did not fall. Wage inequality remains high,
driven by the segmentation of the labor market into “good” (well-paying and formal) and “bad” (low-
paying and informal) jobs.

The employment-to-working age population ratio is relatively high by international standards, and the
unemployment rate is relatively low. However a large proportion of the workforce is engaged in low-
productivity activities in the informal sector, and in subsistence agriculture. Behind the low-
productivity employment are poor education and low workforce skills. The employment structure is
evolving toward a more modern one, but the change is slow. The young generation of Filipino workers
tends to hold somewhat better jobs than the older generation. Young people are better educated,
move from agriculture to services and industry, and are more likely to be employed in the wage and
salary sector. Despite this progress toward more modern employment structure, substantial
challenges remain. There is still a large proportion of poor youth with low educational attainment
ending up in low-skilled jobs. Well educated young workers often cannot find jobs that match their
skills and meet their professional aspirations. Most worryingly, a large proportion of youth is idle, not
in employment, education or training, and this proportion is particularly high among youth from poor
background.

To improve labor market outcomes, the Philippines needs to create more of better jobs. For these
more productive and better paying jobs to be created, workers need to have the skills necessary to
take them. Investment in education and skills of the future generation of workers, especially from
disadvantaged social background, is thus critical to the development of the modern sector of the
Philippine economy, and consequently to the reduction in poverty and inequality.

This chapter is divided into three sections. Section 1 looks at the main labor market trends over the
last decade and at the employment structure. Section 2 analyzes the utilization of labor resources.
Section 3 examines wage inequality and the profile of low-paid employment.




                                                                                                      26
I.       Main labor market trends and employment structure
This section looks at the labor market effects of economic growth in the Philippines. It finds that in
the last decade, economic growth created enough jobs to absorb the increase in the population of
working age. Growth was thus not jobless, and actually led to a slight reduction in the labor market
slack. However, output and labor productivity growth has not translated into real wage growth. Real
wages remained flat in the last decade, suggesting that the quality of jobs has not improved much,
but also that capital appropriated virtually all productivity gains. The employment structure remains
traditional, although younger workers increasingly move to modern sectors of the economy. Overall,
workers’ education remains low, but again, younger workers tend to be better educated. However,
educational attainment of youth from poor families is still unsatisfactory.

Economic growth created enough jobs to absorb the increase in population of
working age but failed to improve their quality
During the last decade, the Philippine economy created enough jobs to absorb labor force growth.9
Table 1.1 shows that employment grew at roughly the same rate as the population of working age.
New entrants to the labor market were finding employment, and there was no increase in
unemployment (Figure 1.1, Panel A). Economic growth was thus sufficiently strong to avoid an
increase in labor market slack due to population growth.

Economic growth did not bring about wage growth. Although labor productivity was growing at a
relatively high pace, real wages remained stagnant in the last decade (Table 1.1, Figure 1.1, Panel A).
Economic growth created jobs, but failed to improve their average quality. Most workers have not
benefitted from growth in terms of higher real wages. This is in sharp contrast to developments in
other Asian countries, which saw a considerable increase in real wages (Figure 1.1, Panel B). The
purchasing power of Filipino workers is falling behind that of their peers in other countries. Why labor
productivity growth did not translate into wage growth in the Philippines is an important question. It
is all the more intriguing given the growth of the minimum wage relative to labor productivity (World
Bank 2013). One possible explanation is weak bargaining power of workers vis-à-vis employers in a
large segment of the economy, especially in the informal sector. Another possibility is a downward
pressure on wages exerted by new labor market entrants. Inasmuch this is the case, low wages are
the price of the good employment record. The reasons for the dismal wage performance need to be
better understood and further research is warranted in this area.




9
  World Bank (2013) claims that growth was jobless in the Philippines, in the sense that it did not reduce the
unemployment rate. In other words, it did not create jobs that could be filled by the unemployed. However,
the unemployment rate in the Philippines is relatively low and to a large extent is due to frictional and structural
factors (reservation wages of the unemployed, a skills mismatch). As argued in this report, the problem is the
lack of “good” jobs, rather than jobs in general.


                                                                                                                 27
Table 1.1 Growth of main labor market variables, 2004-2014
                                                 Annual average
                                                  growth rate,
                                                    percent
a. Population of working age                           1.8
b. Employment                                          1.9
c. Real GDP                                            5.3
d. Labor productivity                                  3.4
e. Real wage                                           0.0
f. Absorption = desired rate of growth (a+d)           5.2
g. Slack = desired - actual rate of growth (f-c)      -0.1
Sources: National Accounts, Philippines Statistics Authority; Yearbook of Labor
Statistics, Bureau of Labor and Employment Studies
Note: 2014 real wage data is the average of January and April 2014.


Figure 1.1 Growth in employment and labor productivity, while real wages are stagnant
Panel A




Figure 1.1, cont.
Panel B




Sources:
Growth Trends :National Accounts, Philippine Statistics Authority (various years); Yearbook of Labor Statistics, Current
Labor Statistics, Bureau of Labor and Employment Statistics (various years)
Real monthly earnings: Global Wage Report 2014-2015, International Labor Organization, World Development Indicators,
World Bank
Note: 2014 real wage data is the average of January and April 2014.




                                                                                                                      28
“Bad” jobs are widespread, but young workers move to better jobs
Employment structure remains traditional, and the modern sector of the economy is still relatively
small. The service sector is the largest employer, followed by agriculture, while industry plays a
relatively minor role. Roughly, every second worker is employed in the services sector, and every third
in agriculture. Only one out of seven workers is employed in industry. Furthermore, the size of the
non-wage sector is substantial. About 40 percent of workers are either self-employed, or unpaid
family members. Such a high share of non-wage employment is another symptom of a traditional
employment structure, since economic development is associated with a growth in the share of formal
wage and salary employment (Gindling and Newhouse 2012, Margolis 2014). Overall, employment in
the Philippines is concentrated in low-productivity activities (World Bank 2013).

Informality10 looms large. Around three-quarters of all jobs are informal. In urban areas, outside
agriculture two-thirds of jobs are informal. Even in the wage and salary sector, 6 out of 10 jobs are
informal (Annex 1A Table 1A). Formal wage and salaried jobs are few, with a negative effect on
productivity and wages. This is because, on average, informal jobs are less productive and pay less
than formal ones (Pages and Stampini 2007, Taymaz 2009). Informal jobs outside agriculture require
lower skills than formal ones, and are disproportionately held by less-educated workers (Figure 1.2).
An increase in the share of formal employment is thus key to productivity and earnings growth in the
Philippines.

 Figure 1.2 Informal employment is widespread and concentrated among less skilled workers
 Panel A                                       Panel B




 Sources: Informal Sector Survey 2008; Bank staff calculations.


Many jobs require little skills and laborers are the single largest occupational group. One in three
workers (excluding farmers) is employed as a laborer in a job that requires no skills. Outside
agriculture and in urban areas, unskilled workers account for nearly one-fourth of total employment.
The prevalence of low-skilled employment reflects both the scarcity of skilled jobs, and the relatively

10
   Informal employment comprises of the total number of informal jobs, whether carried out in formal sector
enterprises, informal sector enterprises, or households, during a given reference period.
This report identifies informal employment using the following criteria. Wage employment is considered
informal if it does not meet at least two of following conditions: a) having a written contract, b) payment of
social security contributions by the employer, and c) protection from job dismissal. Self-employment is
considered informal if the self-employed does not maintain proper bookkeeping and accounting practices. By
assumption, unpaid family workers are considered informally employed. For more detail, see Annex: Defining
Informal Employment.


                                                                                                           29
low educational attainment of the workforce. As many as 44 percent of workers have less than
secondary education; this proportion is substantially higher in rural areas (57 percent), but it is high
even in urban areas (30 percent). If a large proportion of the workforce is unskilled, firms have little
incentive to provide “good” jobs; and if few “good” jobs are available, workers have little incentive to
acquire skills (Snower 1994). Both better education and investments in the modern sector of the
economy are necessary to break the vicious circle of low skills inhibiting the creation of better jobs,
and the lack of productive job opportunities discouraging the acquisition of better skills.

There is a shortage of skilled jobs. Educated workers are often forced to take unskilled jobs, and work
as laborers. About 30 percent of workers with secondary education hold unskilled jobs. And as many
as 35 percent of laborers have at least secondary education. This suggests that the scarcity of “good”
jobs is not caused by an insufficient supply of middle-skilled labor. Instead it seems there is not
enough “good” jobs because the demand for middle-skilled labor is weak in the Philippines.

Traditional employment structure prevailing in the Philippines has important welfare implications.
It means that there is a lot of “bad” jobs—jobs that are informal, not covered by labor regulations,
requiring little skills, paying little, and not pulling workers out of poverty (see Chapter 2). Accordingly,
poverty reduction requires structural change, that is, reallocation of labor from traditional, low
productivity jobs toward more productive jobs in the modern sector of the economy. This primarily
entails migration from rural to urban areas, and from agriculture to service and industry sectors. The
pace of structural change is relatively slow in the Philippines (World Bank 2013), hindering income
growth and poverty reduction. However, there are positive developments and employment gradually
shifts towards modern sectors. In particular, younger worker cohorts are more likely to have jobs in
the modern sectors of the economy than older ones.

Young workers move to better jobs. Young workers are better educated and are more likely to be
employed outside agriculture, in the wage-and-salary sector. But surprisingly, they hardly migrate to
urban areas: the share of urban employment among younger age cohorts is only marginally higher
than among older ones. Although not dramatic, the changes in the employment structure by age are
noticeable. The share of service and industry employment decreases with age, and so does the share
of wage employment. On the other hand, the share of self-employment sharply increases (Figure 1.3).
For example, the share of non-agricultural employment among workers in the 20 to 29 age group is
10 percentage points higher than that among 50 to 59 age group, and 6 percentage points higher than
among the 40-49 group. The increase in the share of service employment among younger workers is
somewhat larger than that in industry employment, which is consistent with the faster growth of
service than industry employment (World Bank 2013). The transition from self-employment to wage
employment is even more pronounced. The share of wage-and-salary employment among the 20 to
29 age cohort is 27 percentage points higher than that among the 50-59 cohort and 20 percentage
higher than among the 40-49 cohort. These changes in the employment structure matter from the
welfare perspective as they contribute to poverty reduction. As it will be shown later, workers
employed outside agriculture and in the wage-and-salary employment earn more and are less likely
to be poor than agricultural workers and the self-employed. What is perplexing is the negligible
increase in the share of urban employment among young workers, which limits the potential gains in
poverty reduction because urban jobs are better than rural jobs (Gindling and Newshouse 2012).
Urban jobs are more productive, pay more, and are associated with a significantly lower risk of poverty




                                                                                                         30
than rural jobs (see Chapter 2).             The obstacles to rural to urban migration warrant further
investigation.

 Figure 1.3 Younger workers have better jobs
 Panel A                                                      Panel B




 Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.



Low educational attainment among youth from poor background remains a big
issue
Although younger workers are better educated than older ones, there is still a sizable group of
poorly educated youth. While the Philippines has made progress in enrollment rates, completion
remains an issue. Nearly 30 percent of workers in the youngest age cohort (20-29) have not completed
secondary education (Figure 1.4, Panel A). This proportion is substantially lower than among older
age cohorts, which is a measure of progress in improving access to education. For example, among
the 40-49 age cohort, the share of workers with less than secondary education is almost 15 percentage
points higher (43 percent). Nonetheless, the pool of rather poorly educated young workers is large.

 Low educational attainment is particularly pronounced among youth from poor families, most of
whom live in rural areas. In the bottom income quintile, as many as 60 percent of young workers lack
full secondary education, and 40 percent in the second quintile (Figure 1.4, Panel B). These are high
percentages. Their importance lies in the fact that workers with less than secondary education face
substantially worse labor market prospects than those who completed high school. Their earnings are
significantly lower (see Section III below), at the risk of poverty is much higher (see Chapter 2).
Improving access to good quality secondary education among the poor, especially in rural areas, is
thus a key component of a strategy to reduce poverty and promote shared prosperity.




                                                                                                   31
 Figure 1.4 Younger workers are better educated but education agenda is unfinished
 Panel A                                         Panel B




 Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.



II.        Utilization of labor resources
The majority of persons of working age are employed in the Philippines and unemployment is
relatively low. However, the employment- to-working age population ratio11, although relatively high
by international standards, is lower than in the most dynamic ASEAN economies. There is room to
improve the utilization of labor resources by bringing more people into employment, which would
translate into higher incomes and lower poverty. This can be primarily achieved by increasing the
labor force participation rate among women and youth. The relatively high percentage of youth who
are not in employment or education is of particular concern. However, the biggest issue is
underemployment; that is, employment in low-productivity, low-paying jobs, which are often part-
time or temporary. From the poverty perspective, low-productivity employment is a bigger issue than
unemployment. To improve the utilization of labor resources, the Philippines needs to create more
of better jobs.

Most persons of working age are employed, but many of them are underemployed
On the face of it, labor resources are almost fully utilized in the Philippines. The employment-to-
working age population ratiois relatively high by international standards. However, it is lower than in
most of the ASEAN countries, where the employment rate is above the world average. For example,
the employment rates in Vietnam and Thailand are 15 and 11 percentage points higher than in the
Philippines (Figure 1.5), respectively. On the other hand, the employment rate in Malaysia is lower by
3 percentage points.

The unemployment rate is relatively low. Using a broad measure of unemployment, which includes
persons available for work, but not actively looking for work, the unemployment rate is around 6 to 7
percent. The standard ILO unemployment rate, which includes only the jobless who are actively
looking for work, is less than 3 percent. If all the unemployed—both active and passive—found
employment, the employment rate would increase by about 5 percentage points This would still be
lower than in the high employment ASEAN countries. In order to increase the employment rate, the
Philippines primarily needs to raise the labor force participation rate, which would bring about much
larger employment gains than reducing the unemployment rate.



11
     Employment to working age population ratio is a summary measure of the utilization of labor resources.


                                                                                                              32
Labor force participation rate is particularly low among women and youth. Only one woman in two
is economically active in the Philippines. There is a 27 percentage points difference between the labor
force participation rate of women and men, which is not unusual as in virtually all countries, men are
economically more active than women. This reflects cultural norms as well as institutional factors such
as access to child care facilities. However, the large pool of economically inactive women means an
untapped potential for income growth. Improving incentives and opportunities for women to enter
the labor market would result in significant welfare gains. The same refers to youth, an issue that is
dealt with in more detail below.

 Figure 1.5 Employment rate is at the average level in the Philippines




 Sources: Key Indicators of the Labour Market database (2013), International Labour Organization; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Low middle incomes countries with gross national income per capita of more than or less than $1,000 from the Philippines in 2013
 were selected for this graph.

Low-productivity employment is a bigger problem in the Philippines than unemployment. Many
workers have jobs but still look for additional work opportunities. These underemployed workers seek
additional earnings to avoid poverty. Chapter 2 shows that employment does not protect one from
poverty, and that the underemployed are particularly vulnerable to poverty. After all, the
underemployed are at a significantly higher risk of poverty than the unemployed. It is estimated that
about one worker in five is underemployed, that is, looking for more work (World Bank 2013). Close
to 60 percent of these workers are “visibly” underemployed, that is, they work less than full-time (40
hours per week).

Socio-economic profile of the underemployed and the unemployed is very different. The
unemployed tend to be young, well-educated, and mostly come from well-off families (see Chapter
2). In contrast, the underemployed are prime age workers with less than secondary education, and
come from poor families. For instance, the unemployment rate among workers with tertiary
education (8 percent) is twice as high as that among workers with primary education (4 percent). In
contrast, the underemployment rate among workers with primary education (25 percent) is more than
twice as high as that among workers with tertiary education (11 percent). Underemployment is a
predominantly rural phenomenon—nearly 70 percent of the underemployed live in rural areas. The
unemployed are found in both urban and rural areas (almost 50-50 split), but the unemployment rate
is higher in urban areas (9 percent) than in rural areas (6 percent). Unemployment is a problem of
young, well-educated persons who search for, but cannot easily find jobs that match their skills and
meet their professional aspirations. Underemployment is a problem of less educated workers who
hold low-paying jobs and are forced to seek additional work—any work—in order to make ends meet.




                                                                                                                                     33
Table 1.2 Main labor force indicators

                        Employment/           Underemployed/        Unemployment       Labor force
                       Population 15+            Employed               rate        participation rate

                                                              percent
Total                                 59.5                   21.0             7.1                 64.1
Urban/Rural location
Urban                                 57.5                   16.0             8.6                 62.9
Rural                                 61.0                   24.5             6.0                 64.9
Sex
Male                                  71.9                   23.6             7.5                 77.7
Female                                47.3                   16.8             6.5                 50.6
Total                                 59.5                   20.9             7.1                 64.1
Age
Youth (15-24)                         37.4                   19.7            16.6                 44.8
Prime age (25-
54)                                   73.5                   21.9             5.0                 77.4
Older (55-64)                         66.7                   19.4             2.6                 68.4
Old (65+)                             35.8                   13.7             1.6                 36.4
Educational attainment
Below primary                         66.2                   27.3             3.3                 68.5
Comp. primary                         65.4                   25.4             4.1                 68.2
Inc. secondary                        46.0                   24.5             7.0                 49.4
Comp.
secondary.                            61.5                   20.1             9.2                 67.7
Inc. tertiary                         44.9                   17.1            10.0                 49.9
Comp. tertiary                        73.0                   10.5             7.7                 79.1
Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.




                                                                                                         34
Many young Filipinos are not in employment or education, and not looking for jobs
A large fraction of Filipino youth is idle. One out of four persons aged 15-24 is NEET.12 This is a high
proportion by both international and regional standards (Figure 1.6, Panel A). The NEET rate is
significantly lower in Vietnam, Thailand, or Malaysia (World Bank 2014a), and approximately the same
in Indonesia. In best performing countries, the NEET rate is less than 10 percent; in majority, it is
below 20 percent. Expectedly, the NEET rate is much higher among young women (31 percent) than
among young men (19 percent). Only 14 percent of young people who are NEET are actively seeking
employment. Again, this percentage is higher among men (20 percent) than among women (10
percent). The majority of NEETs are economically inactive, although some would take a job if
offered—25 percent of men and 9 percent of women. These results indicate that there is scope to
reduce the NEET rate in the Philippines, which would have a positive impact on welfare. In order to
design effective policy interventions promoting youth employment, one needs to identify the reasons
of economic inactivity among the youth.

High NEET rate is associated with poverty. The percentage of idle youth is highest in the first two
income quintiles (bottom 40 percent), and lowest in the top income quintile (Figure 1.6, Panel B). This
is a counterintuitive result. One could have presumed that that the relationship between household
income and NEET is positive rather than negative. That is, the youth in poor households cannot afford
to be idle, while those in non-poor households do not have to work. But apparently the relationship
is negative: the NEET rate in the bottom income quintile is twice as high as in the top quintile (28 and
14 percent, respectively). There seems to be reverse causality: youth from poor families are idle
possibly because of limited job prospects; idleness, in turn, contributes to poverty. In addition, youth
from better-off families can afford to go to college, hence, they are not NEET. Interestingly, there is
no clear relationship between the NEET rate and educational attainment. Rather surprisingly, the
NEET rate is highest among youth with completed secondary and tertiary education (over 30 percent),
and is the lowest among youth with incomplete secondary or tertiary education (about 15 percent).
However, better educated workers are more likely to actively look for jobs, while less educated ones
tend to be economically passive. For example, jobseekers account for 25 percent of NEET youth with
tertiary education, and 7 percent for those with less than secondary education. The NEET rate is the
same in urban and in rural areas.




12
  One may think that the high NEET rate in the Philippines reflects the 10 (rather than 12) year education cycle
and pupils finishing secondary education at the age of 16 and not entering the job market immediately.
However, the NEET rate among youth aged 18-24 is still higher at 30 percent, which means that the high NEET
rate is not explained by the relatively short education cycle.


                                                                                                             35
 Figure 1.6 A large proportion of Filipino youth is idle, particularly among the poor.
 Panel A




 Source: Key Indicators of the Labour Market database (2013), International Labour Organization; Bank staff calculations.

 Panel B




 Source: Labor Force Survey 2013 and Family Income Expenditure Survey 2012; Bank staff calculations.



III.     Wage distribution and its determinants
Wages are an important attribute of job quality. “Bad” jobs are jobs that pay little in relative terms.
Wage—and consequently, income—distribution influences social welfare and sense of fairness in
society. Highly unequal wage distribution is associated with higher poverty rates, and runs counter
the shared prosperity agenda. This section examines the wage distribution in the Philippines and finds
that wage inequality is high, but not exorbitant by international standards. The incidence of low-pay
is high—there is a large number of “bad” jobs that pay little compared with the median wage. Wage
inequality neither decreased nor increased with economic growth, which means that low-paid jobs
are being reproduced and their share did not decline. This section argues that wage inequality in the
Philippines is driven by labor market segmentation, with large wage differentials between the formal
and informal sectors, urban and rural sectors, and modern and traditional industries. Ultimately,


                                                                                                                       36
these wage differentials boil down to differences between high-skilled and low-skilled activities. Wage
inequality, to a large extent, reflects inequality in education and skills. Investment in education and
skills would thus be an effective way to reduce wage, and consequently income, inequality in the
Philippines.

Persistently high wage inequality and high incidence of low-pay
Wage inequality is moderately high in the Philippines by international standards. It is higher than in
most developed European countries, but in the middle of developing economies’ range.13 High earners
(top decile) earn about 7 times as much as low earners (bottom decile). In the most equal countries,
this ratio (known as the decile or 90/10 ratio) is less than 4, whereas in the most unequal countries, it
exceeds 10 (Figure 1.7, Panel A).

 Figure 1.7 Wage inequality is relatively high in the Philippines
 Panel A.




 Figure 1.7, cont.
 Panel B.




 Sources: ILOstat; Bank staff calculations.




13
  International comparisons of wage distribution are difficult and imprecise due to differences in definitions and
data sources. The estimates of inequality measures are subject to a wide margin of error, and thus, need to be
interpreted with due caution. Even for a single country the estimates may differ significantly depending on the
data source.


                                                                                                               37
Wage distribution changed little in the last 15 years. Economic growth did not improve the relative
status of low-paid workers and hardly reduced the incidence of low-pay. If anything, wage inequality
slightly increased. The decile ratio was 6.4 in 2001 and presently stands at 6.9 (as of 2013). This
increase in inequality resulted from an increase in relative wages of the top 10 percent of wage earners
rather than from a decrease in wages of the bottom 10 percent of wage earners. At least, economic
growth did not worsen the relative status of low-paid workers. Actually, there were some positive
changes at the bottom of the wage distribution, but they were negligible. The incidence of low pay
decreased by 1 percentage point between 2001 and 2013, and the 10/50 ratio increased from 38 to
40 percent, which is within the margin of error).

Relative wage status of low-paid workers is modest in the Philippines. A worker at the bottom decile
of the wage distribution earns about 40 percent of the median wage (Figure 1.7, Panel B). This is
rather low when compared to low wage inequality countries, where a worker at the bottom decile
earns over 60 percent of the median wage. In such countries, the distance between a worker at the
bottom of the wage distribution and the median worker (known as the 10/50 ratio) is substantially
smaller than in the Philippines. However, in high wage inequality countries the 10/50 ratio is less than
30 percent, and thus the distance between the worker at the bottom decile and the median worker is
larger than in the Philippines. Based on these metrics, the Philippines appears as a moderately high
wage inequality country. The P10/P50 ratio is particularly relevant form the perspective of poverty
and shared prosperity. The lower the ratio, the higher the incidence of in-work poverty and the more
pronounced is social exclusion.

The incidence of low-pay is high. As many as 30 percent of all wage workers earn less than two-thirds
of the median wage (Figure 1.8, Panel A).14 Low-paid workers are vulnerable to poverty and in fact,
a lot of them end up being poor (Chapter 2). The high incidence of low-pay is characteristic of high
wage inequality. In countries where wage inequality is lower than in the Philippines, the incidence of
low pay is within the 10 to 20 percent range.

Incidence of low-pay is particularly high in the informal sector. The difference between the formal
and the informal sector is dramatic (Figure 1.8, Panel B). In the informal sector, it is the majority of
workers (56 percent) who earn less than two-thirds of the median wage, while in the formal sector, it
is a small minority (7 percent). Low-paid employment is almost tantamount to informal employment.
About 92 percent of all “bad”, low-paid jobs is informal jobs.15 The high incidence of low-paid
employment is thus an upshot of widespread informality. This implies that the minimum wage policy,
which reaches only formal workers, has a very limited potential to address low-paid employment (see
below and Chapter 2 for a more detailed discussion on the effectiveness of the minimum wage policy).




14
   Two-thirds of the median wage is a standard threshold of low-pay. The value of this threshold was ₽167 per
day (US$3.8) in 2013.
15
   The converse is not true; there is a large proportion (44 percent) of informal jobs that are not low-paid.


                                                                                                           38
 Figure 1.8 High incidence of low-pay driven by informal employment
 Panel A                                          Panel B




 Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013 (Panel A) and ISS 2008 (Panel B); Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Very low pay = less than 50 percent of median wage; low pay = less than 67 percent of median wage; middle pay =
 150 percent of median wage; high pay = less than 3 times the median wage; very high pay = 3 times the median wage or
 higher. The intervals are right-open and left-closed; the upper endpoint for the lower wage group is the lower endpoint
 for the higher group.

High incidence of low-pay among informal workers is closely related to the characteristics of the
informal jobs. Informal wage jobs are concentrated in rural areas, in the services sector and among
low-skilled workers (see Annex 1A Table 1A). All these jobs tend to be low-paid. The incidence of low-
pay among rural workers is nearly twice as high as among urban workers (40 and 21 percent,
respectively) and rural workers account for two-thirds of low-paid employment. As many as 54
percent of all low-paid jobs are in the services sector and the incidence of low-pay among service and
sales workers is 36 percent. In comparison, the incidence of low-pay among skilled manual workers
(e.g. craftsmen, machine operators, etc.) is three times lower at 12 percent, and 10 percent among
industrial workers. (Annex 1B Table 1B. provides detailed information on the profile of low-paid
employment in the Philippines).

Low-skilled workers have the highest incidence of low-pay. Every second laborer (an unskilled
worker in so-called elementary occupations) is low-paid, and unskilled workers represent close to 70
percent of low-paid employment. Service and sales workers are the second largest group, which
accounts for about 20 percent of low-paid employment.

Incidence of low-pay is significantly higher among women than men. As many as 37 percent of
women are in low-paid employment compared with 25 percent of men. This large difference, may be
due to women being more likely employed in low wage industries and occupations. Close to 80
percent of women are employed in the service sector compared with less than 50 percent of men,
who are more often employed in the better paying industry sector. Furthermore, 20 percent of
women are employed in low-paying service and sales occupations, compared with 14 percent of men.
Informality does not play a role here, because the incidence of informal employment is the same
among women as men (67 percent). However, discrimination seems to play a role. All else being
equal, women earn less than men.

Underemployment and low-paid employment are closely related. About 55 percent of the
underemployed have low-paid jobs. This is particularly the case with the “visibly” underemployed,
among whom almost three-quarters are in low-paid employment. This correlation adds validity to the
concept of underemployment. Most of those who look for additional work—the underemployed—


                                                                                                                      39
do so because they earn little. However, low-paid employment is a broader concept than
underemployment. There are workers who hold low-paid jobs but do not look for additional work
and, accordingly, are not categorized as the underemployed. The underemployed are a subset of low-
paid workers.

To conclude, wage inequality in the Philippines manifests itself in two ways: in a wide wage differential
between the bottom 10 percent wage earners and the median worker, and in a high incidence of low-
paid employment. There is a lot of jobs that pay relatively little. Factors behind the high incidence of
low-pay is informality and unskilled employment. Below we examine the determinants of wage
variation in more detail.

Wage inequality is driven by labor market segmentation
Wage inequality in the Philippines is high because of labor market segmentation. 16 There are two
sectors with a large wage differential between them. The low-wage sector is traditional, informal, and
rural. While the high-wage sector is modern, formal, and urban. The low-wage sector employs less-
educated and low-skilled workers, and the high-wage sector employs more educated and better
skilled ones. The inter-sectoral differences in skills intensity seem to be central. To a large degree
wage differentials between the sectors boil down to education and skill differential. For example, the
formal and urban segments of the labor market are significantly more skill intensive than the informal
and rural segments (Annex 1A Table 1A). And lack of skills seem to be a major barrier for workers to
move from the traditional low-wage to the modern high-wage sector.

Wage differentials between labor market segments are large. To illustrate, an average formal worker
earns over twice as much as an informal worker. An urban worker earns 50 percent more than his/her
rural counterpart. A worker with tertiary education earns 3.4 times as much as one with primary
education. And a skilled manual worker earns 70 percent more than a laborer. However, these raw
wage differentials do not take into account differences in worker and job characteristics among
sectors. For example, workers in the formal sector are better educated and more skilled than those
in the informal sector, thus the formal/informal wage differential also reflects the education and skills
premia. Regression analysis allows one to separate the impact of different factors on wages, and to
estimate their independent effects. The regression adjusted (independent) effect of selected
variables on wages are shown in Table 1.3. The full results of the regression analysis are presented in
Annex 1C Table 1C.

There is a number of factors that independently contribute to wage inequality in the Philippines.
Table 1.3 indicates that the most important among them are urban/rural location, formal/informal
status, and education and skills (proxied by occupation). Wage inequality reflects large differences in
job and worker characteristics. There are large productivity differentials between urban and rural,
and formal and informal jobs, as well as between well-educated and skilled workers and those with
less education and skills. For example, a formal worker enjoys a 33 percent wage premium over an
observationally identical informal worker. All else being equal, a skilled manual worker is paid a wage
that is 30 percent higher than that of an unskilled worker. And a university graduate earns 74 percent
more than a high school graduate. Altogether, these observable factors explain about 36 percent of

16
   Segmentation indicates that workers who have different characteristics operate in different labor markets,
with different working conditions, different promotional opportunities, different wages, and different market
institutions. (Reich et al. 1973).


                                                                                                          40
variation in wages. There is residual inequality that is accounted for by unobservable differences in
worker and job characteristics as well as institutional factors (e.g. differences in bargaining power
between workers and employers in different segments of the labor market).

 Table 1.3 Regression adjusted wage premia
                                                         Wage premium
                                                           (percent)
 Urban/Rural                                                  20
 Formal/Informal                                              33
 Tertiary/Primary education                                   113
 Tertiary/Secondary education                                 74
 Secondary/Primary education                                  34
 Industry/Services                                            18
 Skilled manual/Unskilled                                     30
 Skilled manual/Services and sales                            13
 Service and sales/Unskilled                                  14
 Male/Female                                                  30
 Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013 and Informal Sector Survey 2008; Bank staff
 calculations.

Reducing wage inequality requires addressing its underlying causes: large skill differentials among
workers and productivity differentials among jobs. Improving the status of low paid workers and
reducing the incidence of low-pay is important to achieve poverty reduction and shared prosperity
goals. Investment in education of youth from socially disadvantaged background is a way to reduce
skill differentials. Strengthening incentives for formality and enhancing job opportunities in the formal
sector so that workers move from low-productivity informal to more productive formal employment
lessens productivity differentials among jobs. Finally, improving agricultural productivity also reduces
the urban/rural wage differential.

Minimum wage policy has a limited potential to reduce wage inequality in the Philippines. This is
due to the large size of the informal sector, where the bulk of low-paid workers are employed. As
discussed in Chapter 3, informal workers do not benefit from the minimum wage policy. In fact, the
majority of them earn less than the minimum wage. The minimum wage policy, in its current form,
may even contribute to wage inequality as it creates a barrier between the formal and informal sector
(see Chapter 3). It prices low-productivity workers out of better-paid formal employment and pushes
them into low-paid informal employment. The increased supply of workers in the informal sector
drives wages down in that sector. As such, the minimum wage policy sustains the formal/informal
wage differential.




                                                                                                      41
ANNEX 1A Non-agricultural employment by formality status and worker
characteristics
 Table 1A: Non-agricultural employment by formality status and worker characteristics,
 2008
                                                  Distribution of non-
                                                       agricultural      Informality
                                                      employment             rate
                                                  Informal      Formal
                                                                 percent
 Total                                                100        100          67
                       Location
 Urban                                                60          74          62
 Rural                                                40          26          75
                         Sex
 Men                                                  55          55          67
 Women                                                45          45          67
                         Age
 Youth                                                19          17          70
 Prime age                                            69          76          64
 Older                                                 9          6           74
 65 and above                                          3          1           89
                       Education
 Below primary                                        12          2           93
 Completed primary                                    17          3           91
 Incomplete secondary                                 16          4           88
 Completed secondary                                  32          23          74
 Incomplete tertiary                                  15          21          59
 Completed tertiary                                    8          46          27
                 Status in employment
 Wage workers                                         53          96          53
 Self-employment                                      39          4           95
 Unpaid family workers                                 8          0           100
                   Occupation
 Managers & gov't employees                           24          13          79
 Professionals                                         1          19          10
 Clerks                                                3          17          27
 Technicians                                           3          8           40
 Service & sales                                      15          17          64
 Skilled manual                                       26          16          76
 Unskilled                                            29          10          85
                   Economic activity
 Industry                                             24          22          68
 Services                                             76          78          66




                                                                                         42
Table 1A: Non-agricultural employment by formality status and worker characteristics,
2008
                     Firm size
Micro (1-10 employees)                                     91           44            84
Small (11-50)                                               8           42            32
Medium (51-250)                                             1           11            20
Large (250+)                                                0            4            15
                 Income quintiles
Bottom                                                     30            3            92
 nd
2                                                          35           11            76
Middle                                                     14           15            47
 th
4                                                          16           30            34
Top                                                         5           42            10
Note: Wage workers are categorized as formal when they meet at least two of the following three
criteria: have a written employment contract, have employer provided social insurance, and are
protected from arbitrary dismissal; otherwise, they are categorized as informal. Self-employed
workers are formal if they have proper bookkeeping system; otherwise, they are informal. Unpaid
family members are informal be definition.
Sources: Informal Sector Survey 2008; Bank staff calculations.




                                                                                                  43
ANNEX 1B Profile of low-paid employment

Table 1B: Profile of low-paid employment
                                 Incidence of           Share in low-paid       Share in
                                   low-pay                employment             total
                                                                              employment
             Total                              30%                  100%           100%
           Location
Urban                                           21%                    34%             50%
Rural                                           40%                    66%             50%
            Gender
Men                                             25%                    50%             60%
Women                                           37%                    50%             40%
               Age
Youth (15-24)                                   44%                    35%             24%
Prime age (25-54)                               25%                    56%             69%
Old (55-64)                                     32%                     7%              6%
Older (65+)                                     48%                     2%              1%
           Education
Below primary                                   58%                    24%             12%
Comp. primary                                   46%                    18%             12%
Inc. secondary                                  43%                    17%             12%
Comp. secondary.                                29%                    32%             33%
Inc. tertiary                                   18%                     6%              9%
Comp. tertiary                                   4%                     3%             22%
              Sector
Agriculture                                     61%                    36%             18%
Industry                                        13%                    10%             24%
Services                                        28%                    54%             58%
           Occupation
 Managers & gov't
employees                                        6%                     1%               4%
 Professionals                                   3%                     1%               9%
 Technicians                                    11%                     2%               4%
 Clerks                                          8%                     3%              10%
 Service & sales                                36%                    19%              16%
 Skilled manual                                 12%                     7%              18%
 Unskilled                                      52%                    68%              39%
      Formal vs. informal*
 Informal                                       56%                    92%              60%
 Formal                                          7%                     8%              40%
Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013 January, Informal Sector Survey 2008 for informal vs formal
distinction; Bank staff calculations
Note: Workers are categorized as low-paid if they earn less than two-thirds of the median
wage.




                                                                                               44
ANNEX 1C Wage Regressions
Table 1C: Wage Regressions

                                                (1)              (2)                    (3)               (4)
            Data source                            Using LFS 2013                           Using ISS 2008
                                             coefficient     t-statistics           coefficient         t-statistics
Education (base = below primary)
         Completed primary                   0.089    ***        8.8                0.106     ***         9.7
         Incomplete secondary                0.123    ***       11.3                0.123     ***        10.6
         Completed secondary                 0.294    ***       29.8                0.221     ***        20.5
         Incomplete tertiary                 0.462    ***       33.9                0.334     ***        26.4
         Completed tertiary                  0.845    ***       54.6                0.595     ***        38.5
Experience a                                 0.026    ***       35.8                0.023     ***        31.8
Experience^2                                -0.000    ***      -26.8               -0.000     ***       -22.9
Male                                         0.264    ***       39.1                0.246     ***        39.6
Urban                                        0.182    ***       29.5                0.178     ***        29.6
Sector (base = agriculture)
         Industry                            0.174    ***       19.1                0.166     ***        17.3
         Services                            0.006               0.7                0.008                 0.9
Occupations (base = unskilled)
        Managers & gov’t                     0.775    ***       33.6                0.658     ***        32.9
employees
        Professionals                        0.830    ***       48.8                0.622     ***       40.2
        Technicians                          0.501    ***       26.0                0.439     ***       25.4
        Clerks                               0.473    ***       34.0                0.338     ***       26.5
        Service & sales                      0.133    ***       12.2                0.120     ***       11.1
        Skilled manual                       0.259    ***       29.1                0.259     ***       30.5
Informal                                       N/A              N/A                -0.396     ***      -57.0
_constant                                    4.350    ***      354.1                4.549     ***      323.7
Observations                                36,668                                 31,445
R-squared                                    0.508                                  0.596
Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013 January, Informal Sector Survey 2008; Bank staff calculations
a Experience was defined as age minus the average number of years of education for each educational classification.

*** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1, denote statistical significance at 99%, 95%, and 90% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                       45
ANNEX 1D Defining Formal Employment

The way the concept of formality is operationalized depends on the specific data source. In this
empirical analysis we define formal employment in Philippines based on the information provided by
the 2008 Informal Sector Survey (ISS). It should be noted, however, that the ISS or any other data
sources do not unambiguously determine the way formal employment is defined. There may be
different criteria used to identify formal employment, and the results will vary depending on the
choice of the criterion. This implies that there is no single “right” measure of formality. There may be
different estimates of the size of formal employment in Philippines obtained using other sources, and
all of them may be valid. There is bound to be some ambiguity in the measurement of formality.

This report defines formal employment as follows. In the case of wage employment, the criteria used
to distinguish between formal and informal employment are: a) having a written employment
contract, b) payment of social security contributions by the employer, and c) protection from job
dismissal. This definition considers a job formal when at least two of the three criteria are met. In the
case of the self-employed, the enterprise is considered formal when it maintains proper bookkeeping
and accounting practices. By assumption, unpaid family workers are considered informally employed.

Given that the estimates of the size of the formal employment depend on the definition, we present
below a set of estimates that were obtained using different operational definitions of the formality of
wage employment. (The focus is on wage employment as the size of informal self-employed is not
sensitive to changes in the definition). Table 1.D.1. provides the upper and lower bound estimates of
the size of formal wage employment in Philippines. At the same time, it shows how sensitive the
results are to changes in the definition of formality.

 Table 1D: Percentage of wage workers meeting different criteria of formality, 2008.
                Formality criteria
                                     Protection         Share in wage
    Written           Social                                            Formality status
                                        from           employment, %
    contract        insurance
                                      dismissal
       no               no                no                 27.1          informal
      yes               no                no                 29.2          informal
       no               yes               no                 29.7          informal
       no               no              yes                  55.2          informal
            Any single criterion is met                      78.2          informal
      yes               yes               no                 31.2           formal
      yes               no               yes                 25.9           formal
       no               yes              yes                 26.7           formal
      yes               yes              yes                 21.9           formal
                                         a
         At least two criteria are met                       40.1           formal
 Sources: Informal Sector Survey 2008; Bank staff calculations.
 a The criterion of formality is used in this report.




                                                                                                      46
Chapter 2
Labor Market Determinants of Poverty
in the Philippines
Introduction
Poverty among working age population is the effect of unfavorable labor market outcomes of
individuals and households. People are poor because they are unemployed or have low-paying jobs.
Also, because they live in households with few earners, or in households with low earning capacity.
Distinguishing between these different factors is important in designing an effective poverty reduction
policy.

This chapter aims at identifying labor market determinants of poverty in the Philippines by examining
the connection between poverty, and worker and households characteristics. It finds that having a
job does not provide a pathway out of poverty, and that in-work poverty is pervasive in the Philippines.
It is the quality of a job that matters. Workers in “bad” jobs run a higher risk of poverty than the
unemployed. There are numerous “bad” jobs, which tend to be informal and concentrated in low-
productivity activities, including in subsistence agriculture. The Government uses the minimum wage
policy to address in-work poverty; however, it reaches only a minority of the working poor, and as
such, is largely ineffective. This chapter further argues that the primary cause of poverty is low earning
capacity, rather than low work intensity among the vulnerable households. The low earning capacity
reflects both low-skills of the poor, and lack of productive job opportunities. Therefore, poverty
reduction in the Philippines hinges on both improving workface skills, and on improving access by the
poor to more productive jobs.

The chapter is structured as follows. Section I looks at the connection between worker and job
characteristics, and poverty. Section II examines the role played by work intensity and earning
capacity in explaining households’ poverty status. Section III analyses the potential of a minimum wage
policy to reduce in-work poverty in the Philippines. The last section concludes and discusses policy
implications of the analysis.



I.      Worker and job characteristics and poverty
This section examines the risk of poverty faced by different population groups based on their labor
market status. It finds that workers in low-productivity jobs are at substantially higher risk of poverty
than the unemployed. Rural and agricultural workers are particularly vulnerable to poverty and
represent the bulk of the working poor. However in-work poverty is not limited to rural areas. Urban
workers who have informal and low-skilled jobs are also highly vulnerable to poverty. Annex 2A Table
2A and Annex 2B Table 2B show the detailed profile of in-work poverty. The strong link between in-
work poverty and low-productivity employment indicates that poverty reduction is contingent on the
creation of better, formal jobs, as well as on investment in education and skills among the poor.




                                                                                                       47
In-work poverty is pervasive
Labor force status has little impact on the risk of poverty in the Philippines. The employed are as
likely to be poor as the economically inactive, and paradoxically, more likely to be poor than the
unemployed (Figure 2.1, panel A). Having a job, by itself, does not protect one from poverty. It is thus
the quality of a job that matters. And the quality of jobs varies considerably in the Philippines (see
Chapter 1 and the analysis below).

Majority of the working-age poor are employed. The unemployed account for only a tiny fraction of
the working-age poor. Figure 2.1, Panel B illustrates this pattern. As many as 60 percent of the
working-age poor have a job. The unemployed, that is, persons who are looking for a job or at least
would like have a job, account for less than 4 percent of the poor. The remaining 35 percent are
persons who are out of the labor force. The high incidence of in-work poverty in the Philippines points
to two things. First, there is substantial number of “bad” jobs, which do not lift workers out of poverty.
Second, poverty will be reduced only if there will be more “good” jobs, which entails gains in labor
productivity being translated into higher wages. As shown in Chapter 1, the latter condition cannot
be taken for granted. Wages in the Philippines are inelastic to growth, which is an obstacle to poverty
reduction.

Unemployment does not mean poverty. Workers looking for a job are less likely to be poor than
many of the jobholders. This is a surprising result, contrary to what is observed in other countries,
especially higher income ones where the unemployed face a considerably higher risk of poverty than
the employed. Why is the pattern in the Philippines opposite to that prevailing in higher income
countries? The explanation lies in the socio-economic profile of unemployment in the Philippines,
which is different from that observed in higher income countries. In the Philippines the unemployed
tend to be better educated and come from well-off families, while in higher income countries, the
unemployed tend to be less educated and come from poorer families than the employed (World Bank
2013). Put differently, the poor cannot afford to be unemployed, whereas the unemployed have
higher reservation wages and look for better job opportunities that would match their professional
aspirations. This is not to say that unemployment is not a social problem in the Philippines. It is a
problem because it lowers the returns to investment in human capital, and implies underutilization of
the well-educated labor force. It also entices some of the well educated workers to seek job
opportunities abroad rather than in their home country. But the link between unemployment and
poverty is rather weak in the Philippines.




                                                                                                       48
 Figure 2.1 Employment does not lower the risk of poverty
 Panel A                                         Panel B




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Poverty = bottom quintile (20 percent) of income distribution.

Underemployment is more of a problem from poverty perspective than unemployment. Workers
who are underemployed, or those seeking additional work, face the highest risk of poverty. Over 30
percent of workers who are visibly underemployed fall into bottom income quintile, compared with
only about 10 percent of the unemployed and 15 percent of the fully employed (Figures 2.1 and 2.2).
Workers are visibly underemployed when they work less than full-time (40 hours per week). They are
invisibly underemployed when they work 40 or more hours per week, but still seek additional work.
The latter category is also at a higher risk of poverty than the fully employed, but not in the same
degree as the visibly underemployed. Altogether, the underemployed represent about one-third of
the working poor, of which the visibly underemployed represent close to 25 percent.

 Figure 2.2 Underemployment increases the risk of poverty




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Poverty = bottom quintile (20 percent) of income distribution; Visible underemployed = work less than full-time (40
 hours per week) and would like to work more; Invisible underemployed = work full-time but would like to work more.




                                                                                                                        49
Majority of working poor live in rural areas and work in agriculture
In-work poverty is mostly, although not exclusively, a rural and agricultural phenomenon. Rural
workers run a much higher risk of poverty than urban ones, and account for bulk of the working poor.
An average rural worker is almost four times more likely to be in bottom income quintile than his/her
urban counterpart (the probabilities are 24 and 6.3 percent, respectively). As a result, 84 percent of
all working-poor live in rural areas. The same is true for agricultural workers, who are much more
likely to be poor than their counterparts employed in industry or services. They are also
disproportionately represented among the working poor (Figure 2.3). The high incidence of poverty
among rural workers reflects the very low productivity of agriculture in the Philippines. Consequently,
poverty reduction is contingent on productivity growth in agriculture, which necessitates the
completion of land reform programs (Briones 2013, PDR 2013, Reyes and Mina 2013).17

 Figure 2.3 Agricultural workers run the highest risk of poverty and are disproportionately
 represented among the working poor
 Panel A                                           Panel B




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Poverty = bottom quintile (20 percent) of income distribution.




Self-employment: necessity rather than opportunity
Non-wage workers are predominant among the working poor. The self-employed and unpaid family
workers represent 52 percent of the bottom income quintile (Figure 2.4). The self-employed also run
a higher risk of poverty than wage workers, in both urban and rural areas (Figure 2.5). For the majority
of the self-employed, entrepreneurship is thus a necessity rather than an opportunity, and reflects
limited access to formal wage employment. However, Figure 2.4 also shows that the self-employed
in the Philippines (as elsewhere) are a heterogeneous group, consisting of both successful and




17
   Despite a long history of agrarian reforms in the Philippines, there remains a number of structural and policy
issues that need to be addressed in order to enhance agricultural productivity. These include the assignment
and security of property rights, which affect the incentives for farmers to invest; improvements in targeting of
land distribution to make it more pro-poor; adequate provision of public goods and support services; and
sufficient public investment in rural infrastructure, and research and development (World Bank 2013).


                                                                                                              50
unsuccessful entrepreneurs. 18 Finally, the data suggest that one way out of poverty is to move from
informal self-employment to formal wage employment.19

Rural workers are predominant among the poor wage workers. Almost 40 percent of rural wage
workers fall into the bottom income quintile, compared with less than 10 percent of urban ones
(Figure 2.4). Low-paid rural wage employment is thus a big issue from the poverty perspective.

 Figure 2.4 Wage workers in rural areas are the single largest group among the working poor




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.




 Figure 2.5 Unpaid family workers and the self-employed are at the highest risk of poverty




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Poverty = bottom quintile (20 percent) of individual per capita income distribution.




18
   Gindling and Newhouse (2012) show that in low- and middle-income countries, about a third of all self-
employed workers are unsuccessful entrepreneurs in the sense that they live below the poverty line of
US$2/day.
19
   This pattern applies to most low- and middle-income countries. According to Gindling and Newhouse (2012),
“the growth of the private wage and salary sector remains the dominant engine of growth and better jobs” (p.
15).


                                                                                                             51
Poor education and lack of skills are key factors behind in-work poverty
In-work poverty is concentrated among less educated workers. Workers with less than secondary
education face a high risk of poverty and are preponderant among the working poor (Figure 2.6).
Altogether, they represent nearly 80 percent of the working poor.20 Among workers with less than
primary education, nearly 40 percent are poor, and among those with primary education almost 25
percent are poor. The completion of secondary education lowers the risk of in-work poverty quite
dramatically to less than 10 percent. The risk of poverty among workers with tertiary education is
negligible.21

In the same vein, in-work poverty is prevalent among low-skilled workers. About 30 percent of all
laborers—workers in unskilled occupations—are in the bottom income quintile; laborers account for
close to 60 percent of all working-poor. The possession of some vocational skills dramatically reduces
the risk of poverty. The incidence of poverty among skilled manual workers (e.g. craftsmen, machine
operators, etc.) and among service and sales workers is three times lower than among unskilled
workers. These results imply that investment in vocational skills has a huge pay-off (see Chapter 1).
Workers in middle-skilled jobs are much better-off than those in unskilled ones. Accordingly, the
provision of vocational training geared to the needs of employers has a significant potential to move
workers out of poverty.

 Figure 2.6 Majority of the working poor have less than secondary education
 Panel A                                          Panel B




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Poverty = bottom quintile (20 percent) of income distribution.

Poverty among low-skilled workers is not only rural but also an urban phenomenon. Unskilled
employment is not limited to rural areas. Around one-third of all unskilled workers (laborers) live and
work in urban areas, and they are often poor. Figure 2.7 shows the occupational structure of urban
poverty. Over half of the poor in urban areas work in unskilled occupations. This proportion is more
than twice as high as their share in total urban employment. Unskilled employment, closely associated
with poverty, is thus a big issue also in urban areas. The reduction of poverty in the Philippines
requires addressing the issue of low skills among the poor in both urban and rural areas.




20
   These results reflect low public investment in education in the past. Many workers are poor, because they did
not have an opportunity to obtain quality education.
21
   Reyes and Mina (2013) provide a more detailed analysis of the links between education and in-work poverty.


                                                                                                             52
 Figure 2.7 Unskilled workers are predominant among the urban poor




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Poverty = bottom quintile (20 percent) of income distribution; Others = clerks, technicians, professionals and
 managers.




In-work poverty is closely linked with informal employment
Expectedly, in-work poverty is closely linked with low wages. Workers who earn less than two-thirds
of the median wage face a significantly higher risk of poverty than those who are above the low-pay
threshold (Figure 2.8, Panel A). Workers who earn more than 1.5 times the median wage are seldom
poor. These are not surprising results. What matters, however, is that there are many low-paid jobs
in the Philippines (see Chapter 1), which explains the high incidence of in-work poverty. Low-skills,
low-productivity, low-wages, and poverty go hand in hand.

Low paid jobs are concentrated in the informal sector. Consequently, in-work poverty is closely
related to informality. Over 90 percent of all low-paid jobs are informal.22 Low-paid employment
means informal employment. And informal employment, which is predominantly low-paid, is often
associated with poverty (Figure 2.8, Panel B). The high incidence of in-work poverty is thus just a
mirror image of pervasive informality (see Chapter 1).




22
     See Chapter 1 for the definition of informal employment used in this report.


                                                                                                                        53
 Figure 2.8 Strong link between low-pay, informality and poverty
 Panel A                                        Panel B




 Sources: Labor Force Survey 2013, Informal Sector Survey 2008, National Statistics Office; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Poverty: bottom quintile (20 percent) of income distribution.
 Very low pay = less than 50 percent of the median wage; low pay= less than 67 percent of the median; middle pay= less
 than 150 percent of the median; high pay= less than 3 times the median; very high pay= 3 times the median or higher.
 The intervals are right-open and left-closed; the upper endpoint for the lower wage group is the lower endpoint for the
 higher group.




Female workers are less likely to be poor than male workers
Incidence of poverty among female workers is lower than that among male workers. It is men who
are preponderant among the working poor. The risk of relative poverty faced by a female worker is 5
percentage points lower than that of a male worker (18 percent). This, combined with a higher share
of men in the workforce, means that bulk (two-thirds) of the working poor are men.

Working women are less likely to be poor because they are better educated and have better jobs
than men. On average, labor market outcomes are more favorable among women than men due to
two closely related factors. First, women are better educated than men. The percentage of employed
women with post-secondary education is 11 points higher than that of men (31 and 20 percent,
respectively). Correspondingly, the percentage of working women with less than secondary education
is also substantially lower (37 and 49 percent, respectively). Second, and as a result, women tend to
have better jobs than men. For example, as many as 40 percent of women work in middle- and high-
skilled white collar occupations, compared with only 22 percent of men.23 Women are also less likely
than men to be employed in agriculture and more likely to be employed in the service sector, where
wages are significantly higher.

Analysis of wage distribution shows a mixed picture of female wages relative to male wages. The
incidence of low-pay is substantially higher among women (37 percent) than among men (25 percent).
But at the same time, women are significantly more likely to be in the top salary bracket (13 percent
of women and only 7 percent of men earn top salaries).24 Wage dispersion is thus much higher among
women than men. While men tend to cluster around the middle of the wage distribution, women
occupy its bottom and upper tail. But even if low-paid, women are not necessarily poor. This is



23
    These occupations include managers, government officials, professionals and associate professionals
(technicians), and clerical workers.
24
   The top salary bracket includes salaries that are higher than three times the median wage.


                                                                                                                      54
because they are often secondary earners in better-off households. In contrast, men are primary
earners, and thus, if they have a low-paid jobs, their household is likely to be poor.

Expectedly, younger workers face a higher risk of poverty than prime age workers. The difference,
of five percentage points, is significant, although not dramatic. Still, young people are
overrepresented among the working poor: one of four poor workers is less than 25 years of age. The
high incidence of poverty among young workers is a common phenomenon, because the youth are
new entrants to the labor market and lack work experience. Their productivity is lower than that of
more experienced workers and accordingly, they earn less (see Chapter 1).



II.     Household characteristics and poverty
Why are households poor? Because they work less than non-poor households, or because they earn
less? Low earning capacity of poor households is the primary cause of poverty in the Philippines.
Lower work intensity is a contributing factor. It is not a result of choice, but of lack of opportunity to
work more. The poor want to work more but lack chances to do so. The low earning capacity and low
work intensity tend to go hand in hand, pushing households deeper into poverty. The common cause
of both low earning capacity and low work intensity of poor households is their limited access to
gainful employment. This access is limited by the scarcity of productive job opportunities, particularly
in rural areas. But more fundamentally, it is limited by low education and skills of the poor. Hence,
poverty reduction hinges on improvements in educational attainment and skills of the poor,
particularly among the youth. It also hinges on enhancing productive job opportunities and on
improving their access to those opportunities.

 Box 2.1. Determinants of household income
 There are four factors that determine the household’s income per capita: number of earners within the
 household, the number hours they work, their earning capacity, and the number of dependents. The product
 of the first two factors, the number or earners and the number of hours they work is referred to as work
 intensity.
 Work intensity measures the amount of labor that the household supplies to the market. Its first component,
 the number of earners (relative to the number of household members of working age), is referred to as an
 extensive margin of work intensity. The second component, the number of hours worked, is referred to as
 an intensive margin.
 Earning capacity is the amount of labor income that the employed household members are able to earn. It
 is measured as the household’s total labor income per earner.
 The relationship between household income and its labor market determinants is expressed by the following
 decomposition formula:

                                                  
                                             = ∗ ∗ℎ∗
                                                ∗ ℎ

 where: Y = total labor income earned by the household, P = number of household members, A = number of
 household members of working age, E = number of household members who are employed, h = the average
 number of hours worked by an earner per week.
 According to the formula, the difference in income per capita between households depends on differences
 in: the demographic factors A/P, the number of earners E/A, hours of work h, and earnings per hour worked
 Y/(E*h).




                                                                                                          55
Households differ in their ability to generate income
There are large differences in labor income among households in the Philippines. Some households
earn a lot, while others earn little (Figure 2.9). The richest households (top 20 percent) earn, on
average, over 9 times as much as the poorest ones (bottom 20 percent). These differences in labor
income can be explained by four factors: the number of earners in the household, the number of hours
they work, their earning capacity, and the number of dependents (Box 2.1). In the ensuing analysis
we focus on the first three factors, which are related to labor market outcomes.

 Figure 2.9 Large income differences between households




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.


Philippine households are poor because four factors act to their disadvantage. First, in poor
households fewer household members of working age are employed than in non-poor ones. Second,
those who are employed, work shorter hours. Third, they earn less. Finally, there are more
dependents in poor than in non-poor households. Work intensity of poor households is lower and so
is their earning capacity. Table 2.1 summarizes these differences.

 Table 2.1. Factors determining household income by income quintiles, 2013.
                                                                                                    Demographic
                                       Work intensity                     Earning capacity
                                                                                                       factor
                            Percentage of
                                                                         Labor earnings per         Percentage of
  Income quintiles           household
                                                   Average hours               earner                household
                             members of
                                                      worked              (middle quintile           members of
                             working age
                                                                               =100)                 working age
                              employed
 Bottom                         57.7                     38.1                     51                     58.7
 Lower middle                   60.7                     41.7                     70                     69.3
 Middle                         62.5                     45.1                    100                     74.9
 Upper middle                   64.3                     46.1                    137                     79.8
 Top                            69.5                     46.4                    277                     86.0
 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.



Differences in earning capacity play the primary role
The relative importance of the factors differs. Differences in earning capacity play the most
important role. Their impact is larger than that of work intensity. First, the differences in earning
capacity between the poor and non-poor are larger than those in work intensity. Second, all else


                                                                                                                    56
equal, increases in earning capacity bring about sharper reductions in the risk of poverty than
increases in work intensity; that is, increases either in the number of earners within the household or
in the hours worked. The number of dependents, plays a role, but it is not related to labor market
outcomes and beyond the scope of labor policy. Thus in the ensuing analysis, we focus on the labor
market determinants of poverty: earning capacity and work intensity.

Differences in earning capacity between the poor and non-poor are substantial. On average,
earnings of workers from the bottom quintile households are 30 percent lower than those of their
counterparts from the second quintile, and 50 percent lower than those of their counterparts from
the middle quintile of income distribution (Table 2.1). These are substantial differences. Workers
from the bottom quintile would need to double their earnings to move the middle quintile of income
distribution.

An increase in households’ earning capacity leads to a sharp reduction in the risk of poverty. If a
household moves from the first to the second earning capacity group, the risk of poverty drops by 18
percentage points (Figure 2.10).25 However, the increase in earning capacity needs to be considerable
to noticeably reduce the risk of poverty. To move from the first to the second earning capacity group
the employed household members would need to double their earnings. For many poor households
such increase is hardly possible given the limited job opportunities available to them.

 Figure 2.10 Sharp reduction in poverty risk with increase in earnings




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.




Differences in work intensity contribute to income inequality
There are fewer earners in poor households than in non-poor households. However, the difference
is not large. The ratio of employed household members to all household members of working age is
58 percent in the bottom quintile and 63 percent in the middle quintile (Table 2.1). Figure 2.11 shows
a more nuanced picture. In majority of poor households, the employment ratio is the same as in non-
poor households. But there is a group among the poor households where the employment ratio is
low, and this group is considerably larger than among the non-poor households. Specifically, the
fraction of households with few earners (one earner per three household members of working age or

25
  Households were divided into five groups of equal size (quintiles) that represent different levels of earning
capacity, ranging from low to middle to high.


                                                                                                             57
less) is 27 percent among bottom quintile households, and 21 percent among middle quintile
households. In the top quintile households, this fraction is still lower (17 percent). Although
households with few earners are a minority among the poor, it is a substantial minority. It is thus
important to identify constraints to employment among these households. Are these constraints on
the supply side (e.g. lack of skills, disability, or child care), or on the demand side (e.g. lack of job
opportunities)? Answering these questions requires more research, and is beyond the scope of this
report. But the answer is important because some of these households could be moved out of poverty
if barriers to their employment were identified and addressed through targeted policy interventions.

 Figure 2.11 Number of earners in poor households is not markedly lower than in non-poor ones




 1/3 = Out of three household members of working age one is employed;
 1/1 = all household members of working age are employed.
 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff
 calculations.

Welfare gains from additional employment are modest. Expectedly, households with few earners
face a higher risk of poverty (Figure 2.12). But surprisingly, the relationship between poverty and
number of earners in a household is relatively weak. An increase in the number of earners only slightly
reduces the risk of poverty. For example, the incidence of poverty among households where one out
of two persons of working age is employed is only 2 percentage points lower than among households
where one out of three persons is employed. Only households, where all persons are employed,
manage to noticeably reduce the risk of poverty, but still many of them remain poor. One out of six
households where everybody works is still poor. High work intensity does not protect households
from poverty.




                                                                                                      58
 Figure 2.12 Modest fall in the risk of poverty with an increase in number of earners




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.

Workers in poor families work shorter hours than their counterparts in non-poor families. This
amplifies the differences in work intensity between the poor and non-poor households. On average,
workers in the bottom quintile work almost four hours per week less than those in the 2nd quintile,
and seven hours less than those in the middle (3rd) quintile (Table 2.1). These are substantial
differences in working time, which translate into lower total earnings of poor households.

The poor work shorter hours because of lack of opportunities to work full-time. Among the poor,
the percentage of workers who would like to work more is significantly higher than among the non-
poor (Figure 2.13). For instance, 33 percent of bottom decile workers would like to work longer hours,
compared with 22 percent in the middle quintile and 10 percent in the top quintile. Apparently the
desire to work longer hours is strongly related to low household income. The poor work shorter hours
not because they choose to, but because they have no other option.

 Figure 2.13 Poor households want to work more but lack the opportunity




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.



Low earning capacity and low work intensity go hand in hand
Low earning capacity is often accompanied by low work intensity. Figure 2.14 shows that there is a
positive relationship between household earning capacity and number of hours worked. Households
whose members earn little also work shorter hours. For instance, members of households with the



                                                                                                             59
lowest earning capacity work an average of 35 hours per week, which is nine hours less than
households with the middle earning capacity, and 13 hours than households with the highest earning
capacity. The combination of these two factors—low earning capacity and low work intensity—
pushes households even deeper into poverty.

Why do poorer workers work shorter hours than non-poor workers? One possibility is that this
reflects voluntary choice. The alternative possibility is that less productive workers have limited access
to full-time and permanent jobs. The high prevalence of visible underemployment, that is, workers
with part time or casual jobs looking for additional work, provides support for the latter hypothesis.
The low earning potential of households cannot be offset by working more because they face limited
opportunities for additional work.

 Figure 2.14 Low earning capacity and short working hours go hand in hand




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.

To conclude, the low earning capacity of vulnerable households is the primary cause of in-work
poverty in the Philippines. The earning capacity of poor households is much lower than that of non-
poor households. At the same time, an increase in the household’s earning capacity leads to a sharp
decline in the risk of poverty. In contrast, poor households do not differ much from non-poor ones in
terms of number of earners, although there is a non-negligible group of poor households with few
earners. The poor tend to work shorter hours than non-poor because of more limited access to
regular, full-time and permanent jobs. Improving access of the poor to productive jobs, and enhancing
their earning capacity are thus two related challenges facing labor policy in the Philippines. Investing
in education and skills of youth from poor backgrounds is the most effective way to respond to these
challenges. But better skilled workers need better jobs. Thus creating more and better jobs is equally
important (World Bank 2013).



III.     Can minimum wage policy reduce in-work poverty in the
         Philippines?
In work-poverty is pervasive in the Philippines. The minimum wage is a policy tool intended to address
in-work poverty, and the Government of the Philippines is actively using it for this purpose. Relative
to the value added per worker, the minimum wage in the Philippines is high by regional and
international standards (World Bank 2013). However, the effectiveness of minimum wage policy in
reducing poverty depends not only on its amount, but also on labor market structure. The question



                                                                                                             60
is then, what is the actual potential of minimum wage policy to reduce poverty. This section argues
that this potential is limited for two reasons. First, a large proportion of the working poor are not
wage earners. Second, those working poor who are wage earners are usually employed informally.
Hence, the majority of the working poor are not reached by the minimum wage policy.26

Few working poor benefit from the minimum wage policy
Minimum wage policy reaches a small minority of the working poor. This is because of two reasons.
First, many of the working poor are not paid workers, they are either self-employed or unpaid family
workers. Second, wage workers who are poor are usually employed informally and not covered by
the minimum wage policy. Figure 2.15, Panel A illustrates these points. Wage workers represent only
about half of the working poor, with about 60 percent employed informally. This is especially the case
with low-paid workers, who are the target of minimum wage policy. Among them over 90 percent are
employed informally. Accordingly, few low-paid workers are formal and covered by minimum wage
policy. And these low-paid formal workers represent less than 2 percent (sic!) of the working poor.
Given the labor market structure in the Philippines, the minimum wage policy hardly reaches the
working poor. Its potential to reduce in-work poverty is thus very limited.

 Figure 2.15 Low-paid workers are a minority among the working poor
 Panel A                                       Panel B




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Low paid = workers earning less than two-thirds of the median wage.

Minimum wage policy also reaches the minority of poor wage workers. This is because most of them
are employed informally, as earlier mentioned. The minimum wage policy could benefit only from 5
to 10 percent of the wage workers in the bottom quintile of income distribution.27 Figure 2.15, Panel
B shows that only about 5 percent of poor workers have formal low-paid jobs. Another 5 percent of
poor workers have formal jobs that pay above the low-pay threshold but less than the median wage.
These workers are potential beneficiaries of minimum wage policy. Even if they are accounted for,
the effect of minimum wage on in-work poverty among wage workers is bound to be limited.




26
   See Gindling (2013) for a more in-depth discussion of the potential of the minimum wage to reduce poverty.
27
   These estimates disregard the potential disemployment effect of the minimum wage policy, which can be
significant when minimum wage is high relative to productivity (as in the case of the Philippines).


                                                                                                             61
Minimum wage policy benefits large number of workers in better-off households
Contrary to the intention, minimum wage is not a well-targeted anti-poverty measure. A large
proportion of low-paid workers are not poor. Only 27 percent of low-paid workers are in the bottom
income quintile (Figure 2.16). Even if one extends the analysis to the bottom 40 percent, still close to
half of all low-paid workers are not poor or near poor. This means that monetary benefits of a
minimum wage increase would accrue to a large number of relatively wealthy households (upper 60
percent), not only to poorer ones. This result is not specific to the Philippines. A similar pattern has
also been found in other countries (Card and Kruger 1995).

 Figure 2.16 Low-paid workers are not necessarily poor




 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; Bank staff calculations.

The minimum wage policy is ineffective in addressing in-work poverty in the Philippines. Are there
alternative policy instruments available to tackle in-work poverty? The Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries increasingly use in-work benefits (IWBs), that is,
transfer payments that top-up the earnings of low-income workers. They differ from traditional social
transfers in that they are conditional on having a job. There are two broad categories of IWBs: those
targeted towards individual low-paid workers, and those targeted towards low-income families (OECD
2009a, 2009b).

In-work benefits do not seem a viable option to address in-work poverty in the Philippines. One
reason for this is that IWB schemes are found to be either ineffective or very expensive in countries
where the distribution of in-work earnings is compressed at the bottom of the wage ladder (OECD
2009a). This is exactly the situation in the Philippines, where the incidence of low-pay is very high.
Accordingly, the policy would be very costly and probably fiscally unsustainable. Another reason is
that IWBs would be ineffective because of high informality, as in minimum wage policy. Workers
operating in the shadow would not be reached by transfers conditional on having a formal job. It is
the widespread informality that severely limits the potential of labor policy tools to fight in-work
poverty.

Conclusions and policy implications
The main labor market problem in the Philippines is low-productivity employment and pervasive in-
work poverty. Workers with “bad” jobs are poor, rather than the unemployed. People are poor
because they earn little, not because they do not work. They are also poor because they hold



                                                                                                             62
temporary, casual or part-time jobs, and thus, work short hours. Not because they want to, but
because they do not have access to regular jobs. They often seek additional employment, but fail to
find it. Low earning capacity and lack of access to regular jobs go hand in hand, pushing households
deeper into poverty.

Low earning capacity of poor households reflects two things. First, low educational attainment and
low skills of poor workers. Second, the lack of productive job opportunities. “Good” jobs are scarce,
“bad” jobs are common. These low-paying “bad” jobs are predominantly informal, rural and
agricultural, and in low-skilled occupations. They also include self-employment jobs held by
entrepreneurs because of necessity rather than opportunity.

The potential of labor policy to address in-work poverty is limited. The minimum wage policy is
largely ineffective due to the labor market structure in the Philippines. It reaches few of the working-
poor because bulk of them are not wage workers, or are employed informally. Similarly, in-work
benefit schemes, popular in higher income countries, do not seem fiscally affordable because of the
high proportion of low-paid workers. In addition, their coverage is confined to the formal sector,
hence as with the minimum wage policy, they would fail to reach to majority of the working poor.

A broader reform agenda is required to address in-work poverty. The two twin reform goals are to
improve worker productivity, and to enhance the quality of jobs. These two objectives are closely
related. The availability of skilled and productive workforce entices investment and the creation of
new, higher value-added jobs. Simultaneously, better job opportunities strengthen incentives to
invest in education and skills. On the one hand, the demand for labor and skills is the function of the
existing supply. On the other, the supply of skills responds to the demand. Therefore, in order for
reforms to be successful, they need to address constraints on both the supply and demand side of the
labor market. By doing so, they have a potential to set in motion a virtuous cycle—better workface
skills encourage investment and hiring that lead to higher demand for labor, which in turn, encourages
workers to invest in skills that improve supply of labor. 28

There are two supply side measures necessary to reduce in-work poverty. First, investment in
education and skills, especially among the poor. This is critical as in-work poverty is strongly correlated
with low educational attainment and lack of skills. Improving workforce skills is a two-track issue,
which involves: (i) improving the quality of education for children entering the education system, and
(ii) providing training opportunities for persons of working age who need to upgrade their skills to find
productive employment (see Chapter 3).

Second, support for reallocation of labor from less toward more productive activities. The latter
involves facilitating labor mobility, including movements of labor from rural to urban areas, from
agriculture to services and industry, and from informal to formal sector. Each of these transitions
need to be supported by different policy interventions. Successful rural to urban migration requires
a well-designed urbanization policy as well as measures to include migrant workers in urban
workforce, housing markets, and social networks. Migration from agriculture to industry and services
needs to be supported by training programs (including trainings provided by firms) to equip migrant
workers with skills required in new jobs. Finally, formalization of employment involves measures to


28
  The policy options presented here are consistent with those discussed in Reyes and Mina (2013) and in the
Philippine Development Report (World Bank 2013).


                                                                                                        63
increase the benefits of formality (e.g. access to credit) and to decrease its regulatory and monetary
costs.

On the demand side, the reduction of in-work poverty requires improving access by the poor to
more productive jobs. Critical in this regard are improvements in agricultural productivity (Briones
2013). Currently low agricultural productivity is one of the main factors behind in-work poverty. In-
work poverty will not be substantially reduced, unless jobs in agriculture become more productive.
The key to raising agricultural productivity is the completion of agrarian reform programs, and
adequate public investment in the sector (World Bank 2013).

Other demand side measures are necessary to reduce poverty. The economy needs to grow to create
better, higher paying jobs that will lift the poor out of poverty. Investment climate reforms are needed
to build foundations for sustainable long-term economic growth, and consequently, strong labor
demand. Such reforms are extensively discussed in the Philippine Development Report (World Bank
2013), and their analysis is beyond the scope of this report. The next chapter looks at selected
elements of the investment climate that refer to labor regulations and policies.




                                                                                                     64
ANNEX 2A Incidence of poverty by labor force status

 Table 2A: Incidence of povertya by labor force status, 2012-13
                                              Poverty rate             Poverty share
                                                             percent
 Non-working age population                        27.1                    47.9
 Working age population                            16.1                    52.1
              Labor force status
 Employed                                          16.5                    60.9
     of which: Underemployed                       31.7                    22.1
                  b
 Unemployed                                        13.6                     3.8
     Active                                        10.6                      -
     Passive                                       15.8                      -
 Out of the labor force                            15.8                    35.3
 aPoverty is defined in relative terms as bottom quintile of individual per capita income
 distribution.
 b Broad definition of unemployment, including persons available for work but not

 actively looking for work.
 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013;
 Bank staff calculations.




                                                                                            65
ANNEX 2B Incidence of poverty by employment status
 Table 2B: Incidence of poverty by employment status, 2012-13
                                             Poverty rate              Poverty share
                                                             percent
                 Sex
 Male                                                     18.3                      68.8
 Female                                                   13.8                      33.2
                 Age
 Youth (15 - 24)                                          21.1                      24.1
 Prime age (25 - 54)                                      16.0                      65.4
 Older (55 - 64)                                          11.7                       7.0
 65 +                                                     14.4                       3.6
             Education
 Less than primary                                        39.1                      39.5
 Primary                                                  23.8                      21.3
 Incomplete secondary                                     22.0                      17.7
 Secondary                                                 9.4                      17.9
 Incomplete tertiary                                       5.1                       2.8
 Tertiary                                                  1.0                       0.9
              Location
 Urban                                                     6.3                      15.8
 Rural                                                    23.6                      84.2
               Sector
 Agriculture                                              36.1                      67.0
 Industry                                                 10.7                       9.5
 Services                                                  7.6                      23.6
       Status in employment
 Wage workers (employees)                                 13.2                      47.8
 Self-employed                                            18.5                      34.5
 Contributing family workers                              30.4                      17.7
             Occupation
 Managers & government
 employees                                                 6.9                       6.4
 Professionals                                             0.4                       0.1
 Technicians                                               4.7                       0.8
 Clerks                                                    2.1                       0.7
 Service & sales workers                                   8.4                       6.3
 Farmers                                                  31.4                      23.5
 Skilled manual workers                                    8.6                       5.9
 Laborers                                                 28.5                      56.4
         Underemployment
 Visible underemployment                                  31.5                      22.9
 Invisible underemployment                                18.2                       9.9
 Full employment                                          14.0                      67.1
 aPoverty is defined in relative terms as bottom quintile of individual per capita income
 distribution.
 Sources: Family Income Expenditure Survey–Labor Force Survey data, January 2013;
 Bank staff calculations.



                                                                                            66
Chapter 3
Labor Regulation and Employment
Programs
Introduction
Labor regulations and employment programs are meant to enhance workers’ welfare by lowering their
exposure to risks arising from labor market imperfections and by increasing the workers’ capacity to
deal with such risks. Labor regulations and employment programs do have other roles from efficiency
perspective as they affect the allocation of labor and productivity of firms. This chapter discusses their
roles from equity perspective, assesses their effectiveness in enhancing workers’ welfare, and
suggests options to improve their impact.

This chapter finds that, on paper, labor regulations in the Philippines provide workers with
considerable degree of protection, but in reality, they benefit only a small group of workers. This is
mainly due to their limited effective reach, as the Philippines features a large proportion of non-wage
employment, widespread informality, and non-compliance with labor regulations. There is therefore
a big discrepancy between the de jure and the de facto coverage of worker protection. The labor
market is segmented—while some workers are covered by regulation (formal), others are not
(informal). Among the covered workers, not all benefit from the same degree of protection as
employment contracts provide varying levels of security, which give rise to further segmentation.
Previous chapters indicated that low-skilled workers are disproportionally outside the coverage of
worker protection. Hence, labor regulations, although intend to protect the most vulnerable workers
from risks, raise the cost of labor; as such, they unintentionally exclude the same workers whom they
intend to protect. There is scope for reducing the distortionary effects of labor regulations in the
Philippines, and consequently for limiting labor market segmentation. The relevant measures include
making employment contracts more flexible, and taking into account productivity of low-skilled
workers in setting minimum wage. Both measures would strengthen incentives to hire workers
formally under regular employment contracts, and thus, increase the actual coverage of worker
protection (Freeman 2009, Johnson et al. 1998, Loayza et al. 2005, Packard et al. 2012). However,
because of the employment structure in the Philippines—largely agricultural, informal, and non-
wage—labor policies have a limited role in expanding coverage of worker protection as such structure
changes only with economic development.

Employment programs run in the Philippines broadly target the vulnerable workers, primarily youth
and informal workers, including the self-employed. The programs are numerous, often small and
implemented by a number of agencies. Limited information is available on their design, cost, and
performance. A relatively small proportion of vulnerable workers benefit from employment
programs.

As pointed out in Chapter 1, low skills often prevent vulnerable workers from accessing productive
employment. Hence, this report calls for enhancing the effectiveness and potentially scaling-up of
training programs targeted at less skilled workers, including youth with incomplete secondary
education. The government has undertaken positive steps towards this end, but more effort is needed


                                                                                                       67
to build the knowledge base on program effectiveness and impact, and eventually consolidate
resources on programs that are cost-effective.

This chapter is organized as follows: Section I discusses the labor regulations, focusing on employment
protection legislation, and minimum wage, and Section II discusses the employment programs. Both
sections present policy implications.

I.       Labor Regulations
This section presents the degree and coverage of worker protection, discusses their implications on
workers’ welfare, and suggests options to improve their impact. It shows that labor regulations in the
Philippines are comprehensive and strict, but cover only a relatively small fraction of the workforce.
It argues that there is a trade-off between strictness and coverage—strict regulations discourage
employers from hiring workers formally, and thus, reduce the effective scope of worker protection.
This applies both to high hiring and firing costs, and to minimum wage that is above productivity of
many low-skilled informal workers. Consequently, strict labor regulations contribute to informality
and labor market segmentation. The workers who are left outside the scope of labor regulations are
often the most vulnerable ones, whose productivity is less than the cost of formal employment. The
challenge is to expand the effective coverage of worker protection by reducing the cost of compliance,
while ensuring that worker rights are adequately protected. This report presents an option of making
employment contracts more flexible by reducing the procedural cost of dismissal, while providing
employment protection through monetary compensation for dismissal increasing with job tenure. It
also calls for considering ways to take into account productivity of low skilled workers while setting
minimum wage. Revisions in labor policies can enhance worker protection, but significant gains can
only be achieved with the growth of the formal sector of the economy.

Labor regulations in the Philippines provide workers a considerable degree of
protection
Labor regulations in the Philippines provide workers with comprehensive protection that meets
international standards. Within the Asian region, the Philippines is recognized as having one of the
most advanced labor codes (Bitonio 2008). Labor regulations are embodied in the Constitution, the
Labor Code, and other laws, which are supplemented by issuances of the President and the Secretary
of Labor and Employment. They provide workers many rights such as the right to security of tenure, a
living wage, humane conditions of work, self-organization, collective bargaining and negotiations,
among others.29 The Philippines has also ratified key conventions of ILO, committing itself to the
protection of workers, and has been an active participant in the ILO’s decent work agenda. On the
other hand, several studies argue that labor regulations in the Philippines raise the cost of labor
relative to worker productivity, impeding the efficient functioning of the labor market (Sicat 2009,
Sicat 2010, Paqueo et al. 2014).

Employers view labor regulations in the Philippines as rigid. The Philippines scores relatively low in
labor market efficiency according to the World Economic Forum’s (WEF) Global Competitiveness
Report 2014 (WEF 2014), which implies that the country’s formal labor market is heavily regulated.
The Philippines ranked 91st among 144 economies on having a flexible labor market, a position that
has barely improved over the years and has remained lower than other countries with similar levels

29
     See Paqueo, et al (2014) for a summary of salient features of labor policy and legal framework in general.


                                                                                                                  68
of economic development (Annex 4 Table A1). The perception that the country’s labor regulations is
rigid is consistent across employers’ surveys and is well discussed in the Philippine Development
Report (World Bank 2013). However, it should be noted that majority of the respondents in these
surveys are large formal firms for whom labor regulations are enforced and binding. But, as it will be
discussed later in this section, majority of firms in the Philippines are small and informal. They are
mostly not covered by enforcement authority or are subject to less stringent regulations.
Furthermore, most of workers in the Philippines are employed in the informal sector, where no labor
regulations apply.

Labor regulations are rigid primarily because of strict dismissal procedures and
high minimum wage
A valid dismissal involves long administrative process that includes notices to the employee,
hearings, and payment of separation benefits. The laws on employment protection and wages in the
Philippines are generally pro-labor. The Labor Code is the governing law among employees in private
firms while separate laws apply to employees in the public sector and in private households. In all of
these labor laws, employment contracts are broadly classified into regular and non-regular contacts,
but the policy preference is towards regular contracts. Terminating a regular employment is
particularly cumbersome. In addition to the long dismissal process, an employee is given the right to
contest the validity of his dismissal through a dispute resolution mechanism, which could be lengthy
and costly and whose decisions often favor the employees (World Bank 2013). Among similar
countries, employment protection laws in the Philippines are particularly rigid, which is reflected in
the low score in hiring and firing practices in the Global Competitiveness Report (Figure 3.1).
                                             In par cular, EPL is restric ve.
 Figure 3.1 Employment protection legislation is restrictive in the Philippines
                                                                  Hiring and firing prac ces score (1-7)
                                                          [1 = heavily impeded by regula ons, 7 = extremely flexible]
                       6.0
                                            ASEAN countries
                       5.0

                       4.0

                       3.0

                       2.0

                       1.0

                       0.0
                              Philippines

                                             Morocco




                                                                                                                    Guatemala

                                                                                                                                Armenia



                                                                                                                                                  Georgia

                                                                                                                                                            Cambodia

                                                                                                                                                                       Malaysia
                                                       Egypt

                                                               Vietnam



                                                                                   Myanmar



                                                                                                         Thailand




                                                                                                                                                                                  Singapore
                                                                         Lao PDR



                                                                                             Indonesia




                                                                                                                                          China




                         Source: Global Compe veness Report 2014-2015
 Source: Global Competiveness   Report 2014-2015, WEF (2014)


Minimum wage is high relative to the median wage in most regions in the Philippines. 30 It is found
to be high by several measures, both relative to Filipino workers productivity and to minimum wage
rates in other countries with similar levels of economic development (World Bank 2013; Betcherman
2014, del Carpio and Pabon 2014, Paqueo et al 2014,and World Bank 2014a). This minimum wage
refers to the wage floor that applies to employees in private firms, who represent 76 percent of wage

30
  The minimum wage in the Philippines varies by administrative region as well as by sector (agricultural and
non-agricultural) and by type of establishments (lower minimum wage rates usually apply for smaller
establishments).


                                                                                                                                                                                              69
workers (the remaining 24 percent are employees in the public sector and in private households, who
are covered by separate wage laws). The minimum wage for employees in private firms varies by
administrative region in the Philippines but, on average, it accounts for about 80 percent of the
median wage in a region. In some regions, the ratio is much higher.31 Actually, 9 out of 17 regions have
a minimum wage that is higher than the median wage (Figure 3.2). However, some firms can apply
lower minimum wage rates. This specifically refers to retail and service establishments, and
manufacturing firms employing less than 10 workers. Institutional details of the minimum wage
setting in the Philippines are provided in the Philippine Development Report (World Bank 2013)

Minimum wage is set at a high level because it is meant to serve as a social safety net. The minimum
wage for private firms is set at an amount that would cover the needs of workers and their families
(see Box 3.1).32 To account for these needs, the government introduced the two-tier wage system in
2012, whereby the first tier is the mandatory regional wage floor while the second tier is an amount
that serves as a guide for employers to adjust wages above the floor wage.33 The recent reform aims
to set the wage floors close to the poverty thresholds in order for the minimum wage to serve as a
social safety net among wage workers. Consequently, the number of minimum wages below the
poverty threshold was greatly reduced. Only 14 minimum wages were still below the poverty
threshold in 2014, and 30 in 2010. The target of this reform is to close all minimum wage-poverty
threshold gaps by 2015.

 Box 3.1 Minimum wage setting in the Philippines
 Each administrative region in the Philippines has a wage board, which is responsible for setting the minimum
 wage rates in the region. The criteria for minimum wage fixing adopted by the regional boards are as follows:
 1) needs of workers and their families; 2) capacity to pay of employers; 3) prevailing wage levels; and 4)
 requirements of economic and social development (NWPC 2015). In general, the wage boards issue a wage
 order once a year, unless there is a petition for a wage increase due to supervening conditions such as
 increases in prices of petroleum products and basic goods and services (NWPC 2015). Any labor organization
 within a region can file a petition for a wage increase. The scale of increase is the result of the decision among
 members of the wage board, which is composed of representatives of workers, employers, and the
 government.
 NWPC = National Wages and Productivity Commission




31
   The minimum wage is roughly equal to the 25th percentile for full-time wage workers with permanent
employment contracts.
32
   According to DOLE NWPC Guidelines No. 01 on the procedure for the minimum wage fixing issued in 2007.
33
   The regional minimum (floor) wage is calculated as follows: x(poverty threshold) + y(average wage) + (socio-
economic indicators), where x + y = 1. x, y, and z represent the weights of the indicators and may vary across
regions depending on the gaps between the minimum wage, poverty threshold, and average wage, and impact
of the socio-economic indicators.


                                                                                                                 70
                                 MW
                            Figure               esp.in
                                        is high,wage
                                   3.2 Minimum         in regions
                                                        many       with
                                                             regions is higher
                                       smaller         wage sector
                                                industrial
                                       than the median
                                                      Ra o of minimum wage to median wage
                           140
                                                                                                      MW > median wage
                           120          Average: 80% of median wage.

                           100

                            80

                            60

                            40          MW < median wage
                            20

                             -
                                        III

                                              Phils

                                                      CAR

                                                            VII

                                                                  NCR

                                                                        VI

                                                                             XI

                                                                                  I

                                                                                      II



                                                                                               VIII

                                                                                                       IX

                                                                                                            V



                                                                                                                      XII

                                                                                                                            IVB
                                  IVA




                                                                                                                                  ARMM
                                                                                           X




                                                                                                                Car
                                 Source: Calculated from LFS 2013
 Sources: Labor Force Survey data, January 2013; National Wages and Productivity Commission; Bank staff calculations.
 MW = Minimum wage.


Minimum wage grows in line with average wage. As a result, the minimum wage to average wage
ratio stayed roughly constant in the last 10 years. The real value of minimum wage slightly increased
by 6 percent in the National Capital Region since 2006. However, the ratio of minimum wage to value
added per worker has gradually declined over the last 10 years, because labor productivity grew faster
than both minimum wage and average wage (see Chapter 1). Nonetheless, at 0.69, the ratio is still
very high by international standards (World Bank 2013).

Widespread informality and non-compliance create a rift between the de jure and de
facto coverage of worker protection
De jure worker protection coverage is relatively low, de facto coverage is even lower.34 By definition,
labor regulations apply only to wage workers, who account for 60 of all employed in the Philippines
(Figure 3.3). The limited de jure coverage of worker protection is due to the high share of non-wage
employment, consisting of the self-employed and contributing family members. But even among the
wage workers, many do not benefit from worker protection because they are either employed in
informal firms, or employed in formal firms but are hired informally. As a result, there is a substantial
rift between the de jure and de facto coverage of labor regulations in the Philippines—only about 24
percent of all employed and 40 percent of wage employees benefit from worker protection.




34
  This is a positive rather than normative statement. The relatively low de jure coverage of labor regulations is
a consequence of the existing employment structure, and as such, cannot be extended. The policy objective is
to reduce the gap between the de jure and the de facto coverage by increasing the latter through reforms to
foster formality.


                                                                                                                                         71
 Figure 3.3 Informality and non-compliance limit the coverage of worker protection




 Sources: Informal Sector Survey 2008; Bank staff calculations.
 Note: This report defines “workers in informal firms” as workers who reported that their employers are private
 households, or are private establishments whose businesses are not registered or do not have fixed locations. Workers
 are considered as “informal wage workers” if any two of the following conditions are met: employment can be terminated
 without advance notice, employers do not pay social insurance contributions, and employment is not based on written
 contract.

Informality severely limits the actual coverage of minimum wage policy. Less than half (45 percent)
of wage workers in private firms are employed in formal firms. Of these wage workers, about 75
percent are paid equal or above the minimum wage. Therefore, only about one-third of workers in
private firms are actually covered by the minimum wage policy (Figure 3.4).

 Figure 3.4 Minimum      Wage of the minimum wage policy for employees in private firms
            Low de facto coverage
                                                                                 Wage workers (100%)



                                                       In public sector (15%)                            In private sector (85%)



                                                  De jure coverage                         Employees in                     Employees in private
                                                  100% of employees in private firms    private firms (90%)                  households (10%)



                                                                  Employees in formal                  Employees in informal
                                                                   private firms (45%)                  private firms (55%)



                                                  Employees earning                     Employees
              De facto coverage                   equal to or above                    earning below
              34% of employees in private firms
                                                     MW (75%)                            MW (25%)


 Source: ISS 2008 and the regional minimum wage rates; Bank staff calculations.
                                                               Compliance  |
                                                                                           to 95% of |          firm
                                                                                                  MW | informal      formal |     Total
                                                                                          -----------+----------------------+----------
Many formal firms are small and are subject to lower labor standards. Firms employing less than 10
                                                                                           Wage < MW |     74.80      24.87 |     52.83
                                                                                          Wage >= MW |     25.20      75.13 |     47.17
workers account for about 90 percent of nearly one million registered firms in the Philippines (Figure
                                                                                          -----------+----------------------+----------
                                                                                               Total |    100.00     100.00 |    100.00
3.5). Given this magnitude, the labor inspectorate can cover only a small portion of them, which
provides room for firms to circumvent regulations or violate labor standards. Data from Department
of Labor and Employment (DOLE) show that the incidence of violations of general labor standards and
the minimum wage was higher among smaller establishments (Figure 3.6). Moreover, the applicable



                                                                                                                                                   72
labor standards for smaller establishments are lower compared to the larger ones. As mentioned
above, small firms employing less than 10 workers, can apply lower minimum wage rates than larger
firms. Employees in smaller establishments are also not entitled to some benefits such as holiday pay,
leaves, and retirement benefits (DOLE 2014a).
                  Figure 3.5 Small establishments account for the large majority of
                                        the formal
  Figure 3.5. Small establishments account          economy
                                              for the large majority of the formal economy
                                             Distribu on of establishments,
                                                   by employment size




                                                                  5-9
                                                                  14%

                                                                        10-199
                                                                         10%
                                                    1-4
                                                    76%                          >200
                                                                                  0%




                                             Total: 945,000 establishments

 Sources: 2012 List of Establishments; Bank staff calculations.


 Figure 3.6. Smaller establishments have higher incidence of violations of labor standards than
 larger firms




 Sources: Compliance data from Bureau of Working Conditions, DOLE; Bank staff calculations.



Strict labor regulations are likely to contribute to labor market segmentation
Within the covered sector not all workers enjoy the same degree of protection. Varied forms of
flexible work arrangements have spread in the Philippines.35 The incidence of non-regular
employment is increasing. According to LFS, about 40 percent of employees in private establishments
had non-regular employment contracts in 2013, which was higher than 33 percent 10 years.36 Another


35
  See Brimon (2010) for discussion on flexible forms of employment in the Philippines.
36
  The Labor Force Survey does not provide information on the type of employment contract (regular or non-
regular) of the employee, but it provides information on the employee’s nature of employment (permanent or
short-term).


                                                                                                       73
survey conducted among large, formal establishments shows that in 2012, about 35 percent of rank-
and-file employees were hired either on non-regular basis or through independent sub-contractors,
which is 25 percent higher than four years earlier (Figure 3.7). Businesses also find creative ways to
circumvent the rules. For example, there is a pervasive use of rotating five-month contract as a way
to circumvent the rule that non-regular workers are classified as regular workers after six months of
probation (Bitonio 2008, World Bank 2013). Importantly, available evidence indicates that workers
with non-regular contracts have less employment security and receive lower wages. On average, they
earn only about 70 percent of the national average wage (ILO 2012).

Proliferation of non-regular employment reflects employers’ attempts to avoid rigidities imposed
by the strict employment protection regulations.37 The tedious procedure for a valid dismissal of an
employee is meant to limit the employer’s prerogative to dismiss a worker. Its primary aim is to protect
the employee from risks associated with sudden job loss. However, the strictness in termination
procedure in effect works the opposite way. High firing cost discourage employers to hire workers on
regular contracts, giving rise to the high incidence of temporary employment in the Philippines (ILO
2012, World Bank 2013). It is noteworthy, that the increase in the proportion of non-regular
employment contracts is a trend observed in many countries with strict employment protection
legislation (World Bank 2014).

                     Figure 3.7 Increasing proportion of workers with temporary jobs




 Sources: Bureau of Labor and Employment Statistics Integrated Surveys; Bank staff calculations.


Minimum wage fails to serve as an effective wage floor because many workers earn less than the
minimum. Set at its current level of about 80 percent of the median wage, the minimum wage leaves
outside its coverage about one-third of all wage earners (Figure 3.8). If the minimum wage were set
at the poverty threshold level (which represents around 70 percent of the median wage in the region),
then fewer (about one-fourth) wage earners workers would be outside the effective coverage of the
minimum wage policy (Figure 3.8). Accordingly, a minimum wage set at the poverty threshold level



37
   The question is often asked why the proportion of irregular contracts is increasing while the rules governing
regular contracts remain unchanged. The answer is that employers hire new workers using irregular contracts
(flow), which leads to a gradual increase in the percentage of these contracts among employees (stock). In
addition, there is likely to be a snowball effect: employers learn from each other about the advantages of using
irregular contracts. If one employer starts to use such contracts, his/her competitor has an incentive to use
substitute irregular contracts for regular ones, too.


                                                                                                             74
could provide an effective wage floor for more wage earners, while still playing its poverty prevention
function.

 Figure 3.8 Minimum wage cuts deep into wage distribution *


                                                                                 Poverty threshold
                                                                                 Average regional minimum wage
                                                                                 Median wage

                                                                                 Average wage
                                                                 * Wage distribution in private establishments.

                                                                 Note: About 33 percent of workers employed in
                                                                 private establishments earn less than minimum
                                                                 wage, and about 25 percent earn less than the
                                                                 poverty threshold.

                                                                 Source: Bank staff calculations based on the Labor
                                                                 Force Survey and the minimum wage rates.




High minimum wage is one of the factors that makes it difficult for workers to move from the
informal to the formal sector. The minimum wage is not a major problem for formal firms, which
tend to be larger and employ more skilled workers. In the formal sector, the minimum wage accounts
for about 60 percent of the sector’s average wage, which is already high but not dramatically high.
However, it is a major problem for informal firms, which tend to be small and employ less-skilled
workers. In the informal sector, the minimum wage accounts for about 115 percent of the sector’s
average wage, which is so high that it is likely to discourage informal firms from formalizing their
activity. This is because the minimum wage is above the productivity level of a large fraction (up to
70 percent) of informal workers. It pushes low-skilled workers into informal employment. They
cannot be hired formally because the value of their marginal product is less than the minimum wage.

There is scope for labor regulations to enhance the welfare of workers by reducing
their distortionary effects
Labor market in the Philippines consists of relatively small regulated segment and a large
unregulated segment. In the regulated (formal) sector worker rights are protected and wages are
relatively high. However entry to this sector is difficult, particularly for less productive workers who
are most vulnerable to poverty. In the unregulated (informal) sector, workers enjoy little rights and
wages are low. Entry to the sector is easy, which gives workers subsistence income, although this does
not necessarily lift them out of poverty (see Chapter 2). Stringent labor market regulations and
substantial increases in labor costs, contribute to this duality. Workers whose productivity is less than
the cost of employing them formally are excluded from worker protection. Labor policy faces the
challenge of reducing this duality and strengthening the incentives for formal employment. This can
be done by reducing the costs of formal employment relative to informal employment, and ensuring
adequate protection of worker rights at the same time. This is a delicate balancing act. However, one
should bear in mind that labor policy is only one of many factors behind informality, and thus, its
capability to address it is limited. Still, it can make a marginal difference. Reducing the distortionary



                                                                                                                  75
effects of labor regulations can be made possible through better aligning of minimum wage with
worker productivity, and making employment contracts more flexible.

Aligning minimum wage with worker productivity could improve the chances of low-skilled workers
being hired formally. In setting minimum wage, it is advisable to consider wage distribution not only
in the formal, but also in the informal sector, and set it at a level that does not cut deep into the overall
wage distribution. Admittedly, this is a difficult task in a two-tier labor market, like the one in the
Philippines. The wage distributions are very different in the upper, formal tier, and in the lower,
informal tier (see Chapter 1). The minimum wage set based on the wage distribution in the formal
sector, as it is currently the case, is too high to be used in the informal sector, where labor productivity
is low. On the other hand, if the minimum wage were set based on the wage distribution in the
informal sector, it would be too low to be meaningful for formal workers. Some compromise is
necessary to strengthen the incentives for employers to hire low-skilled workers formally.38 An
empirically informed discussion among social partners is needed to find a middle ground (World Bank
2013).

Making regular employment contracts more flexible can reduce duality within the formal sector.
The increasing incidence of flexible forms of employment indicates that regular contracts are no longer
viable for many employers. This report reiterates the policy option as presented in the Philippine
Development Report (World Bank 2013) to foster tripartite dialogue—among the government,
businesses, and workers—to redefine valid forms of flexible work arrangements and to enforce these
arrangements effectively.39 This report also presents another option to introduce a single open-ended
contract, which assumes that all contracts are indefinite, while the severance pay increases with
tenure. This contract is meant to relax administrative procedures governing dismissals, including the
judicial review of the validity of dismissal. The use of single open-ended contract has been seen as a
way to address the deeply entrenched segmentation in the labor market.40 Recently, the government
has proposed reforms along these lines by deeming all employment as regular, with few exceptions,
and to reduce termination costs (DOLE 2014b).

Labor policies have a limited role in expanding the coverage of worker protection as
formality and wage employment grow only with economic development
Improving the enforcement of labor standards among firms can expand coverage, but only
marginally. This is because the scope of enforcement authority is limited to formal firms, which
employ only about half of wage workers. Improving the enforcement of labor standards, such as
increasing the capacity of the labor inspectorate and lowering the cost of compliance, is likely to
expand the coverage of worker protection, as firms would be encouraged to offer their workers formal
employment. But even if full compliance were achieved, which is important on its own right, the gain
in coverage would be limited.




38
    Minimum wage is just one of the factors influencing employers’ decision whether or not to hire workers
formally. Other factors include hiring and firing costs, taxes and social security contributions, and other costs
associated with formal employment.
39
   World Bank (2013) elaborates more on this policy option.
40
   See Casale and Perulli (2014), and Lepage-Saucier, Schleich and Wasmer (2013) for the discussion of the pros
and cons of single open-ended contract.


                                                                                                              76
There is more to be gained from formalization of employment. Informality among businesses is a
larger constraint to expanding worker protection than non-compliance among formal firms. There is
more potential to expand the coverage of worker protection by encouraging informal firms to
formalize their businesses. While there is some scope to reduce the cost of formal employment by
making labor regulations more flexible, labor reforms can play only a secondary role in promoting
formalization. Reforms play the primary role in reducing costs and enhancing the benefits of doing
business in the formal sector.

II.     Active Labor Market Programs
This section describes the major active labor market programs (ALMPs) in the Philippines; assesses
the extent to which they improve the employment chances of vulnerable workers; and suggests ways
to improve their effectiveness. The three main groups of programs are public works, livelihood
assistance, and training. In addition, public employment service offices provide jobs search assistance
to the unemployed, mostly less-skilled ones. However, their number is limited, and they are located
mainly in urban areas. Public works and livelihood programs are targeted mainly at the poor among
informal workers. Training programs are targeted at the youth, including those from poor
backgrounds. However, they do not reach the most disadvantaged youth, those with less than
secondary education. Public works and livelihood programs are run on a larger scale than training
programs, and cover a higher proportion of the target population. Little is known about the
effectiveness of the programs because their performance is not monitored and evaluated on a
systematic basis. Public works and livelihood assistance programs are primarily meant to provide
temporary employment and income support. Evidence from other countries indicates that they hardly
improve long-term employment prospects. In contrast, the main objective of training programs is to
improve employability of participants. Limited available evidence suggests that training programs
implemented in the Philippines are relatively successful in this respect. However, some training
participants do not find the skills they acquired useful for their jobs. The two main issues that limit the
programs’ impact are program fragmentation coupled with limited coordination among implementing
agencies, and an underdeveloped program M&E system, which consequently result in insufficient
information on program performance. There is scope for improving the effectiveness of ALMPs in the
Philippines. First and foremost, there is a need to better understand the cost-effectiveness and impact
of different programs, which calls for a thorough review of program performance. This involves the
development of an M&E system to produce information necessary to improve program design and
implementation, and to channel resources to programs that proved to be most cost-effective. Finally,
the review of institutional arrangements and better coordination among various implementing
agencies could reduce inefficiencies resulting from program fragmentation. Table 3.1 summarizes
main characteristics of ALMPs in the Philippines.




                                                                                                        77
Table 3.1 Key characteristics of main ALMPs in the Philippines.
                                                 Direct Job Creation Programs
                Feature                                                                             Training
                                             Public Works         Livelihood Assistance
                                      Temporary wage             Support to self-
 Objective                                                                                Enhance skills of workers
                                      employment                 employment
                                                                                          Youth and low-income
 Target group                         Unemployed                 Informal workers
                                                                                          youth
                                                                 Varies by program,
                                      Self-selection (paying                              Completion of secondary
                                                                 some programs require
 Targeting criteria                   less than the minimum                               education; aged 15–30
                                                                 business proposal to
                                      wage)                                               years
                                                                 qualify for assistance
 Coverage of target group             High                       High                     Moderate
                                                                 Varies by program,
 Assessment of targeting              Effective, according to                             Effective based on profile
                                                                 micro-finance does not
 effectiveness                        national survey                                     of beneficiaries
                                                                 seem to reach the poor
 Share in ALMPs expenditures          Largest                    Large                    Small
 Estimated cost per beneficiary
                                      6,000a                     250 to 10,000b           25,000c
 (Peso) d
                                                                 Effective, but only      Effective among
 Assessment of program                Effective, but impact is
                                                                 among higher-skilled     participants who found
 effectiveness                        short-term
                                                                 workers                  jobs
                                                                   DA, DOLE, DSWD, and
 Major implementing agencies          DA, DAR, DENR, DPWH                                    DOLE, DSWD, TESDA
                                                                   government banks
                                         Performance of programs performance is not monitored on a systematic basis
 Monitoring and evaluation               and consolidated information on program outcomes is not available. The net
                                         impact of programs has not been evaluated.
                                         Many government agencies implement programs with limited coordination,
 Main issues
                                         leading to program fragmentation
 a Assumes one beneficiary works for 30 days and is paid 75percent of the daily minimum wage.
 b Estimates from Sustainable Livelihood Program. Cost per beneficiary varies depending on the form of assistance.
 c Assumes a training course that runs for about 30 days.
 d 1 US Dollar = 45 Philippine Peso (2014)

 DA = Department of Agriculture; DAR = Department of Agrarian Reform; DENR = Department of Environment and
 Natural Resources; DPWH = Department of Public Works and Highways; DOLE = Department of Labor and Employment;
 DSWD = Department of Social Welfare and Development; TESDA = Technical Education and Skills Development
 Academy.


Direct job creation and training are the two most important active labor market
programs being implemented in the Philippines
Direct job creation programs are the largest active labor market programs in the Philippines. They
include public works (emergency employment programs, cash/food-for-work), livelihood assistance
programs, government internships, apprenticeships, and wage subsidy (see Annex 3B Table 3B for
description). Their primary objective is to provide temporary or immediate employment. Some of
these programs, such as the internships, apprenticeships, and wage subsidy programs, go beyond the
primary objective as they also aim to improve the future employability of workers by providing them
on-the-job training. Almost all government agencies in the Philippines are involved in the
implementation of direct job creation programs, encompassing many sectors (agriculture, micro-
finance, labor, social welfare, public works and highways, education, among others), as well as levels
(national, regional, and local levels). Many of these programs are small, but taken altogether, they
account for the largest share in government expenditures on active labor market programs (see Annex
3B Table 3B for indicative budget).


                                                                                                                      78
Government-supported training programs in the Philippines are meant to provide a more equitable
access to skills enhancement. They include technical-vocational education and training (TVET)
scholarship programs (training grants) and community-based training programs. Compared with
direct job creation programs, the government spends much less on training programs. Most TVET
programs in the Philippines are provided by private technical vocational institutions (TVIs) and only a
few are provided by government-owned institutions. TVET students pay for their own training fees,
but the government provides financial support to selected TVET students through scholarship
programs (see Annex 3B Table 3B for description). On the other hand, community-based training
programs are shorter in duration and less technical than TVET programs. They are administered solely
by government agencies as extension support services of their own programs such as small business
development, community-driven development, and agricultural development programs. In terms of
budgetary allocation, community-based training programs receive more budget than the regular TVET
scholarship programs (see Annex 3B Table 3B for indicative budget).

In addition to programs, the government provides employment facilitation services to reach out to
workers in local communities. They are primarily undertaken by the PESOs situated in different
localities and are being managed by the local government units (LGUs). PESO services include the
provision of labor market information, career guidance, employment coaching, and job-worker
matching through on-line search tools (PhilJobnet), job referrals, and job fairs (see Annex 3B Table 3B
for description). As of 2014, there are about 1,900 PESOs in the Philippines but only about 400 are
institutionalized, which means that the office was established with a legal basis and the staff hold
permanent positions.41 DOLE’s role is to coordinate the network of employment facilitation service
providers in the Philippines. Currently, DOLE is pilot-testing JobStart, a program being implemented
with PESOs that provides a full-cycle of employment assistance in the school-to-work transition among
young workers (Annex 3B Table 3B).

Programs for the informal workers are large in scale, but there is little
understanding on how they benefit the workers
There are many livelihood assistance programs in the Philippines, which target informal workers.
The assistance comes in many forms such as access to microfinance (grants or loans) or provision of
physical resources (raw materials, equipment, and tools). They target the self-employed (individual,
groups, or cooperatives) to allow them to undertake income-generating activities. They also target
low-wage workers to allow them to have additional sources of income. In 2013, livelihood assistance
programs were estimated to have served as many as 600,000 workers (Table 3.2). But in other years,
the number of workers served went up to over a million. Livelihood assistance programs targeting
small farmers to enhance their earnings capabilities were the largest in terms of coverage in 2013.
Other major forms of livelihood assistance include microfinance and provision of a mix of grants and
equipment to be used for business start-ups.




41
  An institutionalized PESO is created by virtue of city/municipal ordinance and has a Memorandum of
Agreement with DOLE. It has its own budget allocation and a dedicated professional staff.


                                                                                                    79
Table 3.2 High coverage of livelihood programs relative to the number of low-income self-employed
              Forms of Livelihood Assistance                  No. of beneficiaries,         Estimated % of target
                 (Implementing Agency)                            2013 a (‘000)                    group b
     Assistance for rural farm & fishery workers (DA)                   317                            16
     Microfinance (LandBank)                                            175                             9
     Mix of grants and equipment (DSWD & DOLE)                          105                             4
     Other forms of livelihood assistance (other agencies)                9                             0
     Total                                                              606                           30%
     a Estimates based on the reported number of jobs generated.
     b Estimates based on the number of jobs generated and the estimated number of poor self-employed in the

     Philippines.
     Sources: World Bank staff estimates based on data from DOLE and Labor Force Survey – Family Income Expenditure
     Survey 2012.

Livelihood assistance programs cover a considerable proportion of the target group. Assuming a
limited error of inclusion, the livelihood assistance programs cover about 30 percent of low-income
self-employed (Table 3.2). This coverage rate is high compared to that of programs for the youth. Such
high coverage of these programs is made possible by the massive amount of government expenditures
devoted to them (see Annex 3B Table 3B for indicative budget). While some of these programs are
regular programs of the implementing agencies and receive regular budget allocation, others are
created on ad hoc basis or are expanded by realigning funds from other sources.42

However, there is little understanding how livelihood assistance programs in the Philippines benefit
the workers served. This can be attributed to the weak M&E components of these programs. A study
of employment generation programs in the Philippines observed that there is generally lack of
identification and integration of data even within an agency (Ballesteros and Israel 2014). The
oversight agencies conduct periodic monitoring of programs and base their assessments on selected
cases.43 Moreover, there are many forms of livelihood assistance in the Philippines, with varying
design and implementation features (Table 3.2). Hence, a generalized conclusion as to their overall
performance cannot be drawn. A more in-depth research is needed on to better understand the
profile of beneficiaries, targeting efficiency and the impact of specific livelihood assistance programs.

Livelihood assistance provided through microcredit does not benefit the poorest. A study evaluating
the impact of microfinance on small-scale entrepreneurs in the Philippines shows positive impacts on
employment and income among clients (Kondo, 2007). However, majority of the qualified applicants
are not poor, which can be attributed to microfinance institutions favoring the enterprising
individuals, with higher likelihood of repayment than with the ultra poor. Moreover, a rapid
assessment study conducted on the microenterprise development component of DSWD’s Sustainable
Livelihood Program (SLP) indicates that it can do little to transform the beneficiaries’ undertakings into
sustainable and viable sources of livelihood (Ballesteros et al 2015). Therefore, there remains a limited
understanding on which form of livelihood assistance can benefit the most disadvantaged workers in
the Philippines, which also holds for other countries (Box 3.2).



42
   It is possible for an implementing agency to realign its funds into other programs. Hence, some programs can
be supported out of the funds of other regular programs of the agency.
43
   In some of these cases, it was observed that livelihood assistance grants are used by beneficiaries to meet
their immediate consumption needs and to pay off their debts, rather than to expand their livelihood
undertakings.


                                                                                                                      80
  Box 3.2 Evidence on what works for the necessity self-employed is limited
  Globally, significant knowledge gaps exist on what works for the necessity self-employed. However, there is
  a general agreement in the literature that the self-employed is a heterogeneous group and they vary in
  motivations behind their labor market status—while some have voluntarily chosen to be self-employed,
  others are forced to be out of necessity. The latter is due to lack of skills to take on wage employment or
  limited wage employment opportunities (World Bank 2007, Gindling and Newhouse 2012). Employment
  programs for the necessity self-employed can be in the form of training, to equip them with skills to
  transform their businesses into sustainable sources of livelihood, or skills to take on wage employment.
  However, the training depends largely on the skills needs of the necessity self-employed. There is therefore
  a need to identify these skills needs before designing a training program for the self-employed and whether
  or not these skills are the same ones demanded by the labor market. Cho, et al (2014) argued that small-
  scale subsistence entrepreneurs often lack entrepreneurial aptitude and basic numeracy and literacy skills.
  But if programs that promote entrepreneurship target the self-employed who possess these skills, those
  who do not will therefore be excluded. The excluded ones can be the target of social safety nets and
  interventions that connect them with wage employment. However, if wage employment is limited, social
  safety nets alone will not lead to increase in earnings and living standards.

Programs for the youth are small scale and do not reach the most disadvantaged
groups
Youth programs aim to facilitate the education-to-work transition and to equip the youth with
employability skills. Table 3.3 summarizes basic information on these programs. The Special Program
for the Employment of Students (SPES) and Government Internship Program (GIP) are implemented
primarily to create jobs for the youth; whereas the TVET training scholarship programs are
implemented primarily to enhance the skills of participants through on-the-job training. The Special
Training for Employment Program (STEP), Private Education Student Financial Assistance Program
(PESFA), and SPES programs are specifically targeted at the low-income youth. In particular, STEP
focuses on short training courses targeted at the low-income youths in rural areas where access to
formal education is limited.

Table 3.3 Youth employment and training programs
                                                                                                     No. of
                                                                                                                     Estimated % of
                             Programa                                      Target Group           beneficiaries,
                                                                                                                      target group
                                                                                                     2014b
  Direct job creation (wage subsidy)
  Special Program for the Employment of Students (SPES)                 Low-income youth             182,584              20c
  Government Internship Program (GIP)                                   Youth                         22,522              <1
  Training
  Training-for-Work Scholarship Program (TWSP)                          Youth                        175,522               4
  Special Training for Employment Program (STEP)                        Low-income youth              27,917               3c
  Private Education Student Financial Assistance Program                Low-income youth              26,758
  (PESFA)                                                                                                                  3c
  a Includes government-financed ALMPs that include youth as their target groups.
  b Data on direct job creation programs are taken from DOLE; data on training are taken from TESDA.

  c Estimated using the number of beneficiaries relative to the estimated number of youth NEET in the Philippines.




Among youth programs, the coverage of the wage subsidy program (SPES) is relatively high, whereas
that of training scholarship programs is low. The number of students who participated in SPES
represented 20 percent of the estimated number of low-income youth NEET in the Philippines in 2014
(Table 3.3). At the same time, the number of low-income TVET students whose training was financially



                                                                                                                                 81
supported by STEP and PESFA was low at only 3 percent. As to other programs that are broadly
targeted at the youth, such as GIP and TWSP, the coverage is also low at 1 to 4 percent of the youth
NEET in the Philippines.

Most youth programs miss out the disadvantaged groups. The selection criteria of SPES, GIP, TWSP,
and PESFA require potential beneficiaries to have completed at least secondary education and to be
either students, or recent graduates (see Annex 3B Table 3B for selection criteria). These selection
criteria indicate that they cater to the needs of better educated youth who have better chances of
finding productive employment. However, it is the low-educated youth who are the most
disadvantaged and run the highest risk of poverty (Chapter 2). To address this gap, the government
implemented STEP in 2014 to widen access to training programs among indigent youth. Globally,
evidence on which active labor market program works for the disadvantaged youth is limited (Box
3.3). This calls for evaluation of existing programs for the youth in the Philippines and for pilot-testing
of new ones to determine their potential impact.

Some initiatives reach out to disadvantaged youth, who are not part of active labor market
programs. These include programs under the auspices of the education sector.44 There had also been
innovations in the delivery of social protection services that link social assistance programs with
ALMPs to ensure that youth from poor households are provided employment assistance. An example
is the conditional cash transfer (CCT) program—the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps), which
links its beneficiaries with training, public works programs, and employment facilitation service.

     Box 3.3 Employment programs for the youth can have positive impacts
     In a study on different categories of employment programs targeted at the youth, Betcherman, et al (2007)
     pointed out that labor market interventions appear to have positive impacts on employment and earnings
     of beneficiaries. It argued that there are no major differences across categories of interventions in terms of
     impact and cost-effectiveness. This implies that particular types of programs should not be favored but
     rather interventions should be chosen based on the specific obstacles to employment that need to be
     overcome. There is limited evidence on impact of employment programs for the youth in the context of
     developing countries. But Quintini and Martin (2006) offered some insights on what works in the context of
     the OECD countries—programs should come into play early; private sector and local communities need to
     be mobilized and involved in project design; targeting should distinguish between teenagers (who should be
     helped to remain in school) and young adults (who need help in acquiring work experience) and focus on
     school drop-outs; job-search assistance should be provided to the youth; programs should insist on tight
     work-search requirements; services should be integrated into a comprehensive package; and social partners
     and public authorities at all levels should be involved.




44
  One of these programs is the Abot-Alam Program of the Department of Education, which aims to enroll out-
of-school youth in appropriate program interventions in education such as the Alternative Learning System.
Another example is the Students’ Grant-in-Aid Program for Poverty Alleviation being implemented by the
Commission on Higher Education to provide financial assistance to poor students.


                                                                                                                 82
Public works are meant to provide temporary employment opportunities for the
most disadvantaged workers
Public works programs in the Philippines are used to provide temporary employment opportunities
to low-skilled workers.45 The jobs include construction of roads, flood control structures, school-
buildings, water systems, among others. To make public works more targeted at the disadvantaged
workers, government agencies are mandated to hire unskilled workers from the community where
the project is being undertaken.46 There are no clear-cut guidelines as to targeting the beneficiaries of
public works programs. Implementing agencies have generally relied on self-selection method by
paying the beneficiaries 75 percent of the minimum wage. However, some social assistance programs
such as the CCT have recently linked their beneficiaries to public works programs to provide them
additional source of income. Livelihood programs also include components that assist their
beneficiaries in accessing emergency employment programs.

Evidence indicates that public works programs in the Philippines benefit mainly the poor. About 80
percent of the families who availed of the cash/food-for-work program belong to the bottom 40
percent of the income distribution, according to the Annual Poverty Indicators Survey (APIS) (Figure
3.9).47 The cash/food-for work program is among the public works programs being used to assist
displaced workers as a result of shocks such as natural calamities and economic crisis. However, other
than the cash/food-for-work program, there is no other evidence on targeting efficiencies of other
public works program.48 The consolidated information on the beneficiaries of public works programs
show only the number of beneficiaries, but not their economic background.49




45
   Public works programs refer to the infrastructure and emergency employment programs enrolled under the
Community-Based Employment Program (CBEP).
46
   Public works programs, in general, are mandated to hire workers from the local community where the
government project is being undertaken, not only the unskilled workers but also the skilled ones.
47
   The sample covered by APIS, however, is very small. The number of individuals (weighted) who benefited from
cash/food-for-work program in both 2013 and 2014 APIS represented less than 1 percent of the entire
individuals covered by the survey.
48
   Among the ALMPs, APIS covered only cash/food-for-work, Training-for-Work Scholarship Program (TWSP),
and CBEP. The sample size for TWSP and CBEP are too small to allow valid statistical analysis.
49
   Detailed information on beneficiaries served is available from each implementing agencies, but the quality of
information varies depending on how the agency keeps record of the beneficiaries of its programs.


                                                                                                             83
     Figure 3.9 Cash/food-for-work programs mainly benefit the poor




     Source: World Bank staff estimates using Annual Poverty Indicators Survey.

Public works programs account for the largest share of government expenditures on ALMPs. The
resources devoted for public works programs vary every year depending on economic conditions, but
on average, they account for the largest share in the government expenditures on ALMPs (see Annex
3B Table 3B for indicative budget). Public works, in particular, are important countercyclical
interventions. In times of crisis, there is more spending, such as during the global financial crisis in
2009 and during the onset of natural calamities. In general, both public works and livelihood assistance
programs are the most important ALMPs that receive the largest amount of government resources.
Public works programs created roughly as many jobs as livelihood assistance programs (Figure 3.10).

Public works programs are primarily designed as stop-gap measures. They are short-term and
seasonal in nature. Implementing agencies vary in their guidelines in administering their public works
programs but, in general, one beneficiary is allowed to work for only up to 30 days and can avail of
any of the public works program up to twice per year.50 The design and implementing features of these
programs indicate that they are likely to have limited long-term employment effect on the
beneficiaries. That is, once a worker reaches the maximum number of working days allowed, he loses
the income support. However, some public works programs are meant to create infrastructure such
as irrigation system, farm-to-market roads, post-harvest facilities as well as disaster-risk mitigating
infrastructure that benefit the rural farm workers. Many of these types of public works programs are
implemented by the departments of agrarian reform and agriculture. Experience in other countries
also show that public works programs can have positive spillover effects (Box 3.4).




50
 The cash-for-work program of DSWD, for instance, can be availed for only 10 days, but can be extended to at
most three months depending on economic conditions in the area of implementation.


                                                                                                         84
     Figure 3.10 Public works programs generate as many jobs as livelihood programs51




     Source: Department of Labor and Employment.




     Box 3.4 Public works can be designed to have positive spillover effects
     The primary objective of public works programs is to provide temporary income support, but they can also
     be designed to have secondary objectives that create longer-term benefits to recipients. For example, public
     works programs can include a training component in their core design to enable workers to gain needed
     skills to help them transition into more regular employment (e.g. Jefes de Hogar in Argentina). They can also
     require beneficiaries to save a portion of their wage earnings to enable them to obtain credit and begin a
     self-employment activity (Vision 2020 Umurenge Program in Rwanda). Moreover, public works programs
     can create physical assets that are of commercial value to communities such as irrigation infrastructure.
     More examples of these types of public works are discussed in Subbarao, et al (2013).


Public works programs in the Philippines are highly fragmented. As in the case of livelihood
assistance programs, public works programs are composed of many small-scale projects being
implemented independently by different government agencies. As such, implementation
arrangements vary across agencies. For example, all emergency employment and livelihood assistance
programs of DOLE are clustered under the Integrated Livelihood and Emergency Employment
Program. Meanwhile, emergency employment programs of DSWD are clustered under its disaster
response program while the livelihood assistance programs are clustered under SLP. DOLE is
responsible for monitoring public works programs, but its role is limited to consolidating information
on these programs.




51
  The number of jobs generated by public works programs are calculated not by the actual number of workers
served, but by using the following formula: percent share of labor cost to total project cost / (average daily wage
per job x duration of program in months x 22 days per month).


                                                                                                                85
Training programs are relatively successful, but there is room for making them
more relevant to labor market needs
TVET programs are often not sufficient to improve the employment prospects of trainees. A large
proportion of beneficiaries of TVET training scholarship programs do not find jobs. A survey of TVET
graduates conducted by the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) in 2012
showed that only about half of the training scholarship beneficiaries (49 percent) were employed one
year the training, which is a relatively good result (Table 3.4).52 But many of those who did not find
employment withdrew from the labor market. This pattern has also been observed in earlier years.
The high rate of labor market withdrawal after training participation is disappointing because
vocational training programs are meant to address structural unemployment. The fact that a
substantial proportion of training participants withdrew from the labor market limits the efficiency of
training programs (Orbeta and Abrigo, 2011).

Table 3.4 Half of TVET graduates in 2012 were able             Figure 3.11 Most trainees find training
to find jobs after graduation                                  useful
                               All TVET        Scholarship
     Employment Status
                              graduates       beneficiaries*

Total graduates                788,439           239,339
(number)
Total graduates                  100               100
(% distribution)
  In the labor force              68                72
    Employed                      44                49
    Unemployed                    23                23
  Not in the labor force          32                28
* Training financially supported by the government
Source: Technical Education and Skills Development Authority    Source: Technical Education and Skills Development
(2013)                                                                           Authority (2013)


Most TVET graduates who found jobs viewed training as useful. Available evidence indicates that
among the TVET graduates who were employed after the training, about 80 percent reported that the
skills acquired from training were useful to their jobs, according to a survey on TVET graduates
conducted by TESDA (Figure 3.11). However, to assess the actual impact of training participation on
employment outcomes one would need to carry out net impact evaluation to compare employment
outcomes (e.g. the job placement rate) of the treatment group (those who received training) with
those of the control group. International evidences show that the net impact of training courses is
considerably lower than the gross impact (Card et al. 2010, 2015).




52
   No information is available on the quality of employment—for example, whether the job is formal or informal,
permanent or temporary, and what is the wage offered. The relatively high gross job placement rate is likely to
reflect the fact that the standard unemployment rate is very low in the Philippines, which means that jobseekers
find jobs relatively easily (although not necessarily “good” jobs).


                                                                                                                 86
Outreach of public employment services is limited
Majority of unemployed who used PESOs are urban low-skilled workers. According to LFS, about 30
percent of the unemployed who used PESOs to search for jobs were service and sales workers, another
25 percent were unskilled workers, including farmers (Figure 3.12, Panel A). This indicates that PESOs
reach out primarily to the low-skilled segment of the workforce. Majority of the unemployed who
used PESOs live in urban areas (Figure 3.12, Panel B). This can be attributed to the fact that PESOs are
located mainly in urban localities, such as in municipal/city halls, or in schools/universities.

  Figure 3.12 Majority of the unemployed who used PESOs are unskilled workers, mostly from urban areas

  Panel A                                              Panel B




  Source: World Bank staff estimates using Labor Force Survey 2013


Public employment services are used by few jobseekers and employers. Only 6 percent of the
unemployed used PESO to search for jobs, according to LFS (Figure 3.13, Panel A). From the employer
side, the Bureau of Labor and Employment Studies Integrated Survey showed that 13 percent of
medium-to-large formal establishments (20 or more workers) used PESOs to look for applicants
(Figure 3.13, Panel B). This indicates the low reliance on PESOs of jobseekers and employers. This can
be attributed to many factors such as the quality and effectiveness of services provided, difficult access
to services, and their limited outreach (concentration of PESO in urban areas). It was noted that in
many LGUs, personnel are assigned to PESOs in an ad hoc or add-on capacity without additional and
separate resources and budget (Bitonio, 2008).




                                                                                                       87
  Figure 3.13 Majority of jobseekers and employers use informal means for job-worker matching
  Panel A                                            Panel B




  Note: 40% of unemployed workers in the LFS supplied     Note: Survey covers formal enterprises with 20 or more
  answers.                                                employees.
  Sources: Bank staff calculations; Labor Force Survey,   Sources: Bank staff calculations; Bureau of Labor and
  2013.                                                   Employment Statistics Integrated Survey, 2012.

There is scope to improve the effectiveness of active labor market programs
A number of measures could enhance the effectiveness of employment programs in the Philippines.
These include (a) improving coordination among the different implementing agencies,
(b) consolidating small scale programs to exploit the economies of scale, (c) integrating employment
programs with other social protection programs, (d) improving access to and quality of public
employment services, (e) expanding programs that enhance workers’ skills and improve their long-
term employment prospects, and (f) developing an M&E system to inform employment policy. Some
of these measures are discussed in more detail below.

A more in-depth review of existing programs is necessary to better understand their performance.
The assessment provided in this section offer insights on which programs deserve a thorough review.
Among them are public works and livelihood assistance programs, which take up a large share of
government expenditures on ALMPs, but whose long-term employment impact is likely to be limited.
On the other hand, programs such as internships, apprenticeships, wage subsidy, TVET scholarship,
and capacity-building programs account for a relatively small share in government spending on
ALMPs, but their employment impact is likely to be longer-term. The cost-effectiveness of each
specific program is largely unknown. However, there are some recent initiatives to evaluate program
performance. Still, more investments are needed to enhance the available information on the
performance of existing programs. This would allow the government to make informed decisions
concerning program design, and allocation of resources to programs that prove to be most cost-
effective. All major programs need to be monitored and evaluated regularly to redesign those that
perform poorly, and scale-up those that are most cost-effective.

ALMPs should be integrated with other social protection programs. This particularly refers to using
a common targeting system to ensure that the poorest households also benefit from ALMPs. The
government has set up a national household targeting system, which is being used by social welfare
programs. However, this targeting system is not yet widely used for ALMPs. Currently, ALMPs use
different selection criteria, depending on the implementing agency. As argued in this section, this has
resulted in ALMPs benefitting mainly better-skilled workers, while leaving out the less-skilled ones,



                                                                                                                   88
who are most disadvantaged. There had been reforms in the social protection system in the
Philippines, which aim to integrate ALMPs with social welfare programs. In this regard, social welfare
programs have extended their services to include labor market interventions targeted at the most
disadvantaged workers. For example, public works programs keep certain number of job vacancies for
4Ps beneficiaries; livelihood programs have also extended their coverage to 4Ps beneficiaries; and
training programs are provided to high school graduates of 4Ps beneficiary household members.

There is a need to explore the most effective implementation arrangement to enhance the role of
PESOs. Institutionally, PESOs are independent entities, although they are linked to DOLE’s regional
offices for coordination and technical supervision. The institutional capacity to carry out the services,
and the resources devoted to them, varies because they are managed by different local government
units, non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations, or state universities and
colleges. Such implementation arrangement is likely to affect the distribution of PESOs across the
country, with a bias against locating in rural areas where low-skilled workers are based. The current
set-up of PESOs also prevents DOLE from providing uniform guidelines in providing employment
facilitation services. Many of them are not institutionalized and therefore, the continuity of their
services is uncertain. The existence of non-institutionalized PESOs depends solely on the managing
unit. This limits the role of DOLE in providing them technical supervision and in enhancing their
capacity to carry out employment facilitation services.

The government may consider expanding training programs. This report has identified lack of skills
as a key constraint to productive employment. Training programs hence have the potential to address
the root cause of labor market disadvantage in the Philippines.53 Although they cannot be a substitute
to a high quality education system, they can equip disadvantaged workers with employability skills
that will enhance their long-term job prospects. (This is in contrast to public works, which provide
only short-term employment). International evidence indicates that in order to be effective, training
programs need to be designed so as to address well identified needs of both workers and employers,
and tailored to the different needs of various worker groups (e.g. women vs. men, younger vs. older
workers, less skilled vs. more skilled). Training programs can be designed in a variety of different ways.
Important design features include course curriculum, focus on technical versus socio-behavioral skills,
classroom versus on-the-job training, and training duration.54 Training programs need to be pilot-
tested to determine their impact and to identify groups that benefit most from different training
interventions. Given limited resources, scaling up of successful training programs can be coupled with
scaling down of the least effective programs. This entails evaluation of the cost-effectiveness and
impact of the whole range of different ALMPs that are currently in place in the Philippines.

Pilot-testing new programs is key to improving their design and implementation features. There are
recent initiatives in the government to pilot-test new programs. For instance, a new youth
employment program known as JobStart, is pilot-tested by DOLE to evaluate its impact on the
randomly selected youth from the target population aged 18 to 24 years who completed secondary
education and had limited work experience over the past year. The result of the pilot-test will provide

53
   In developed countries, vocational education and training can be classified into three distinct systems: 1)
school-based vocational training and education; 2) formal apprenticeship schemes; and 3) dual vocational
training systems (Eichhorst 2015). All three modes of training delivery exist in the Philippines, with an addition
of community-based training (TESDA 2015).
54
   Socio-behavioral skills (also referred to as job attitudes or work ethics) are often neglected in training curricula,
while research shows that they are as critical for employability as technical, job-specific skills.


                                                                                                                     89
information on the potential impact of the program on the beneficiaries’ employment and earnings,
as well as information on potential pitfalls in implementation procedures. More resources are needed
to step-up pilot-testing of new programs. Earlier experience (e.g. that of DSWD with the CCT program)
indicates that investing resources on pilot-testing yields long-term benefits as it helps reduce
implementation costs and increase cost-effectiveness of the program.55

Finally, developing an M&E system is key to improving program design and enhancing the
effectiveness of employment policy. Currently, little is known about the performance of different
employment programs. This represents an important informational obstacle to an efficient allocation
of the scarce program resources. Once the M&E system is in place it becomes possible to assess cost-
effectiveness and impact of different programs, scale up programs that perform well, and redesign (or
scale down) programs that perform poorly. Ultimately, the M&E system allows the Government to
carry out evidence based policy, and to allocate available resources so as to maximize the impact of
employment policy.




55
  The pilot-testing of JobStart is being supported by the Asian Development Bank, while that of the CCT was
supported by the World Bank.


                                                                                                        90
ANNEX 3A The Philippines ranks low in labor market efficiency

Table 3A: The Philippines ranks low in labor market efficiency

               Labor market      Rank in labor             Selected components (1-7)              Ratio of min.
                 efficiency        market             Hiring and   Redundancy     Flexibility in  wage to ave.
   Country
                   scorea         efficiency             firing    costs, weeks      wage         value-added
                    (1-7)        (out of 144)         practices      of salary   determination    per worker/b
 Singapore           5.7                2                 5.4            3.0           6.0               –
 Malaysia            4.8               19                 4.9           23.9           5.5             0.23
 Cambodia            4.6               29                 4.8           19.4           4.8               –
 Lao PDR             4.6               34                 4.1           47.2           5.7             0.37
 China               4.6               37                 4.6           27.4           4.8             0.33
 Georgia             4.5               41                 4.7            4.3           5.6               –
 Vietnam             4.4               49                 3.9           24.6           5.1             0.60
 Thailand            4.2               66                 4.4           36.0           4.3             0.41
 Myanmar             4.2               72                 4.1           20.2           5.5               –
 Armenia             4.2               74                 4.5           11.0           5.1             0.25
 Guatemala           4.1               85                 4.4           27.0           5.7             0.73
 Philippines         4.0               91                 3.4           27.4           4.8             0.69
 Indonesia           3.8               110                4.3           57.8           4.4             0.55
 Morocco             3.8               111                3.7           20.7           5.4             0.74
 Egypt               3.1               140                3.9           36.8           5.1               –
 a Score of 1 means heavily impeded by regulations, 7 means extremely flexible.
 b – means no minimum wage.

 Sources: Global Competitiveness Report 2014-2015 (WEF 2014); and World Bank’s Doing Business Report 2015 (World
 Bank 2014b).




                                                                                                                   91
     ANNEX 3B Description of major labor market programs in the Philippines

Table 3B: Description of major labor market programs being implemented in the Philippines

                Program                                Description                               Objective                      Implementing Unit             Target Group          Targeting Method
  A. Direct job creation programs
  1. Public works                         Short-term employment programs         Provide temporary income support          All government agencies,      Unemployed              Self-selection
                                          (up to 30 days per beneficiary)        (paid 75% of minimum wage)                primarily DPWH, DA, and
                                                                                                                           NHA
  2. Livelihood programs                  Temporary source of financial          Enable workers undertake income-          All government agencies,      Informal workers        Varies by program, other
                                          support for business start-ups, also   generating activities by providing        primarily DOLE, DSWD, DA,                             programs use national
                                          includes training and job referral     microfinance or physical equipment        and Land Bank                                         household targeting
                                                                                                                                                                                 system
  3. Government Internship Program        On-the-job training in government      Provide temporary income support and      DOLE, PESOs, and              Youth                   Fresh college or TVET
                                          offices for 3-6 months                 work experience (paid 75% of minimum      participating government                              graduates, 18-30 years
                                                                                 wage)                                     agencies                                              old
  4. Special Program for the              On-the-job training in private         Provide temporary income support and      DOLE and private              Youth from low-income   Students, 15-25 years
  Employment of Students                  establishments for 20-52 days          work experience (paid minimum wage)       establishments                households              old
  B. Training programs
  1. Technical-vocational education and
  training (TVET) scholarship programs
     a. Training-for-Work Scholarship     Grant to avail of skills training      Increase supply of skills to priority     TESDA and TVIs                Youth                   At least 18 years old
                                          courses                                sectors as identified by the government                                                         high school graduates
    b. Private Education Student          Grant to avail of skills training      Access to TVET programs by students       TESDA and TVIs                Youth from low-income   At least high school
      Financial Assistance                courses                                from low-income households                                              households              graduates from low-
                                                                                                                                                                                 income households
     c. Special Training for Employment   Grant to avail of skills training      Access to TVET short-term programs by     TESDA and TVIs                Youth from low-income   At least 15 years old
        Program                           courses                                students from low-income households                                     households
  2. Community-based training             Short-term training programs           Access to training programs for           Various government            Informal workers        Varies by program
  programs                                                                       livelihood activities                     agencies
  C. Employment facilitation services
  1. JobStart Philippines                 Full-cycle employment facilitation     Assist beneficiaries find jobs by         DOLE, PESOs, TVIs, and        Young workers           Unemployed, 18-24
                                          (education-to-work transition          providing them training, job referral,    private establishments                                years old, at least high
                                          program)                               and internship                                                                                  school graduate
  2. Sustainable Livelihood Program       Full-cycle employment facilitation     Assist beneficiaries find jobs by         DSWD, PESOs, TVIs             Young workers           High graduates of CCT
  (employment facilitation track)         (education-to-work transition          providing them training grant and job                                                           beneficiary households
                                          program)                               referral
  2. Job-worker matching                  Job fairs, online jobs-applicants      Match jobseekers and employers            DOLE, PESOs, and public and   Unemployed              Self-selection
                                          search tools                                                                     private institutions
  3. Labor market information             Publications on labor market trends    Reduce information gaps on labor          DOLE, TESDA, PESOs            Unemployed              Self-selection
                                          and hard-to-fill jobs                  market
  4. Employment coaching                  Seminar/workshop on labor market       Assist jobseekers find jobs suitable to   DOLE, TESDA, PESOs            Unemployed              Self-selection
                                          trends and job prospects               their qualifications




                                                                                                                                                                                                  92
Table 3B (continuation). Description of major labor market programs being implemented in the Philippines
                                                                                                                     No. of Beneficiaries        Indicative Budget in Pesos
                Program                     Regularity of Program                 Record Keeping                                                                                     Other Information
                                                                                                                      (Source of data)                (Source of data)
  A. Direct job creation programs
  1. Public works                         Regular program, coverage     Regional offices of agencies record    997,600 jobs generated in         5.8 billion in 2013 (World   One beneficiary can take on as
                                          depends on the availability   the number of jobs created and         2013 (CBEP database)              Bank staff estimates based   many as 3 jobs within a year
                                          of jobs in government         submit the information to DOLE for                                       on no. of jobs generated)
                                          projects                      consolidation
  2. Livelihood programs                  Regular program, coverage     -- same as above --                    606,000 jobs generated in         3 billion in 2013            In 2013, jobs generated and
                                          depends on budget                                                    2013 (CBEP database)              (CBEP database)              budget cover DOLE, DSWD, DA,
                                          allocated                                                                                                                           DTI, DFA, CFO, NHA and
                                                                                                                                                                              LandBank
  3. Government Internship Program        Seasonal, only when jobs      -- same as above --                                                                                   Government agencies where the
                                          are available in                                                                                                                    GIP beneficiaries work pay the
                                          government agencies                                                                                                                 beneficiaries from various fund
                                                                                                                                                                              sources
  4. Special Program for the              Seasonal, only when           -- same as above --                    167,600 beneficiaries in 2013                                  DOLE pays 40% of salary, private
  Employment of Students                  private establishments                                               (DOLE)                                                         establishment pays 60%
                                          participate
  B. Training programs
  1. Technical-vocational education and                                 TVIs submit number of TVET
  training (TVET) scholarship programs                                  graduates and scholarship
                                                                        beneficiaries to TESDA
    a. Training-for-Work Scholarship      Regular program               -- same as above --                    175,500 beneficiaries in 2014     1.4 billion in 2014 (GAA)
                                                                                                               (TESDA)
     b. Private Education Student         Regular program               -- same as above --                    26,800beneficiaries in 2014       200 million per year
        Financial Assistance                                                                                   (TESDA)                           (TESDA)
     c. Special Training for Employment   Regular program               -- same as above --                    28,000 beneficiaries in 2014      833 million in 2014
        Program                                                                                                (TESDA)
  2. Community-based training             Regular program, coverage     Agencies keep record of workers        937,000 graduates in 2014         Not available
  programs                                depends on budget             served, but no central consolidating   (TESDA only)
                                          allocated                     agency
  C. Employment facilitation services
  1. JobStart Philippines                 Regular program               DOLE records the number of             Not available                     Not available                Currently being pilot-tested by
                                                                        beneficiaries                                                                                         DOLE
  2. Sustainable Livelihood Program       Regular program               DSWD records the number of             106,000 beneficiaries in 2014     2.4 billion in 2014,         Program covers two tracks:
  (employment facilitation track)                                       beneficiaries                          (employment facilitation track    including livelihood track   livelihood program and
                                                                                                               only) (DSWD)                      (GAA)                        employment facilitation
  3. Job placement                        Regular program               PESOs records the number of            1.4 million job applicants        2.5 billion in 2014, DOLE
                                                                        beneficiaries and submits to DOLE      placed in 2014 (DOLE)             central office only (GAA)
  4. Labor market information             Regular program               DOLE records the number of             2.9 million individuals reached   -- Included in above
                                                                        publication views                      in 2014 (DOLE)                    budget --
  5. Employment coaching                  Regular program               PESOs records the number of            800,000 individuals covered in    -- Included in above
                                                                        beneficiaries and submits to DOLE      2013 (DOLE)                       budget --




                                                                                                                                                                                                    93
References
Almeida, Rita, Orr, Larry and David Robalino (2012), “Wage subsidies in developing countries as a tool to
build human capital: design and implementation issues”, IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3(12).
Ballesteros, Marife M. and Danilo C. Israel (2014), Study of Government Interventions for Employment
Generation in the Private Sector, Philippine Institute for Development Studies and Department of Budget and
Management, Manila.
Ballesteros, Marife M., Aniceto C. Orbeta, Jr., Gilberto M. Llanto, Maureen D. Rosellon, Jasmine E. Magtibay,
Larraine Bolanos, and Christine Salazar (2015), “Assessment of the DSWD SEA-K Strategy,” Philippine Institute
for Development Studies Discussion Paper Series No. 2015-09, Manila.
Betcherman, Gordon (2014), Labor Market Regulations: What Do We Know about Their Impacts in
Developing Countries?, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6819, March.
Betcherman, Gordon, Martin Godfrey, Susana Puerto, Friederike Rother and Antoneta Stavreska (2007),
Global Inventory of Interventions to Support Young Workers Synthesis Report, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Bitonio, Benedicto (2008), Labour market governance in the Philippines: Issues and institutions, International
Labour Organization Asia-Pacific Working Paper Series, August.
Brimon, Katherine B. (2010), Flexibility and Security at Work: Seeking a Balance of Interests, Institute for
Labor Studies Discussion Paper Series 2010.
Briones, Roehlano M. (2013), “Agriculture, Rural Employment, and Inclusive Growth”, Philippine Institute for
Development Studies Policy Notes No. 2013-39.

Card, David and Alan Kruger (1995), Myth and Measurement. The New Economics of the Minimum Wage,
Princeton University Press.

Card, David, Jochen Kluve and Andrea Weber (2010), “Active Labor Market Policy Evaluations: A Meta-
Analysis,” NBER Working Paper No. 1673.

Card, David, Jochen Kluve and Andrea Weber (2015), “What Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent Active Labor
Market Program Evaluations,” NBER Working Paper No. 21431.

Casale, Giuseppe and Adalberto Perulli (2014), Towards a Single Employment Contract: Comparative
Reflections, ILO, Geneve.

Cho, Yoonyoung, David Robalino, and Samantha Watson (2014), Supporting self-employment and small-scale
entrepreneurship, World Bank, Washington DC.
Community-Based Employment Program (2015), CBEP Online Monitoring and Reporting System, website:
http://116.50.172.42/index.php
Del Carpio, Ximena and Pabon, Laura (2014), Minimum wage policy: lessons with a focus on the ASEAN
region, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Department of Labor and Employment (2014a), Handbook of Statutory Monetary Benefits 2014, Manila.
Department of Labor and Employment (2014b), Progress Report 2014, Manila.
Department of Labor and Employment (2014c) “2014 is Productivity Year, says Baldoz, In 2014, DOLE
launches NWPC’s Productivity Toolbox; 11,860 MSMEs with 26,320 workers benefit from productivity
training,” http://www.dole.gov.ph/news/view/2680
Department of Social Welfare and Development (2014), Accomplishment Report of Sustainable Livelihood
Program, Manila.
di Gropello, Emanuela, Hong Tan, and Prateek Tandon (2010), Skills for the Labor Market in the Philippines,
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Eichhorst, W. (2015), Does vocational training help young people find a (good) job?" IZA World of Labor 112.

Freeman, Richard B. (2009), “Labor Regulations, Unions, and Social Protection in Developing Countries:
Market distortions or Efficient Institutions?,” NBER Working Paper No. 14789.

Gindling, Tim H. (2014), Does increasing the minimum wage reduce poverty in developing countries? IZA.

Gindling, Tim H. and David Newhouse (2012), “Self-employment in the Developing World”, World Bank Policy
Research Working Papers, No. 6201.

Institute for Labor Studies (2014), “A Rapid Assessment of the Community-Based Employment Program
(CBEP),” Institute for Labor Studies Policy Brief Series No. 2014-PB03, June.
International Labour Organization (2012), Decent Work Country Profile: The Philippines, Geneva.
Johnson, S., D. Kaufmann, and P. Zoido-Lobatón. 1998. “Regulatory Discretion and the Unofficial Economy.”
American Economic Review 88 (2): 387–92.
Kondo, Toshio (2007), “Impact of Microfinance on Rural Households in the Philippines,” Asian Development
Bank, Manila.

Loayza, N.V., A.M. Oviedo, and L. Servén. 2005. “The Impact of Regulation on Growth and Informality.” Policy
Research Working Paper 3623. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Machin, Stephen, Alan Manning and S. Woodland (1994), Are workers paid their marginal product? Evidence
from a low wage labour market. CEP Discussion Paper No. 158, London School of Economics and Political
Science, London, UK.
Margolis, David. N. (2014), “By Choice and by Necessity: Entrepreneurship and Self-Employment in the
Developing World”, IZA DP No. 8273.

National Wages and Productivity Commission (2012), Guidelines on the Implementation of Two-Tiered Wage
System, NWPC Guidelines No. 02, Series of 2012.
National Wages and Productivity Commission (2015), “Frequently Asked Questions on Procedure on
Minimum Wage Fixing,” available: http://www.nwpc.dole.gov.ph/faqs.html#2
OECD (2009a), In-Work Poverty: What Can Government Do? Policy Brief, Paris.

OECD (2009b), Employment Outlook, OECD, Paris.

OECD (2013), Employment Outlook, OECD, Paris.
OECD (2014), Employment Outlook 2014, OECD, Paris.
Orbeta, Aniceto R. and Abrigo, Michael (2013), An Assessment of TESDA Scholarship Programs, Philippine
Institute for Development Studies Research Paper Series No. 2013-01, Manila.
Packard, Truman, Johannes Koettl and Claudio E. Montenegro (2012), In From the Shadow. Integrating
Europe’s Informal Labor, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Pages, Carmen and Marco Stampini (2007), “No Education, No Good Jobs? Evidence on the Relationship
between Education and Labor Market Segmentation,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 3187.
Paqueo, Vicente, Aniceto R. Orbeta, Leonardo A. Lanzona, and Dean Dulay (2014), Labor Policy Analysis for
Jobs Expansion and Development, Philippine Institute for Development Studies Research Paper Series No.
2014-34, Manila.
Philippine Statistics Authority (2015), “Current Labor Statistics,” available:
http://www.bles.dole.gov.ph/PUBLICATIONS/Current%20Labor%20Statistics/index.html
Quintini, Glenda and Martin Sebastien (2006), “Starting Well or Losing Their Way? The Position of Youth in
the Labor Market in OECD Countries,” OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers No. 39, Paris,
OECD.
Reich, Michael et al (1973) Dual Labor Markets: A Theory of Labor Market Segmentation,” American
Economic Review 63 (2): 359–65.
Reyes, Celia M. and Christian D. Mina (2013), “Where are the poor employed? Profiling the working poor”,
Philippine Institute for Development Studies Policy Notes No. 2013-04.

Rutkowski, Jan (2003), The Minimum Wage: Curse or Cure?, World Bank Social Protection Primer Note.
Sicat, Gerardo (2009), Labor Policies and Philippine Companies: Analysis of Survey Opinions, Philippine
Journal of Development 16(2).
Sicat. Gerardo (2010), “Spotlighting on High Economic Growth, Employment of the Poor, and Poverty
Reduction: A Three-Pronged Strategy,” UP School of Economics Discussion Paper No. 2010-07, July.
Subbarao, K., del Ninno, C., Andrews, C., Rodriguez-Alas, C. (2013), Public Works as Safety Net, World Bank,
Washington DC.
Taymaz, Erol (2009), "Informality and Productivity: Productivity Differentials between Formal and Informal
Firms in Turkey," ERC Working Papers 0901.
TESDA (2013), Impact Evaluation Study (IES) of TVET Programs (Highlights), Manila.

TESDA (2015), "TVET Programs." Available: http://www.tesda.gov.ph/About/TESDA/24.
World Bank (2003), Out-of-School Children and Youth in the Philippines: Issues and Opportunities, World
Bank, Washington DC.
World Bank (2010), Skills for the Labor Market in the Philippines, World Bank, Washington DC.
World Bank (2012), World Development Report: Jobs, World Bank, Washington DC.
World Bank (2013), Philippine Development Report: Creating More and Better Jobs, World Bank, Manila.
World Bank (2014), “Balancing Flexibility and Worker Protection: Understanding Labor Market Duality in
Poland,” processed.

World Bank (2014a), East Asia Pacific at Work: Employment, Enterprise, and Well-being, World Bank,
Washington, DC.

World Bank (2014b), Doing Business database, website: http://www.doingbusiness.org
World Economic Forum (2014), Global Competitiveness Report 2014-2015, WEF, Geneva.
