                      88929
    Development Policy Review 2014




       Indonesia:
Avoiding The Trap
THE WORLD BANK OFFICE JAKARTA
Indonesia Stock Exchange Building, Tower II/12-13th Fl.
Jl. Jend. Sudirman Kav. 52-53
Jakarta 12910
Tel: (6221) 5299-3000
Fax: (6221) 5299-3111

Printed in May 2014

Indonesia Development Policy Review 2014 is a product of staff of the World Bank. The findings, interpretation and conclusion expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Executive Directors of the World Bank or the government they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denomination and other information shown
on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement of
acceptance of such boundaries.

Cover and chapters photos are: Copyright @ World Bank. Photos on Chapter 1 and 4 were taken by Jufferdy; on Chapter 2 by Education team; on Chapter
3 by Aldian; on Chapter 5,7 and 8 by Josh Estey; on Chapter 6 by Takiko ; and on Chapter 9 by Disater Risk Management team. All rights reserved.
                       Development Policy Review 2014


                       Indonesia:
                   Avoiding The Trap


Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Department
East Asia and Pacific Region
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                 Table of Contents




          Table of Contents
          Preface											V
          Acknowledgments								 	  VI
          Executive Summary								 	1
               The next decade brings opportunities and risks	for Indonesia				                   2
               What strategy for a strong and inclusive growth in Indonesia?				                  5
               What policy priorities to support productivity-driven growth?				                  6
               What policy priorities to ensure that prosperity is shared more widely?			         13
               The Challenge of Implementation: What Can Be Done?					                            17


          Chapter I. Indonesia’s Economic Transformation Post-1997/98			                          25
               1. The Turnaround in Macro Policymaking Post-1997/98				                          27
                   The legacy of the 1997/98 crisis							28
                   Addressing the fallout of the crisis							28
                   Good policies in bad times: policy response to the global financial crisis			 29
               2. The Transformational Impact of the Commodities Boom				                        29
                   The commodities boom: a significant and unforeseen positive shock			          30
                   Impact on Indonesia’s terms-of-trade and corporate wealth				                 30
                   Contribution to Indonesia’s investment recovery						32
                   Contribution to Indonesia’s nominal GDP growth and household incomes			       33
                   Supply-side response and the structural transformation					                   34
               3. Over-reliance on Commodity Exports Has Fueled Vulnerability			                  39
                   Changes in the composition and destination of exports					                     39
                   Increased vulnerability to changes in commodities markets				                  40
               4. The Commodities Boom Has Also Sharpened Environmental Concerns		                41

          Chapter II. The Economic Transformation’s Social Impacts				                            44
               1. Poverty										45
                   Trend in income-poverty								45
                   The significant role of growth-driven job creation in poverty reduction			 45
               2. Vulnerability									47
                   Vulnerability to sliding back into poverty remains high					               47
                   Vulnerable households face high food price risks					                      48
                   Vulnerable households are highly exposed to health shocks				              49
                   There are gender differences in vulnerability						                        50
                   The job market is the key source of vulnerability					                     50
               3. Inequality of income and opportunity						                                  53
                   Income inequality has increased over the past decade					                  53
                   Inequality of opportunities has worsened						55
                   The role of the commodities boom in rising income inequality				           56
                   Has fiscal policy helped to redress increasing inequality?					56




                                                       ii
                                                                                   Development Policy Review 2014
Table of Contents                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




        4. Access to Basic Services								58
            Education										58
            Health										59
            Water and sanitation									61
            Electricity										62

    Chapter III. The Road to Shared Prosperity						                                                       65
        1. Key Opportunities and Risks							66
            Key opportunities									66
            Risk of a growth slowdown								                                            68
            Risk of growth not being inclusive enough						                              69
        2. Growth Strategy									71
        3. Priority Reform Areas								73
        4. Addressing cross-cutting Implementation Challenges					                       75
            Stronger Center of government							76
            Streamlined Bureaucratic Procedures and Structures					                      77
            Strategic Management of Human Resources						                                77
            Delivering results with public spending							                               78
            Refocus Local Governments to be Accountable for Improving Service Delivery		 78

    Chapter IV. Closing Indonesia’s Large Infrastructure Gap				                                           81
        1. Under-Investment in Infrastructure and the Cost to the Economy			                               83
            Indonesia’s total investment ratio has recovered in recent years				                           83
            However, infrastructure investment (as a proportion of GDP) is lagging behind…		               84
            …imposing higher costs in terms of economic growth…					                                       86
            …and under-investment cuts across most key infrastructure subsectors			                        86
        2. Not Only About Money								91
            Land acquisition complexities								   91
            Coordination issues									92
            Public-private partnerships (PPP)							93
        3. Policy Options									93
            Mobilizing funding for infrastructure development					 93
            Coordination/engagement with ASEAN						95


    Chapter V. Closing the Skills Gap in the Labor Force					                                              97
        1. Indonesia’s Scorecard to Date							98
            The labor force is more educated							98
            …but many graduates enter the labor market without the right skills			 99
            Skills shortages are related to quality and relevance of education				 104
        2. Policy Options									106
            Focus on quality and skills, not only expansion						                                          107
            Improve relevance of feeders into the labor market: vocational education and tertiary education107
            Upgrading skills of existing labor force							108




                                                       iii
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                   Table of Contents




          Chapter VI. Improving the Functioning of Markets					                                     111
               1. Improving the functioning of product markets					           112
                   Key relevant product market/investment climate issues					 112
                   Policy options									114
               2. Reducing labor market rigidities and uncertainties					     115
                   Key relevant labor market issues							115
                   Policy options									118
               3. Deepening Financial Markets							119
                   Key relevant financial market issues							                119
                   Policy options									120
               4. Land Markets									121


          Chapter VII. Improving Access to Quality Services for All				                             123
               1. Poverty and Institutional Context							124
                   Trends in urban and rural poverty							124
                   Changes in the institutional context: decentralization					                      125
               2. Access to High Quality Services in Urban Areas					                               126
               3. Access to Improved Essential Services in Rural Areas					                         127
               4. Policy Options for Improving Access to Services for All				                       130
                   More resources to front-line services and less on personnel and administration		 130
                   Provide alternative financing options to local governments				                   131
                   Enhancing the quality of spending							132
                   Clarifying missions, refocusing the bureaucracy to be accountable for results			 133
                   Strengthening Community-driven programs and demand-side accountability			        133

          Chapter VIII. Strengthening Social Protection						137
               1. Building an Effective and Sustainable Social Security Framework 			              138
               2. Strengthening Indonesia’s Emerging Safety Net for the Poor	 			                  142
                   Safety nets have an immediate impact on reducing extreme poverty	 			           142
                   Further reforms are needed to strengthen safety nets					                       142
               3. Maintain National Oversight to Ensure that Social Assistance Is Well-Coordinated
                  and Integrated									144


          Chapter IX. Managing Disaster Risks, Building Resilience	         			                     147
               1. Urbanization and disaster risk profile and cost					 148
               2. Urbanization and Vulnerability to New Hazards					   151
               3. Policy Options									153




                                                        iv
                                                                               Development Policy Review 2014
Preface                                                                                    Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




                                              Preface

   The World Bank undertakes, on a regular basis and in many emerging economies, an evidence-
   based review of development challenges and optional policy solutions to address these. One of
   such analytical pieces is called Development Policy Review.

   The World Bank has completed a Development Policy Review for Indonesia in 2009. That
   report identified the reforms of institutions and processes that govern the state as critical for
   unleashing the country’s development potential. That report provided an analytical underpinning
   for the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy 2009-2014 and shaped the Bank’s support to the
   Government’s RPJMN 2010-2014.

   While the institutional reform agenda remains unfinished, the present report argues that
   Indonesia has the potential to rise and become more prosperous and equitable in the next two
   decades. Its central thesis is that with a few critical reforms in the six priority areas identified,
   Indonesia can climb the income ladder and join the rank of high-income economies within two
   decades, in an inclusive manner. At the same time, in the absence of critical reforms, Indonesia
   would float in the middle, as was the case of Brazil, Mexico, South Africa and other middle-
   income countries from the early 1980s to the mid-2000s. Which way Indonesia’s economy will
   go depends is, to a critical extent, on the hands of Indonesia’s authorities. The main difficulties
   lie in getting the reforms implemented in a complex institutional and decentralized framework.
   But Indonesia cannot afford to not try hard. The costs of complacency – and the rewards for
   action – are too high.

   The report was elaborated upon large consultations/ discussions with key stakeholders
   in Indonesia, including government officials, private sector leaders, non-governmental
   organizations, academics and labor unions. It is hoped that these stakeholders, as well as others
   readers will find it useful.



                Rodrigo A. Chaves                                     Sudhir Shetty
             Country Director, Indonesia                           PREM Sector Director




                                                     v
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                      Acknowledgments




                                       Acknowledgments

          This report was prepared by a team drawn from the different units of the World Bank’s Jakarta
          Office. The team was led by Ndiame Diop (Team leader) and comprised Fitria Fitrani, Yue
          Man Lee, Arvind Nair, Matthew Grant Wai-Poi, Alex Sienaert, Ashley Taylor and Maria Monica
          Wihardja (PREM), Carlos Pinerua and Connor P. Spreng (FPD), Iwan Gunawan, Taimur Samad
          and Renata Simatupang (SD), Samer Al-Samarrai, Pedro Cerdan-Infantes, Darren W. Dorkin and
          Mitchell Wiener (HD) and Dini Sari Djalal (EXT). Useful inputs and comments were received
          from: Vivi Alatas, Cut Dian Agustina, Mark Eugene Ahern, Hans Antlov, Brendan M. Coates,
          Fook Chuan Eng, Ahya Ihsan, Amri Ilmma, Blane D. Lewis, Mattia Makovec, Bernard Myers,
          Dhanie Nugroho, Gregorius D.V. Pattinasarany, Anh Nguyet Pham, Sjamsu Rahardja, Cristobal
          Ridao-Cano, Henry Sandee, Della Y.A. Temenggung,Violeta Vilovic and Robert Wrobel. The
          team thanks Arsianti and Peter Milne for their assistance on editing and formatting the report.
          The work was conducted under the guidance of Jim Brumby, Rodrigo Chaves and Sudhir Shetty.

          The team is thankful to the peer reviewers Indermit S. Gill, Vikram Nehru and Raden Pardede
          for their helpful comments and advice. The team is also grateful for the comments and support
          from Josephine M. Bassinette, Shubham Chaudhuri, Bert Hofman, Stefan G. Koeberle and
          William Wallace.

          This report benefitted from the discussions with a large number of key economists and resource
          persons in Indonesia. The authors thank Mr. M. Chatib Basri (Minister of Finance), Mr.
          Mahendra Siregar (Chairman of the Investment Coordinating n Board), Ms. Armida Alisjahbana
          (State Minister for National Development Planning/Head of Bappenas), Mr. Lukita Dinarsyah
          Tuwo (Vice-Minister of Bappenas), Mr. Mohamad Ikhsan (Vice Chairman of LPEM-UI) and
          the late Mr. Thee Kian Wie (Senior Researcher, LIPI) for useful research suggestions at the
          concept stage of the study. The team also received valuable feedback on preliminary findings
          from Mr. Wijayanto Samirin (Paramadina), private sector representatives (Apindo and Kadin)
          and many members of the civil society and Indonesia’s community of experts.
           




                                                        vi
             Executive Summary




INDONESIA: Avoiding The Trap
                  RISING?




                            FLOATING?



2014                            2030
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                         Executive Summary




                                    Executive Summary

          Within the next two decades Indonesia aspires to generate prosperity, avoid a middle-income trap
          and leave no one behind as it tries to catch up with high-income economies. These are ambitious
          goals. Realizing them requires sustained high growth and job creation, as well as reduced
          inequality. Can Indonesia achieve them? This report argues that the country has the potential
          to rise and become more prosperous and equitable. But the risk of “floating in the middle” is
          real. Which pathway the economy will take depends on: (i) the adoption of a growth strategy
          that unleashes the productivity potential of the economy; and (ii) consistent implementation of
          a few, long-standing, high-priority structural reforms to boost growth and share prosperity more
          widely. Indonesia is fortunate to have options in financing these reforms without threatening its
          long-term fiscal outlook. The difficulties lie in getting the reforms implemented in a complex
          institutional and decentralized framework. But Indonesia cannot afford hard to not try harder.
          The costs of complacency – and the rewards for action -- are too high.

          The next decade brings opportunities and risks for Indonesia

          •	    Over the next decade, four domestic and external factors—which good policies can
                turn into powerful drivers of growth, or “pull factors” —will shape economic prospects.
                These factors are Indonesia’s demographics, the urbanization trend, commodity prices, and
                developments in China.
          •	    Demographics. Indonesia is fortunate to have abundant labor. Between 2013 and 2020, the
                working-age population will increase by 14.8 million, reaching 189 million from the current
                174 million. Today, 50 percent of the population is under the age of 30. This increasingly
                educated and IT-savvy youth is an asset that can be used to boost overall productivity and
                economic growth. With the right policies in place to utilize this labor, Indonesia is poised to
                benefit from a demographic “dividend”, before the population starts to age in 2025-30.
          •	    Urbanization. Indonesia’s urban population is increasing at an annual pace of about 4
                percent, making Indonesia one of the most rapidly urbanizing countries in the world. By
                2025, 68 percent of the population is projected to live in urban areas, compared to 52
                percent in 2012. As income rises and existing large metropolitan areas such as Jakarta and
                Surabaya become saturated, the demand for consumer durables, shopping space and housing
                will increase significantly in smaller cities. Connecting these cities and their inhabitants to
                rural areas, metropolitan areas and the global economy will be essential to attracting firms
                and achieving shared prosperity. Empirical evidence shows that urbanization supports
                growth and poverty in Indonesia only in the presence of adequate infrastructure (Lewis,
                2014).
          •	    Global commodity prices. The softening of commodity prices since 2011 poses challenges
                for Indonesia in the short term, as seen in their impact on Indonesia’s trade balance, but it
                offers an opportunity to enhance the quality and diversity of investments in Indonesia. Over
                the past decade, high commodity prices tilted investment incentives in favor of the resource
                sector and non-tradable sectors (e.g., the real estate sector) against manufacturing and other




                                                            2
                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                      Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




        tradable sectors. Since 2005, commodities have overtaken manufacturing as Indonesia’s
        largest exports (65 percent of total exports). Going forward, lower commodity prices should
        increase the relative profitability and attractiveness of manufacturing and can help Indonesia
        develop its industrial base. Commodity price falls over the past two years are now translating
        into depreciation in the real effective exchange rate, stimulating manufacturing investments,
        exports and competitiveness. With reforms to reduce the constraints faced by manufacturing
        firms (see below), weaker commodity prices may be a blessing in disguise.
   •	   Developments in China. China’s rapidly rising wages present Indonesia with a potential
        in regaining a comparative advantage in labor-intensive export sectors. China’s nominal
        wages have grown by an annual average of almost 15 percent since 2001 which, together
        with slowing productivity growth in low-skilled sectors in recent years, has seen Chinese
        unit labor costs grow by almost 70 percent since 2005 (Economist Intelligence Unit,
        2012). Meanwhile, ongoing Yuan appreciation, with the real effective exchange rate up
        30 percent since 2005, is further eroding China’s competitiveness in manufactured goods.
        These pressures, combined with slower overall economic growth as China rebalances,
        are likely to prompt investors to look beyond China’s coastal areas. These dynamics offer
        ASEAN countries, including Indonesia, an opportunity to attract more investments in the
        manufacturing industries.

   However, while none of these potentially favorable factors will be captured without reforms, two
   risks remain: a risk of a slowdown in long-term growth and a risk of growth not being inclusive.

   •	   Risk of a growth slowdown. International experience shows that growth slowdowns
        can occur at all levels of income (Bulman et al, 2012). Recent evidence suggests that
        their frequency is higher for middle-income countries (IMF, 2013). As an example,
        Brazil grew fast in the 1960s and 1970s. But from 1981, when its GDP per capita stood
        at US$3,939 (slightly above Indonesia’s GDP per capita today), it suffered a prolonged
        relative growth slowdown, until 2004.1 Similarly, also starting from 1981, when its GDP
        per capita was US$6,965, Mexico saw more than 20 years of slowing growth. South Africa
        experienced similar trends. These examples suggest that Indonesia cannot take its solid
        growth performance for granted. All the more so that growth was partially driven by a
        very favorable external environment: the commodity boom of 2003-11 combined with
        low global interest rates since 2009 supported corporate revenues, household incomes and
        government revenues, and led to a significant jump in domestic demand.2 But, since 2011,
        commodity prices have softened significantly. With the normalization of US growth, the
        Fed’s quantitative easing policy—which led to low global interest rates—is being gradually
        unwound, increasing financing costs. Without structural reforms, the risk of a growth
        slowdown for Indonesia is very real.



   1 A commodity-rich country similar to Indonesia, Brazil benefitted significantly from a commodity boom in 2004-11. This favorable
   external factor explains parts of the strong growth recovery in that country in that period.
   2 More specifically, the direct rise in the value of resource assets (palm oil, rubber, coal, gas, etc.), as well as the value of other
   assets purchased on the back of commodity incomes or wealth (real estate properties, land and securities), significantly encouraged
   consumption and investment against these assets and generated multiplier effects in the economy.




                                                                     3
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                                                                                             Executive Summary




          Figure ES1: Brazil, Mexico and South Africa experienced prolonged relative slowdown
                            0.6                     Ratio to USA                                                     Absolute numbers in constant 2005 USD
                                                    USA = 1.0                                            1981, $25,902                                                                                 2010, $42,001
                            0.5


                            0.3                                                                                        1981: $6,965
                                                        S.Africa                                                                                                 Mexico                  2010: $7,834
                                                                                    1981: $5,486
                            0.2                                                                                                                                                        2010, $5,794
                                                                                                                       1981: $3,939
                                                  Brazil                                                                                                                                     2010, $5,618
                            0.0
                                          1960
                                                 1962
                                                        1964
                                                               1966
                                                                      1968
                                                                             1970
                                                                                    1972
                                                                                           1974
                                                                                                  1976
                                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                                1980
                                                                                                                       1982
                                                                                                                              1984
                                                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                                                                                               1998
                                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2012
          Source: World Bank and World Development Indicators.


          •	                        Risk of growth not being inclusive enough. Even if Indonesia manages to avoid a
                                    prolonged growth slowdown, growth may not be inclusive, i.e. the benefits and opportunities
                                    associated with growth are not shared widely across the population. From 1999 to 2012,
                                    poverty was cut by half: from 24 percent to 12 percent. However, in 2012, about 65 million
                                    people hovered between the national poverty line and 50 percent above the latter. They
                                    and the poor are highly vulnerable to food price increases, health shocks and natural
                                    disasters. Vulnerability persists partly because the poorest families enjoy only a very small
                                    increase in real income, compared to those more fortunate. In 2003-10, real growth of per
                                    capita consumption was 1.3 percent per annum for the poorest 40 percent of households,
                                    compared with 3.5 percent for the next 40 percent, and 5.9 percent for the top 20 percent
                                    (Figure ES.2). Moreover, consumption inequality in Indonesia is increasingly determined
                                    by access to opportunities. In 2002, 27 percent of child consumption inequality was due
                                    to differences in their gender, the gender and employment status of the head of their
                                    household, their parents’ education, and their region and location of birth. By 2012, this
                                    reached 37 percent. Going forward, equitable growth needs to be fostered and not taken as
                                    granted.

          Figure ES.2: Poorer households experienced lower than average growth in their real consumption
          over 2003-10
                                                                12%                                                40%                                                                              80%
                                      8
            Annualized growth (%)




                                      6
                                                               Average Growth for all Households

                                      4


                                      2


                                      0
                              71 01 31 61 92 22 52 83 13 43 74 04 34 64 95 25 55 86 16 46 77 07 37 67 98 28 58 89 19 49 7
                                            14
                                                      Household Per Capita Consumption Percentile
          Note. A Growth Incidence Curve (GIC) shows the annual growth rate in consumption between two periods for each percentile
          of the distribution. Thus, the GIC indicates how the average consumption growth for all households is distributed across the
          distribution. See World Bank (forthcoming) Inequality of Income and Consumption in Indonesia.
          Source: Susenas and World Bank calculations




                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                                Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   What strategy for a strong and inclusive growth in Indonesia?
   Given the opportunities and risks discussed above, and Indonesia’s aspiration of shared
   prosperity, what would be the country’s best growth strategy going forward? Quite
   simply, a country can increase its income per capita (a proxy of prosperity) by a combination
   of improving labor productivity or increasing the share of the population employed.3 Because
   the latter increases very slowly over time, cross-country evidence shows that 92 percent of the
   differences in GDP per capita across nations are explained by differences in aggregate labor
   productivity (IMF, 2013). Thus, for Indonesia’s GDP per capita to converge rapidly to high-
   income economies, boosting economic growth through increasing labor productivity will be
   crucial. Beyond moving the economy to higher value-addition, a productivity-driven growth
   strategy is also important for Indonesia to reduce vulnerability and enhance competitiveness
   in the private sector. Indeed, the political pressure for increasing wages is unlikely to weaken in
   Indonesia. In this context, the only way to accommodate wage increases without jeopardizing
   competitiveness is to increase labor productivity.

   The question is then how can Indonesia boost labor productivity growth? Aggregate labor
   productivity growth has two sources. First, a movement of labor (and capital or other inputs
   to production) from low to higher productivity growth sectors increases aggregate productivity
   of an economy (this is called “structural change effect”, see McMillan and Rodrik, 2011). For
   instance, when workers leave agriculture and work in higher productivity sectors (e.g., as a result
   of investment in agriculture that increases yields), the aggregate productivity of the economy
   increases. The second source of aggregate productivity growth is productivity growth within
   economic sectors, e.g., higher productivity in agriculture, thanks to the use of higher-yielding
   seeds or higher productivity in manufacturing thanks to the entry of new innovative firms.

   The good news is that productivity gaps across Indonesia’s economic sectors are,
   providing scope for boosting productivity through structural change. Table E.1 shows the
   gap in labor productivity levels between agriculture and other sectors of the economy, measured
   as the ratio of sectoral productivity to agriculture. Moving a worker from agriculture to the low-
   end services subsectors (wholesale and retail trade and personal, social services and construction)
   leads to a doubling of productivity on average. This movement has largely occurred over the
   past decade and has been the key driver of poverty reduction. Seventeen of the 20 million jobs
   created in 2001-11 occurred in services, mostly in the low-end segment. Today, more than 50
   percent of workers are employed in agriculture and low-end services. In the years to come,
   Indonesia should seek to expand the movement of labor and job creation in the manufacturing
   sector and high-end services.4 Despite the sharp decline in manufacturing productivity growth
   in the past decade, the average productivity of workers in manufacturing industries remains fully
   five times higher than that in agriculture.5 Indonesia will see rising productivity growth if most
   of the 15 million additional individuals that will join the labor force by 2020 are employed in
   manufacturing and high-end services (versus low-end services).
                                                                              GDP       GDP   Workers   GDP
   3 This proceeds the decomposition of GDP per capita as follows: Population = Workers * Population . Workers is the aggregate labor productivity and
   Workers
   Population the proportion of the total population employed.

   4 The skills requirement for entering the high-end services sector is however higher, implying that the scope for job creation in
   manufacturing is much larger given the average levels of skills in the labor force.
   5 In the past decade, labor productivity in agriculture increased (driven by rubber, palm oil, coffee and tea) and dropped to almost
   zero in manufacturing. The sharpest decline in labor productivity growth occurred however in mining and quarrying. See Chapter 2.




                                                                          5
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                             Executive Summary




          The scope for increasing “within sector” productivity growth is also large in Indonesia.
          This type of productivity growth typically requires greater use of capital by workers (more
          modern machines and equipment), improvements in the quality of labor (better trained workers),
          adoption of new technology (including through FDI and joint-venture with foreign firms) and
          competition within sectors that lead to a larger number of efficient firms. The Government
          of Indonesia has, in its development plans, stated its objective of upgrading the country’s
          industries to enhance value-addition. International experience shows that countries that are
          successful in achieving this have (i) adopted a clear and consistent industrial strategy; (ii) removed
          regulatory and administrative bottlenecks to investment and business conduct and; (iii) partnered
          and coordinated with the private sector to supply the right skills, infrastructure and specific
          institutional support in the sectors where the country has latent or overt comparative advantage.
          As shown below, important multi-faceted reforms will need to be implemented if Indonesia is to
          realize this.

          Table ES.1: Labor productivity differences across sectors remain significant
          (Sector labor productivity (real terms) compared with labor productivity in agriculture)
           Sector                                                         2000-03               2005-08          2009-12
           Agriculture                                                    1.0                   1.0              1.0
           Low-end services                                               2.4                   2.5              2.2
           Manufacturing industries                                       5.7                   5.8              5.0
           Transport and communication                                    2.8                   3.5              5.5
           Financial services                                             21.5                  20.5             14.6
           Mining and quarrying                                           46.8                  26.7             18.0
           Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.


          Moving to a productivity-driven growth model will be a significant break from the
          past. Over past decades, growth has in large part been supported by capital accumulation and
          employment growth with limited contribution of total factor productivity (TFP). Van Der
          Eng (2008) finds that TFP explained only 33 percent of growth in 2000-07 and played no role
          in growth prior to 2000.6 This is to be contrasted with China and South Korea, where TFP
          explained more than 50 percent of growth during that period. The aggregate productivity level
          of Indonesia—measured by average value-added per worker- is also low by regional standards.
          For instance, Malaysia’s average productivity per worker is more than 5 times Indonesia’s.
          Average labor productivity in Indonesia is also lower than in Thailand, the Philippines and China
          (Chapter 3). The decisive policy reforms discussed below will be necessary if Indonesia is to
          catch up with these countries.

          What policy priorities to support productivity-driven growth?
          This report identifies three priority areas to foster productivity-driven growth: (i) closing
          the infrastructure gap (roads, ports, electricity, water and sanitation and irrigation networks);
          (ii) closing the skills gap; and (iii) improving the functioning of product, labor, land and capital
          markets. Addressing these priorities is needed to boost productivity in key sectors, including
          agriculture (which will release labor), manufacturing and high-end services (which would
          6 Van der Eng, Pierre (2008) ‘Capital Formation and Capital Stock in Indonesia, 1950-2007.’ Working Papers in Trade and
          Development No.24. Canberra: School of Economics, ANU College of Business and Economics, Australian National University.




                                                                      6
                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                     Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   absorb labor) and accelerate structural transformation. So far, progress in addressing these
   long-standing, well-known priorities has been uneven. Decentralization since the early 2000s
   has complicated and slowed implementation. Yet, there are a few key specific policies that can
   make a big difference in boosting growth under each of these priority areas (see Table ES1
   for a summary). These reforms will also help share prosperity more widely although specific
   additional reforms are needed to achieve that objective.

   Closing Indonesia’s infrastructure gap
   Infrastructure development in Indonesia rests on, first and foremost, improving central
   government and sub-national governments’ quality of public spending to allocate more
   funds to infrastructure. Total infrastructure investment—that is, investment by the central
   government, sub-national governments, state-owned enterprises and the private sector—has
   remained at only 3 percent to 4 percent of GDP over the past decade. This is far below the
   rates of above 7 percent of GDP before the 1997 Asian financial crisis and the 10 percent and
   7.5 percent spent by China and India, respectively.

   At the central government level, a key option to finance greater infrastructure spending
   is phasing out the large fuel subsidy spending. At 2.6 percent of GDP and 21 percent of
   the central government budget after transfers to the regions and interest payments, fuel subsidy
   spending is more than double the spending on infrastructure which stands at 1 percent of GDP
   only. A more-than-doubling of government-wide infrastructure spending (from 2.5 percent of
   GDP) can come from reducing energy subsidies (see below). Any such spending reallocation would
   however need to be accompanied by further improvements in the areas of budget planning
   and execution so as to improve absorptive capacity and ensure the quality of infrastructure
   investment management and implementation.

   At the sub-national governments, spending more on infrastructure also requires in most
   cases spending re-allocation and greater spending efficiency. Sub-national governments do
   spend more than the central government on infrastructure (1.5 percent of GDP versus 1 percent
   of GDP). But they could spend much more to improve roads, water and sanitation and health
   infrastructure (both in terms of new investments and maintenance) if their budgets were not
   tied up by excessive spending on personnel and if they could raise more revenues themselves.
   Over 40 percent of sub-national government spending is on personnel and about 90 percent
   of their budgets come from the central government (fiscal transfers). A key reform to incentive
   greater reallocation of spending to infrastructure is to improve the fiscal transfer system toward
   performance-based transfers by increasing the share of the transfers tied to spending on sectors/
   areas of national priorities.7 For the few municipalities that meet fiscal prudence and fiduciary
   risk criteria, alternative means of financing, such as PPPs, municipal bonds, and intermediary
   financing can further help finance local infrastructure.

   7 Fiscal transfers to sub-national governments are dominated by a “block grant” component (DAU) relative to transfers tied to
   special purposes. Block grant transfers are untied, facilitating excessive subnational personnel expenditure, leaving little space for
   transfers that could be tied to front-line service provider levels. In 2012, the DAU made up almost 60% of central government
   transfers to subnational governments. The specific purpose grant (DAK), allocated to certain regions with the aim of funding special
   activities of the region in accordance with national priorities, only cover 6% of these transfers and is highly fragmented (covers too
   many sectors).




                                                                    7
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                           Executive Summary




          Closing Indonesia’s infrastructure gap requires additional reforms, however. In particular,
          the following complementary reforms will be needed: (i) Strengthening project prioritization/selection
          and preparation. Today, different government agencies/Ministries have different project lists. The
          authorities might want to consider empowering one dedicated agency/ Ministry to undertake
          project selection. This can help ensure that selected projects respond to value-for-money and
          viability/ feasibility rather than just political imperatives; (ii) Strengthening the partnership between the
          public sector and private domestic and foreign investors. Private partners are needed to bridge the funding
          gap (doubling of public investment in infrastructure will only help close about half of the
          funding gap). Private investors should also be considered as key partners to improve operational
          efficiency and accountability for service delivery and; (iii) an effective implementation of the new land
          law, which, once enacted, will require good implementing regulations.8 Without faster and less conflict-
          ridden acquisition of land, implementation of infrastructure projects will remain uncertain and
          costly, discouraging private sector participation.9

          The growth payoff of greater investment in infrastructure cannot be overstated. Under-
          investment in infrastructure has been a substantial drag on Indonesia’s growth over the past
          decade.10 The consequent slow growth in the infrastructure capital stock relative to the pace
          of economic and urbanization growth has contributed to congestion problems and poor
          logistics performance, undermining productivity growth. Firm surveys show that problems
          with transportation are among the worst business constraints for urban manufacturing firms.
          In urban areas, rural producers find themselves unable to compete with imports. Thus, clearly,
          connective infrastructure development can help leverage agglomeration economies in urban
          areas and unleash the growth and productivity potential of agriculture, rural non-farm industries
          and urban manufacturing sectors. Furthermore, because one-quarter of urban populations and
          more than half of rural dwellers have poor access to transport services, improving infrastructure
          is key in enhancing well-being in Indonesia.

          Closing Indonesia’s skills gap
          Closing Indonesia’s skills gap requires enhancing the quality of education at all levels
          and the functioning of training centers. Today, two-thirds of firms complain that finding
          suitable employees for professional and managerial positions is either “difficult” or “very
          difficult”; and almost 70 percent of employers in manufacturing report finding it “very difficult”
          to fill skilled professional-level positions (engineers). There are two types of mismatch. Some
          sectors report insufficient graduates as the reason (for example, in textiles), whereas other sectors
          complain about the skills of existing graduates (for example, in rubber and plastics). Meanwhile,
          firms in Indonesia are much less likely to offer training to their employees than in other countries
          in the region. Most existing training-providers are concentrated in low-value-added areas (such
          as beauty salon and spa skills and basic computer skills). Finally, Indonesia compares unfavorably
          with other middle-income economies and East Asian neighbors in learning assessments such as

          8 Subject to the adoption of the Land Bill by the Parliament and its enactment.
          9 As discussed in Chapter 4 and 6, a land bill, currently being discussed at the Parliament, is expected to facilitate access to land for
          public purposes.
          10 If Indonesia’s real infrastructure capital stock had growth by 5 percent annually over 2001-11 versus the actual growth rate of 3
          percent it is estimated that annual real GDP growth would have been 0.5 percentage points higher. See the October 2013 Indonesia
          Economic Quarterly for further details.




                                                                              8
                                                                                                    Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                   Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   PISA. For instance, 15-year-old students in Indonesia have learning levels far below their peers in
   Vietnam, even though per-capita income is higher. To expand workers’ entry into manufacturing
   and high-end services (e.g. finance, business services, communications, etc.)—again crucial for
   productivity growth—these issues need to be addressed.

   Public policy has so far focused on access/enrollment. Thanks to strong government
   commitment, Indonesia will probably boast one of the largest numbers of college-goers in the
   world in years to come.11 Over the past five years, the labor force with tertiary and secondary
   levels of education has increased by more than 1 million and more than 2 million annually,
   respectively. If recent trends in enrollment continue, the number of Indonesians with tertiary
   education can more than double in the next decade.12

   Thus, going forward the focus should be on equipping graduates and workers with the
   right technical and employer-valued behavioral skills (discipline, reliability, teamwork
   and leadership) to support/enable large investments in key sectors. This requires a three-
   pronged reform strategy. First, improve the quality of basic education to build a stronger base of
   cognitive skills necessary to acquire the higher-level skills that will be needed by the workforce.
   How? A single key measure that could significantly support this is to strengthen the quality assurance
   system by ensuring that quality assessments are followed-up on and education institutions
   implement identified corrective actions.

   However, even if the educational system could be perfected instantly, the first graduates
   would only join the workforce in about 10-20 years’ time. It is therefore essential to find
   short and medium-term solutions for the current skills constraints: the second and third prongs
   of the strategy are thus improving the relevance of feeders into the labor market (technical
   and vocational education, and tertiary education) and upgrading the skills of the existing
   workforce (reform of the training system). Improving the relevance of vocational and tertiary
   education calls for (i) supplying students and graduates with more information on labor market
   opportunities (most graduates chose the public sector whereas return to tertiary education in
   many parts of the private sector is higher than in the public sector), and (ii) making the tertiary
   and vocational education more responsive to the market’s needs. Improving the relevance of the training
   system, on the other hand, requires creating more training institutions to deliver relevant training and
   specific skills in higher value-added, strategic sectors (textiles, food products, other key manufacturing
   branches and higher-end services).

   The growth payoff of skills development is large, if difficult to quantify. Because more
   than 60 percent of Indonesian firms report that skills are a constraint, relaxing this constraint
   will help them expand and become more competitive.13 Today the majority of tertiary graduates
   work in the public sector. Going forward, skills development is likely to increase the flow of
   graduates employable in the private sector where the focus is arguably more on specific skills
   than diplomas (contrary to the public sector). This could thus increase aggregate productivity
   11 The Constitution mandates that 20% of the budget should be allocated to education.
   12 The Government’s objective is to provide universal access to senior secondary education through a compulsory 12 years of
   education and to double enrollment in higher education by 2020. The share of individuals with tertiary education in the labor force
   stood at 8% in 2012.
   13 The importance of human capital in and of itself to economic growth has been much stressed in the endogenous growth theory
   literature, starting with Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988).




                                                                   9
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                    Executive Summary




          and growth through “within sector” productivity growth (e.g. workers in manufacturing and
          high-end services equipped with more skills) and/or labor movement from low-end services to
          manufacturing (e.g. worker from low-end services moving to manufacturing thanks to adequate
          training). Developing skills should also help Indonesia leverage the opportunities to increase
          middle-class demand and withstand competition from ASEAN partners. Without the right skill
          sets among those entering the workforce, imports may remain more competitive than domestic
          production in satisfying the demand for higher quality products and services from Indonesia’s
          growing middle-class.

          Improving the functioning of markets
          Enhancing productivity growth through structural change or within sectors in Indonesia
          requires improving the functioning of product, labor, capital and land markets. 14 As
          regards product markets (or sectors), even as Indonesia implements reforms to reduce
          administrative and regulatory barriers and facilitate investment and licensing in some sectors,
          ad-hoc policy-making protectionist measures are increasing uncertainty for businesses and
          sending mixed signals to investors. For instance, a number of sector-specific laws and measures
          announced recently are either inconsistent with previous laws or create confusion about the
          direction of reforms (e.g. conflicts between the horticulture law versus the investment law).
          The new industry and trade laws provide ministerial authorities with new, sweeping authority
          to intervene in the market, increasing uncertainty and exposing the economy to rent-seeking
          activities. In the mining sector, irrespective of how the new regulation banning exports
          of mineral ores is ultimately applied, the repeated shifts have increased uncertainty.15 The
          Government’s recent approach in trying to move up the value chain is to legislate and regulate
          first, then negotiate with private actors whose investments are needed to realize the government’s
          objective. This approach contrasts with the one adopted in most successful countries, where
          sound analysis and a strong partnership with the private sector in identifying and coordinating
          the needed investments and other industry-specific needs were used as a first step.

          Going forward, to successfully upgrade the country’s industries, a consistent industrial
          strategy elaborated in partnership with the private sector is needed. Such industrial policy
          could usefully reflect lessons from industrial policy around the world. In particular, a coordinated
          approach to identifying and removing binding constraints such as sector-specific infrastructure,
          skills and institutional support is needed. To ensure adequate implementation, a key option is
          to strengthen the quality of the policy formation process for economic policies and regulations.
          Some countries have done this by empowering one ministry or government agencies to play the
          function of “policy integrator” (i.e. create a so-called “Center of Government”).16. A strengthened
          policy formation process should help address genuine concerns of Indonesians that the public
          interest be protected, and should enable the Government to push back against more narrow
          rent-seeking activities and self-centered business interests. This is all the more important

          14 The land market is also very important for public and private investment. A comprehensive land law, currently being discussed by
          the Parliament, is expected to address some of the key issues that have constrained investments in recent years. See Chapter 4.
          15 Under the new Mining Law of 2009 and its implementing regulation issued in 2012, the export of unprocessed minerals was
          to be banned completely. The Government issued conflicting statements about the application of this ban, adding to the sense of
          regulatory uncertainty across all sectors.
          16 See specific recommendations in the “implementation” section below




                                                                         10
                                                                                                      Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                    Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   given that Transparency International (TI) rates Indonesian law courts, local governments and
   politicians poorly in terms of the corruption perception index (in 2012, TI ranked Indonesia
   100 out of 183 countries reviewed). In addition to strengthening policy formation, the pursuit
   of ongoing reforms spearheaded by BKPM to facilitate investments and business licensing would help
   Indonesia attract more investment in higher value-added sectors.

   The labor market. For Indonesia’s labor market to support workers’ mobility and
   structural transformation, a revision of the severance pay provision of the labor law will
   be needed. The labor Law enacted in 2003 significantly improved workers’ rights and made
   hiring more flexible. However, the provision of the law mandating that severance pay should
   be at least 100 weeks of wages is an example of a well-intentioned provision that has led to a
   “lose-lose” outcome. The majority of companies adjust to the high severance pay provision
   by either not formally signing a contract for workers or resorting to short-term contracts (80
   percent of workers do not have a formal contract). The fewer formal companies that abide by
   the Law have to deposit cash accrual for severance pay in an escrow account to be able to pay
   for the severance if they decide to fire their workers. At the same time, when a worker decides to
   voluntarily quit a company, only a part of the severance accrued is paid. In 2011, only 7 percent
   of dismissed workers received full severance pay. Thus, the severance pay neither protects
   workers nor encourages formal employment. As a result, for instance, workers leaving farm or
   rural non-farm activities are stuck into slightly higher but still low-productivity informal sectors.
   Revising the severance pay provision of the labor Law could significantly improve the functioning of the
   labor market.

   The minimum wage setting process is another critical labor market issue to tackle in
   improving the functioning of the labor market. Since 2011, there is a significant departure
   from the moderate pace in minimum wage increases observed over most of the past decade.
   In 2012, 25 Provinces increased their minimum wage by an average 30 percent and Jakarta
   increased it by 44 percent. While workers in Jakarta see these increases as “normal” given the
   cost of living in this metropolitan area, in the absence of commensurate labor productivity
   increases, Indonesia’s competitiveness and firms’ capacity and incentive to create jobs in the
   formal sectors are reduced. Perhaps even more problematic is the uncertainty of the minimum
   wage setting process, which can encourage firms to replace labor by capital when they make their
   investment/ expansion decisions.17 To support formal job creation and structural transformation,
   consultations between employers, workers and the Government in view of adopting new
   minimum wage setting formula based on cost of living, inflation and productivity (as mandated by a recent
   Presidential guidance) is crucial.18

   Capital markets. There is ample evidence that enterprises in Indonesia are credit
   constrained (IMF 2012). Firms, to a large extent, tend to rely more on retained earnings than
   on bank credit for the expansion of their activities, which in turn means that current cash flow
   17 The minimum wage-setting process is complex. Negotiations and final agreements take place at the province and sectoral
   level (and often at the district and sub-sector level), making communication and compliance with new formula-based adjustments
   more difficult. More generally, ensuring the compliance of firms and employers to minimum wage regulations is not easy, and
   requires monitoring and coordination at the central level, between the Ministry of Manpower and relevant ministries for effective
   implementation, as well as between central and local governments and relevant actors (District Governors and Wage Councils).
   18 Because the minimum wage in some Provinces is far below the minimum cost of living, an adjustment mechanism can be
   introduced in the formula to gradually bring the minimum wage to the cost of living.




                                                                   11
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                               Executive Summary




          becomes the major factor in investment decisions. This has significant implications for the types
          of investments taking place in the economy, particularly in young and innovative firms that
          usually have negative cash flows in the early stages of operation, and need bank or non-bank
          financing to grow and create high quality jobs.

          The credit constraint faced by firms reflects the lack of depth of Indonesia’s financial
          market. The financial sector is dominated by banks (78 percent of assets) and its claims to the
          private sector stand at only 35 percent compared to close to 100 percent on average for Malaysia,
          Thailand and the Philippines. Capital markets are thin with corporate domestic debt securities
          (outstanding) accounting for less than 5 percent of GDP, similar to Thailand and the Philippines
          but much lower than the 45 percent for Malaysia. Pension fund assets are also relatively low
          compared to the size of the economy (5 percent compared to 10-15 percent in the Philippines
          and Thailand and 40 percent in Malaysia).

          A part of the shallowness of Indonesia’s financial market will be difficult to overcome
          because it reflects deep risk aversion behavior. For instance, following the 1997-98 financial
          crisis, both savers and investors moved into the shorter end of the maturity spectrum. Insurance,
          investment funds, and corporate bonds issuance, for example, have grown in recent years but
          still do not contribute significantly to the pool of domestic long-term savings and investments.19
          Public policy can nudge the system toward greater financial depth. For instance, the development
          of the corporate bond market appears particularly constrained by strict investment requirements, high
          underwriting costs and weaknesses in the execution regime. International experience emphasizes
          the role of building a credible legal system that allows for the effective enforcement of contracts and
          property rights and provides investor protection. Financial contracts are defined and made more
          or less effective by legal rights and enforcement mechanisms. From this perspective, improving
          Indonesia’s legal system would facilitate the operations of markets and intermediaries. This
          relates to improving the quality of the business environment more broadly, as financial sector actors, just
          as investors themselves, need a minimum level of certainty when making long-term financing
          decisions.

          Land market. Land is at the center of a large number of socio-economic issues in Indonesia,
          including infrastructure development, urban development, mining and forestry resource
          management, environment degradation, conflicts, etc. Looking at how land markets intermediate
          all these issues is beyond the scope of this report.20 From a growth perspective, it is notable
          that a lack of clarity in regulations governing land acquisition for public purposes
          has caused major delays to infrastructure projects, particularly toll roads. This is in part due
          to the imprecision of the rules and procedures of a 2005 Presidential Regulation on Land
          Acquisition for Infrastructure Development in the face of a complex problem (although land
          tenure is characterized by a state control over land, but parallel, traditional systems subsist
          and enforcement is weak). Legitimate or illegitimate landowners frequently hold onto their
          land to benefit from an appreciation in value or enhance their negotiating power. Investors in
          infrastructure, public or private, have to overcome this hurdle before shovels hit the ground,
          leading to higher costs and significant delays.
          19 A significant share of high-wealth savers have actually chosen to intermediate their resources offshore.
          20 For a comprehensive review of the land sector in Indonesia, see World Bank (2014 –forthcoming): Towards Indonesian Land
          Reforms: Challenges and Opportunities.




                                                                       12
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                       Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   A new land Law is expected to improve the clarity and transparency of land acquisition
   for public purpose. Drawing on the lessons from the 2005 regulation, the new draft land
   Law is more specific and can significantly improve the procedures for acquiring land for public
   infrastructure.21 Areas of significant improvement include the setting of clearer guidelines for
   land valuation, the mechanisms for grievances, the compensation for affected or displaced
   individuals and of clear timeframe for each step in the process.22 For instance, the new regulation
   provides specifics about the inventory of affected people and assets, the consultation process,
   the compensation, and the dispute settlement. It also sets a specific timeframe for each of the
   acquisition stages and sub-stages, including the maximum time that a court may take to resolve
   disputes related to land acquisition. If well enacted and well implemented (i.e., with good implementing
   regulations and enforcement), the new land Law should help.

   The pay-off for reforming product and factor markets is large. Well-functioning product,
   labor, financial and land markets are critical drivers of productivity growth and are central to
   the overall efficiency and competitiveness of the economy. These markets act as a lubricant
   allowing the expansion of individual sectors and the movement of resources across sectors. In
   Indonesia, along with infrastructure and skills development, they determine whether resources
   (workers, talent and capital) can move to higher productivity sectors or remain bottled up
   in low-productivity uses. Although reforms of product and factor markets (in particular the
   labor market) are difficult and politically sensitive, they yield high payoffs for ordinary citizens.
   Realizing Indonesia’s growth potential hinges in part on making the product and factor markets
   function better.

   What policy priorities to ensure that prosperity is shared more widely?
   Indonesia’s public policy challenge is not only to support policies that generate
   prosperity. Another challenge facing policymakers is that of sharing prosperity more widely.
   Indeed, a large number of households classified as non-poor in terms of income/consumption
   are poor in many other dimensions, including access to decent housing, transportation, water,
   sanitation, health and education. At the same time, despite Indonesia’s success in reducing
   poverty, the slowing pace of progress in recent years and high vulnerability remain a concern.
   Finally, Indonesia’s hard-fought poverty reduction outcomes are constantly under threat, due to
   the country’s vulnerability to natural disasters such as earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions,
   floods, landslides and forest fires. The report discusses three key priority areas to address these
   challenges.

   Improving local access to services for all
   For the poor, the vulnerable and some in the middle-class, higher income and prosperity
   will not translate fully into enhanced living standards if access to key services is not
   improved. The hopes placed on decentralization reforms to improve public services delivery
   21 A Presidential Regulation No. 71/2012 sets the institutional arrangements for implementing the law.
   22 In 2012, the GoI issued several pieces of legislation relating to land acquisition to be carried out for projects of public purpose
   (Law No. 2/2012 in January 2012; Presidential Regulation No. 71/2012 in August 2012; and technical guidelines issued by the
   relevant ministries). These replaced previous presidential regulations that had been unable to support accelerated infrastructure
   development in Indonesia while ensuring that people affected by the negative impacts of associated land acquisition were adequately
   protected. Pursuant to Law No. 2/2012, Presidential Regulation No. 36/05 as amended is valid until 31 December 2014. The new
   legislations procedure applies to the acquisition of land under the authority and control of the National Land Agency. If land
   needed is under the authority of other ministries such as Ministry of Forestry, then before such land can be dealt with under the new
   legislations procedure, it must be released from forest zoning pursuant to applicable forestry legislation or other relevant legislation
   like mining, natural gas, etc.


                                                                    13
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                     Executive Summary




          have yet to materialize. Regional autonomy has indeed failed to deliver the improvements in local
          public services that were expected when launched in 2001, despite substantial resource transfers
          to subnational governments. Transfers to sub-national governments now make up approximately
          one-half of the state budget, net of subsidies and interest payments (about 6 percent of GDP),
          and over 80 percent of this amount accrues to subnational governments at the lowest level—
          kabupaten/kota. Nevertheless, the quality of services remains problematic (as detailed in
          chapter 7, Indonesia’s indicators in the areas of sanitation, water, health, electricity are below the
          level expected from a G-20 member, below East Asia Pacific’s middle-income average and below
          the ambitions of the authorities).

          Improving service delivery requires strengthening accountability through both demand-
          side and supply-side measures. International experience reveals that weak accountability and
          poor local public services go hand in hand. Accountability in this context comprises two separate
          dimensions: (i) a demand by citizens for improvements to service quality, and (ii) a response by
          local governments to meet constituents’ demands. Addressing the poor performance of local
          service providers will require measures focused on each dimension. A variety of approaches can
          be helpful for improving citizen engagement. These include sharing information about public
          service quality with local citizens (open data), including comparative studies of one locality
          with other similar ones. In the context of Indonesia, strengthening of community-driven programs,
          which have a strong demand-side accountability component, can help. From the perspective
          of service providers (supply-side) there are a number of constraints imposed by the current
          funding mechanisms that inhibit performance. First, there is a one-size fits all approach in the
          intergovernmental finance system, despite the diversity of issues faced by regions in Indonesia.
          The uniform treatment of heterogeneous subnational units in policy design and implementation
          is a problem for the proper resourcing of provinces and districts. Large municipalities, small-
          and medium-sized cities, and rural districts are all treated more or less equivalently from a fiscal
          point of view. Furthermore, perverse incentives in the grant allocation system have encouraged
          spending on salaries and administration at the expense of a more balanced use of resources that
          promotes service delivery outcomes. Thus, two reform options might be considered: (i) amending
          the central government transfer system to increase the proportion of local governments’ budgets tied to
          specific sectors and front line-services and (ii) clarifying the roles and responsibilities of different levels of
          government while refocusing the bureaucracy to be accountable for results (see below the “implementation”
          section).

          Strengthening social protection
          Indonesia’s social security system is set to undergo significant transformations. Indeed,
          universal social insurance is legally mandated for health (by 2014) and employment (by 2015)
          under the 2004 National Social Security Law and the 2011 Social Security Administrators
          Law. These ambitions have fiscal implications as they require increases in public health and social
          assistance spending. Given its income level, expenditure on health and social assistance is very low
          in Indonesia compared with other countries. In 2013, total (central and subnational) public
          health expenditure was estimated to be only 0.9 percent of GDP and central government social
          assistance 0.7 percent of GDP. While Indonesia has financing options to accommodate the
          additional spending (see “financing option” section below), whether the desired results will be
          obtained will crucially depend on the quality of implementation. To be effective and sustainable, the




                                                                 14
                                                                                                    Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                  Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   system will require appropriate benefit levels, sound fiscal risk management, sound institutional
   development and management, and non-contributory coverage of the poor and vulnerable,
   while at the same time collecting contributions from those who can afford to pay. But this
   transformative reform requires above all strong leadership for effective implementation due to
   the large number of stakeholders with diverging interests and the significant potential impact on
   the state budget, the labor market and the macro economy.

   Alongside social insurance, strengthening existing social assistance programs is the
   other essential component of a comprehensive social protection framework. Indonesia
   needs to reform current programs, fill in existing gaps, and integrate the programs into a
   system—all of which will increase the quality of spending and the impact of social assistance
   programs. Again, leadership and coordination will be crucial. Central government social
   spending is currently distributed among roughly 12 ministries, 22 programs, and 87 activities.
   In order to ensure services are delivered appropriately, the Government might want to continue
   its efforts to eliminate fragmentation and duplication across programs. The oversight and coordination
   under National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (TNP2K) has played a crucial
   role in devising the poverty assistance strategy, integrating poverty programs and coordinating
   implementation with various ministries. Going forward, a unified oversight and coordination model will
   continue to be crucial for effective implementation irrespective of the form of institutional arrangement setup.

   Managing natural disaster risks, building resilience
   Safeguarding hard-fought poverty reduction and social protection progress in Indonesia
   calls for continuously enhancing the management of disaster risks and further building
   resilience. Indonesia is situated in one of the world’s most active disaster zones, prone to
   earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, floods, landslides and forest fires. The increase in
   population and assets exposed to natural disasters in recent years, combined with the rise in the
   number and intensity of hydro-meteorological events resulting from climate change, may further
   increase the economic and human impact of natural disasters. According to a global risk analysis
   by the World Bank23, Indonesia is among the top 35 countries that have high mortality risks from
   multiple hazards. About 40 percent of the population is at risk, that is, more than 90 million
   lives.

   At the same time, Indonesia’s cities’ resilience to natural disasters has weakened due
   to the rapid construction of physical assets in urban areas and weak enforcement of
   building codes and zoning regulations. Indonesia’s capital, Jakarta, is particularly exposed,
   with urbanization-induced land subsidence posing a bigger threat to the metropolitan area than
   climate change associated with rising sea levels. The non-compliance with building codes and
   zoning regulations, and the occupation of dedicated drainage “open” spaces, have not only made
   Jakarta and many other Indonesian cities more vulnerable to natural disasters but also created
   new hazards such as seawater inundation in low-lying coastal areas and flooding.

   23 See World Bank, Natural Disaster Hotspots, A Global Risk Analysis (Washington, DC: Disaster Risk Management Series, 2005),
   table 1.2. For a comprehensive review of disaster risks in the EAP region and policy options, see Abhas K. Jha and Zuzana Stanton-
   Geddes, Editors (2012): Strong, Safe, and Resilient A Strategic Policy Guide for Disaster Risk Management in East Asia and the
   Pacific. World Bank




                                                                  15
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                              Executive Summary




          The rapid expansion in the physical assets of cities requires both a credible regulatory
          framework and a healthy market to accompany the economic dynamism with preventive
          and risk-management investments. Priority reform options include: (i) a national program on
          hazardous micro-zoning providing detailed instruments for incorporating resilience into site design
          and construction standards; (ii) financing framework for both urban, housing and property
          development that incentivizes investment with built-in resilience linked to disaster insurance;
          and (iii) a national program on urban upgrading and ecosystem rehabilitation to increase the resilience of
          existing settlement and urban infrastructure.

          Financing options for the reform agenda
          What are the options available to finance the significant expansion in infrastructure,
          health and social assistance spending advocated by this report? Indonesia faces
          considerable and inter-related challenges in improving the quality of its spending mix to meet
          its development goals. Solid growth of revenues and spending in recent years, and achievement
          of small fiscal deficits and the debt-ratio reduction, mask two key challenges for Indonesia’s
          fiscal sector. First, relative to total output, both revenues and expenditures have in fact fallen
          since 2001, to about 15.7 percent and 18.1 percent of GDP in 2013, respectively—both at the
          low end for middle-income countries. This suggests that there is scope for Indonesia to increase
          the public sector’s share of total expenditures (absorption), making it feasible for Indonesia to
          increase the spending on key developmental priorities such as infrastructure, health and social
          assistance. Second, the quality of the spending mix has been reduced by high spending on energy
          subsidies, which have limited the Government’s ability to increase budget allocations towards
          more beneficial forms of spending, especially in infrastructure and social sectors.

           “Business as usual” fiscal projections: limited fiscal space for spending priorities
          Macro and fiscal projections have been developed for the next national medium-term
          plan (RPJMN) period: 2015-19 (see Table ES2, section 1 at the end of the ES). Assuming
          a base-case GDP growth scenario of 5.5 percent-5.8 percent per annum and a “business as
          usual” situation with no significant fiscal reforms or shocks, total revenues and expenditures
          are projected to remain fairly constant during this period at 16.5 percent-16.7 percent of
          GDP and 18.4 percent-18.6 percent of GDP, respectively. This results in a fiscal deficit of 2.1
          percent of GDP in 2015, which gradually declines to 1.7 percent of GDP by 2019. Keeping the
          deficit within the fiscal rule of maximum 2.5 percent of GDP, the amount of fiscal space for
          spending priorities will be very limited, especially if additional baseline expenditure pressures
          emerge. Potential sources of pressures include external shocks (e.g., oil price increase and
          rupiah depreciation on subsidy spending), as well as domestic policy developments such as
          the implementation of SJSN (risk of actual costs being higher than those currently estimated),
          implementation of the new village law and the rollout of bureaucracy reform at the subnational
          level. In addition, lower-than-expected growth could reduce revenues.

          Reforms required to increase fiscal space: taxes, personnel spending and fuel subsidies
          There are at least three major options that could significantly increase the available fiscal
          space. On the revenue side, Indonesia could embark on a “big push” to increase tax revenues as
          a share of GDP by improving tax administration and compliance, as well as increasing excise tax
          on tobacco (which will have additional public health benefits). Second, growth in average central




                                                             16
                                                                                                     Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                   Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   and subnational personnel spending could be tempered to grow in line with inflation rather than
   at 5 percent to 8 percent above inflation in recent years. Lastly, fuel subsidies could be phased
   out by 2019. Section 2 of Table 1 provides an indication of the potential annual gains from all
   of these measures, relative to the baseline through 2019. Fully phasing out fuel subsidies by 2019
   would free up 2 percent of GDP per year by 2019. Tax measures to increase compliance such as
   implementing fully third-party reporting and improving data matching could increase revenues
   by nearly 1.5 percent of GDP per year by 2019, while increasing excise tax on tobacco to 70
   percent would increase revenues by 0.5 percent of GDP per year by 2019. Maintaining central
   and subnational personnel spending flat in real terms would free up 1.4 percent of GDP per
   year by 2019. All together, these measures have the potential to expand the available fiscal space
   by 1.1 percent of GDP in 2015, rising to 5.3 percent of GDP by 2019 (see Section 2 of Table
   ES2).24

   Spending priorities: increasing infrastructure, health and social assistance spending
   Phasing out fuel subsidies combined with either tax reform or efforts to control personnel
   spending could allow Indonesia to double its spending on infrastructure, health and social
   assistance (Section 3 of Table 1). Indonesia can double its total infrastructure spending in real
   terms and increase it to 4.4 percent of GDP by 2019, with additional financing of just 0.3
   percent of GDP in 2015, rising to 1.9 percent of GDP by 2019.

   To close half of the gap to the international norm of public health spending per capita25
   by the end of the RPJMN period, Indonesia needs to increase health spending to 2.4
   percent of GDP by 2019 (from 0.9 percent of GDP in 2013). Social assistance spending
   should increase to 1 percent of GDP from 2015 onwards to accommodate the costs of SJSN
   health, as well as enable expansion of poverty programs. Increasing spending on health and
   social assistance would require additional financing of 0.4 percent of GDP in 2015, rising to 1.6
   percent of GDP by 2019.

   The total additional financing requirement for these three spending priorities is 0.6
   percent of GDP in 2015, rising to 3.6 percent of GDP by 2019. This could be met through a
   combination of the fiscal space options outlined in Section 2—for example through the phasing-
   out of fuel subsidies plus tax reforms or a concerted effort to control personnel spending.26
   Indonesia is fortunate in having real options to meet the challenge of financing an ambitious
   expansion of pro-development spending.

   The Challenge of Implementation: What Can Be Done?
   The public administration plays an important role in delivering both the regulatory legal
   environment and services vital for a prosperous and equitable state. As the economy
   grows, the administration has to be responsive in providing sound regulations to support
   investment and to deliver core infrastructure and services for the needs of individuals and
   24 This discussion focuses on the opportunities that could be created by redirecting spending and boosting revenue collection, but
   these are not the only options. For example, subject to debt sustainability considerations, Indonesia could also evaluate increasing
   deficit spending.
   25 Predicted average of all countries at the same income level (GDP per capita) as Indonesia
   26 These figures are conservative in the sense that they exclude potential positive feedback loops from higher development spending
   to GDP growth and revenues, as well as gains from increasing efficiency.




                                                                  17
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                           Executive Summary




          companies – including roads, health care, education, physical security, environmental safety, etc.
          However, some of the systems and practices within the public administration that have been
          part of Indonesia’s development process over the past decades will not serve its future needs
          and could undermine future growth. Attention needs to be given to realign and refocus the core
          institutions of government to support a modern and rapidly developing economy.

          In spite of the substantial changes in the roles and responsibilities of the public
          institutions since 1998, many of the core elements of the pre-1998 era remain. For
          instance, MENPAN&RB continues to control the administrative apparatus and while there are
          now multiple stakeholders formulating and implementing policy at both the national and sub-
          national level there are no effective coordination mechanisms across government. The outcome
          has been poor delivery of services by government institutions, inconsistent policy settings across
          sectors, and a lack of responsiveness of the administration to the priorities of the government
          and citizens. The failure to adapt old institutional arrangements and policies to reflect the new
          environment is an impediment to the effectiveness of the public administration, and poses a
          threat to Indonesia’s future ambitions.

          To support a rapidly developing economy attention needs to be given to refocusing the public
          administration to establish:
          •	 A stronger Center of Government to manage the policy process and resolve policy conflicts.
          •	 Streamlined bureaucracy for enhanced accountability.
          •	 More strategic management of human resources across the public administration
          •	 Better planning and budgeting procedures to deliver improved results with public spending
          •	 Stronger accountability for service delivery at the local level

          These reforms are notoriously difficult to implement. However, given their costs to the
          economy and to citizens and the country’s ambitions, Indonesia cannot afford not to consider
          decisively implementing some of these in the short-term (low-hanging fruits). Perhaps the most
          urgent one is the need of a stronger Center of Government. In 2004 OECD/Sigma provided
          an outline of some of the core functions one would expect in an effective CoG.27 Those
          functions include: (i) policy document review: quality assurance; inter-ministry mediation; (ii)
          monitoring government performance; (iii) coordination of horizontal policies/priorities; (iv)
          legal conformity of draft laws; (v) communication with media and public and (vi) coordinating
          with other branches of the state.

          In Indonesia several different institutions, starting with the Presidential Administration,
          play some role in the coordination of policies including the three Coordinating
          Ministries, the Ministry of Finance, Bappenas, ManPAN, the Vice President’s office,
          the delivery units (UKP4 and TPN2k) and others. However, this fragmentation of CoG
          roles and functions is not serving Indonesia well. On the contrary, ministries have been able to
          implement new policies and regulations that conflict with other regulations. Policy management
          is also more difficult because of the challenges to coordinate separate planning and budgeting
          processes for different parts of the budget. In the future, Indonesian authorities may want to
          27 SIGMA Paper 35: Coordination at the Centre of Government: The Functions and Organization of the Government Office
          (OECD; Paris, 2004).




                                                                    18
                                                                                     Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   consider how to refine the mandates and functions of the various institutions that support the
   CoG, and to empower the President’s Office (or its designate) or another institution to play a
   stronger role in managing the policy process.

   The Stakes: Reform Payoff and the Cost of No Reform
   Indonesia needs to grow above 5 percent to avoid serious unemployment problems. First,
   the population of working age is projected to increase significantly in the next 10 years before
   peaking as a share of the total population around 2025. Most of the additional 14.8 million
   individuals that will join the population of working age by 2020 will seek jobs and absorbing
   them will require fast economic growth. Based on the sensitivity of employment to growth for
   the period 1990-2012, if Indonesia grows by 6.5 percent annually the country would create 12.4
   million new jobs by 2020. This compares favorably with the employment creation if the country
   grows by only 5 percent per annum: 10.2 more million jobs by 2020. Thus, the difference
   between growing by 5.0 percent and 6.5 percent is a significant 2.2 million jobs over the eight
   years, which is significant.

   Looking longer term, faster economic growth (than 5 percent) is also required if
   Indonesia is to climb the income ladder and position itself well to become a high-
   income economy before starting to get old. For Indonesia to reach high-income status by
   2030—i.e. a per-capita income of US$12,000—it will need to grow by some 9 percent annually
   over the next 16 years.28 Short of this exceptionally high rate of growth, growing at least above
   the current 5 percent-6 percent “trend” growth would be required to position the country well
   to escape a middle-income trap. The income per capita of Singapore, South Korea, Japan and
   Hong Kong all were above $12,000 when the population of these countries started to age. For
   Indonesia, it will take a really fast growth to realize that. Fortunately, the country can do it, with
   the implementation of the serious reforms outlined above.

   Figure ES 3: Income per capita reached by several countries when their demographic dividend
   ended, versus Indonesia (2030)
                    GDP per capita (constant 2012 USD)                                         Assuming
     30,000                                                                                    10 percent
                                                                                   Assuming    real GDP
                                                                       24,218
     25,000                                                                        6 percent   growth
                                         20,017                                    real GDP    2013-2030
     20,000                                                                        growth
                                                                                   2013-2030     16,618
                                                         14,274
     15,000         12,424

     10,000                                                                        8,531

      5,000
                     1982                 1970             2000          1991        2030          2030
          0
                 Hong Kong                Japan          Korea, Rep    Singapore   Indonesia    Indonesia




    28 Using constant 2013 US dollars.




                                                                  19
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                     Executive Summary




          Structure of the report
          The report is structured around 3 parts and 9 chapters. In Part 1, the report looks back and
          analyzes the key drivers of Indonesia’s economic transformation in the past decade (chapter 1)
          and its social consequences (chapter 2). The second part of the report, composed of 4 chapters,
          starts by laying out a framework for analyzing Indonesia’s journey to high-income status, taking
          into account (chapter 3). This chapter highlights the opportunities and risks that will shape
          economic prospects but also the growth strategy, policy priorities and institutional reforms that
          could help Indonesia realize Indonesia’s aspirations. Then chapters 4, 5 and 6 elaborate on the
          policy reform areas and priorities to boost prosperity, namely closing Indonesia’s infrastructure
          and skills gaps (chapter 4 and 5 respectively) and improving the functioning of product and
          factor markets (chapter 6). The last part of the report discusses in some details the policy
          priorities to share prosperity more widely: quality service delivery for all (chapter 7), enhanced
          social protection (chapter 8) and improved resilience and management of natural disaster risks.

          Annex Table ES 1: Summary of key suggested policy reform options
              Development aim            Suggested policy options                        Evidence, salient facts
                                                Enhancing productivity growth
           Closing infrastructure gap Increase total public sector infra-     Phasing out fuel subsidy alone could fully
                                      structure spending from 2.5 percent finance this increase (would free up 2% of
                                      of GDP in 2013 to 4.5 percent by GDP)
                                      2019
                                      Improve the fiscal transfer to sub-     The DAK share in total transfers is small
                                      national government to encourage        (only 7 percent) and is highly fragmented
                                      investment in infrastructure
                                      Alternative means of financing for      Large municipalities miss this opportunity;
                                      the municipalities that are ready       but safeguard measures needed to reduce
                                                                              fiscal risks
                                      Strengthening project prioritization/ Multiple agencies and Ministries draft
                                      selection and preparation               project lists; value-for-money/feasibility
                                                                              often absent
                                      Strengthening the partnership be-       Private sector is often just expected to take
                                      tween the public and private sector     up pre-selected projects and finance it.
                                      Effective implementation of the new Once enacted, the Law will require good
                                      land law                                implementing regulations
           Close skills gap           Strengthen the education quality        Quality assessments are not followed-up
                                      assurance system by acting on quality on and corrective actions not effectively
                                      assessments                             implemented
                                      Provide more information to students Occupational choice of graduates depends
                                      on labor market opportunities           on the information on job opportunities
                                      Make tertiary and vocational educa- Skills shortages and mismatches persist in
                                      tion more responsive to the market’s part because the system is not responsive
                                      needs                                   to markets
                                      Create more training institutions to Most training centers are in low productiv-
                                      deliver relevant training and specific ity sectors (spas, beauty salons, etc.).
                                      skills in higher value-added, strategic
                                      sectors




                                                                 20
                                                                                          Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                     Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Improve market functioning
      •	 Product markets            Create a strong “Center of Govern-   Policy and regulatory inconsistency reflect
                                    ment”                                weak policy integration/ brokerage
                                    Continue simplification of invest-   Time to obtain licenses varies by districts
                                    ment procedures, incl. licensing     and sectors; investment facilitation helps
                                                                         investors
      •	 Labor market               Revise the severance pay provision ofSeverance pay neither protection workers
                                    the labor Law following consultation nor encourage formal employment
                                    with relevant stakeholders
                                    Adopt a new minimum wage setting Uncertainty around minimum wage setting
                                    formula based on cost of living,      undermines formal employment
                                    inflation and encourage use of
                                    productivity for wage raises
      •	 Capital market             Identify specific measures to develop More analysis needed to pinpoint specific
                                    of the corporate bond market          measures to support this
                                    Build a more credible legal system to More analysis needed to pinpoint specific
                                    secure financial contracts            measures to support this
      •	 Land market                Effective implementation of the new The new land law addresses some of the
                                    land Law                              key issues related to land acquisition
                                              Sharing prosperity more widely
    Quality local service for all   Support demand-side accountability There is evidence that open data initiatives
                                    (user empowerment)                    and partnership with change agents works
                                    Improve the fiscal transfer to sub-   The large block grant component encour-
                                    national government to encourage      ages personal and admin spending
                                    front line service delivery
                                    Refocus the bureaucracy to be ac-     The focus is almost exclusively on compli-
                                    countable for results                 ance
                                    Clarifying roles and responsibilities There are overlaps and coordination
                                    of different levels of government     failures
    Strengthen social protection    Increase public health spending from Tax measures and tempered growth in per-
                                    0.9 percent of GDP in 2013 to 2.4 sonal spending free up enough revenues to
                                    percent of GDP by 2019                finance it
                                    Leadership and high quality imple- International experience supports this
                                    mentation of SJSN
                                    Increase social assistance spending   Tax measures and tempered growth in per-
                                    from 0.7 percent of GDP in 2013 sonal spending free up enough revenues to
                                    to 1 percent of GDP from 2015         finance it
                                    onwards
                                    Expand proven poverty programs        See related evidence in chapters 2 and 8
                                    (e.g. PKH), reform the ineffective
                                    ones (e.g. RASKIN) and fill in
                                    coverage gaps through pilots (e.g.,
                                    elderly, disabled, early childhood,
                                    workfare)
                                    Keep a unified oversight and coordi- Given large number of Ministries and
                                    nation model for effective implemen- agency implementing, a unique umbrella
                                    tation of poverty program             “broker” is needed to ensure consistency
                                                                          and effectiveness



                                                            21
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                  Executive Summary




           Disaster risk management,   Establish a national program on      Needed for greater resilience of site design
           building resilience         hazardous micro-zoning               and construction standards
                                       Put in place a financing framework Needed to incentivize disaster insurance
                                       for housing and property development
                                       Establish a national program on      To increase resilience of existing settle-
                                       urban upgrading and ecosystem        ments and urban infrastructure (green
                                       rehabilitation                       growth)
                                                   Financing option initiatives
           Infrastructure develop-     •	 Remove fuel subsidy for           Phasing out fuel subsidies would free up 2
           ment                            premium & diesel over 5          percent of GDP by 2019
           Greater protection              years                            1.4 percent of GDP can be secured if
           against health risks        •	 Control central and subna-        central and subnational personnel spend-
                                           tional personnel spending        ing could be tempered to grow in line
                                       •	 Increase tax revenues by          with inflation rather than at 5 percent to 8
                                           improving tax administra-        percent above inflation in recent years
                                           tion (measures to increase
           Social assistance to the                                         Tax administration measures could in-
                                           compliance such as imple-
           poor                                                             crease revenues by nearly 1.5 percent of
                                           menting fully third-party
                                                                            GDP per year by 2019, while increasing
                                           reporting and improving
                                                                            excise tax on tobacco to 70 percent would
                                           data matching) and increas-
                                                                            increase revenues by 0.5 percent of GDP
                                           ing tobacco excise tax
                                                                            per year by 2019

                                                  Strengthening implementation
           Effective implementa-       •	   A stronger Center of
           tion of the develop-             Government to manage the
           ment agenda                      policy process and resolve
                                            policy conflicts
                                       •	   Streamlined bureaucracy for
                                            enhanced accountability
                                       •	   More strategic management
                                            of human resources across
                                            the public administration
                                       •	   Better planning and budget-
                                            ing procedures to deliver
                                            improved results with public
                                            spending
                                       •	   Stronger accountability for
                                            service delivery at the local
                                            level




                                                               22
                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Executive Summary                                                                                                     Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   Table ES 2: Baseline fiscal projections, options for increasing fiscal space, and expanded
   infrastructure, social assistance and health spending scenarios
   (all figures are percent of GDP)
                                                2013     2014    2015      2016    2017    2018  2019
    1.Baseline fiscal projections- business as usual
    Revenues                                    15.7     16.6     16.5     16.5     16.7    16.7 16.7
    o/w tax                                     11.8     11.7     11.7     11.7     11.7    11.7 11.7
    o/w non-tax                                   3.9      4.8     4.8       4.8     5.0     4.9   5.0
    Expenditures                                18.1     18.6     18.6     18.5     18.5    18.4 18.5
    o/w central personnel spending                2.4      2.4     2.4       2.4     2.4     2.4   2.4
    o/w subnational personnel spending            3.3      3.4     3.5       3.6     3.8     3.9   4.1
    o/w fuel subsidies                            2.3      2.4     2.4       2.5     2.5     2.6   2.7
    o/w infrastructure                            2.5      2.5     2.5       2.5     2.5     2.5   2.5
    o/w social assistance (inc. SJSN)             0.7      0.9     0.8       0.8     0.8     0.8   0.7
    o/w health                                    0.9      0.9     1.0       1.0     1.0     1.0   1.1
    Fiscal balance                               -2.4     -2.1    -2.1      -2.0    -1.8    -1.8  -1.7
    2. Options for increasing fiscal space
    (a) Increase tax revenues by improving        0.4      0.8     1.1       1.5     1.9
    tax administration and increasing
    tobacco excise tax
    (b) Control central and subnational           0.3      0.5     0.8       1.1     1.4
    personnel spending
    (c) Remove fuel subsidy for premium &         0.4      1.0     1.5       1.9     2.0
    diesel over 5 yrs.
    Total increase in fiscal space                                 1.1       2.3     3.5     4.4   5.3
    3. Total spending priorities                                   0.6       1.2     2.1     2.8   3.5
    additional financing requirement
    3a. Spending Priority 1: Increasing total infrastructure capital spending to 4.4% by 2019
    o/w infrastructure                            2.5      2.5     2.8       3.0     3.6     4.0   4.4
    Additional financing requirement                               0.3       0.5     1.1     1.5   1.9
    3b. Spending Priority 2: Increasing social assistance spending to 1% of GDP from 2015 onwards
    o/w social assistance (inc. SJSN)             0.7      0.9     1.0       1.0     1.0     1.0   1.0
    Additional financing requirement                               0.2       0.2     0.2     0.2   0.3
    3c. Spending Priority 3: Increasing public health spending to 2.4% of GDP by 2019
    o/w health                                    0.9      0.9     1.2       1.5     1.8     2.1   2.4
    Additional financing requirement                               0.2       0.5     0.8     1.0   1.3
    Source: Baseline fiscal projections from the World Bank’s RMSM model for Indonesia, updated in February 2014. Estimations of
    fiscal space options and spending options from World Bank staff analyses.
    Notes:
    •	 2013: Estimated outturn for government revenues, expenditures and the fiscal deficit.
    •	 For 2014-19, the revenues and expenditures are projected assuming a base case GDP growth scenario of 5.3-5.8% per annum and
        a “business as usual” situation assuming no significant fiscal reforms and no significant shocks or sustained pressures to revenues
        or expenditures.
    •	 Aggregate revenue is total central government revenues and grants excluding subnational own source revenues. Aggregate
        expenditure is central government expenditure plus transfers to regions and fiscal balance is central government deficit.
    •	 Infrastructure spending is total estimated capital and current spending on infrastructure by central and subnational government.
        Capital spending is approximately 85 percent of total infrastructure spending.
    •	 Social assistance spending figure is central government only and includes estimated SJSN health costs from 2014 onwards.
    •	 Health spending figure is total estimated spending on health by central and subnational government



                                                                   23
       Part 1
     Indonesia
in the Past Decade
 Chapter I. Indonesia’s
Economic Transformation
     Post-1997/98
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                             Chapter I




                                     Chapter I
                       Indonesia’s Economic Transformation
                                   Post-1997/98

          Indonesia’s economic turnaround since the Asian financial crisis in 1997/98 has been
          impressive. In little more than a decade, Indonesia has gone from a low middle-income country
          (MIC) in political, financial and economic crisis to a democratic, stable and confident member
          of the G-20. Between 2001 and 2012, total GDP almost doubled from US$580 billion to US$1.1
          trillion (15th largest economy in the world). During the same period, GDP per capita jumped
          from US$2,737 to US$4,272 (all in constant 2005 US$, PPP). These shifts reflect a gradual
          recovery in economic growth post-1998: following a 13 percent contraction in 1998, real GDP
          growth rebounded to an average annual rate of 4.7 percent in 2000-05, then picked up to 5.7
          percent in 2006-10 and 6.0 percent in 2011-12, demonstrating Indonesia’s strong resilience to the
          global economic downturn in 2008. Remarkably, growth has gone hand-in-hand with low fiscal
          deficits, a sharp decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio and healthy external balances until mid-2013,
          when Indonesia opened an annual current account deficit for the first time since 1997.

          The recent moderation in economic growth and sharp external balance pressure invite a
          deep examination of Indonesia’s growth pattern and model. This first chapter focuses on
          this examination. Its key findings are as follows:
          •	 Improved macro policy management in the decade or so following the 1997/98 financial
               crisis played a very important, and particularly welcome, role in supporting the stability of
               Indonesia’s growth performance over the past decade;
          •	 However, the considerable structural shifts seen in the economy were driven by deeper
               dynamics, in particular the commodities boom Indonesia experienced in the period 2003-12,
               which made the economy dependent on commodities for exports;
          •	 The massive income and wealth effects of the commodities boom fed into nominal GDP
               growth, boosting private consumption and supporting a recovery in investments;
          •	 In response, the service sector expanded rapidly to become the largest sector in the economy
               both in terms of production and employment relative to agriculture; but Indonesia’s
               structural transformation pattern displays important differences from China, South Korea
               and India:
               oo The relative decline of agriculture (as a share of total production and employment) has
                   been slower in Indonesia than in these economies over the past three decades, reflecting
                   the fact that some branches of agriculture in Indonesia benefited from the commodities
                   boom of the past decade (palm oil, rubber and to a lesser extent coffee and tea);
               oo The relative rise in services in Indonesia is also smaller than in China, South Korea and
                   India, reflecting the fact that lower value-added services increased much more in size
                   than modern services in Indonesia;




                                                         26
                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                                                                                          Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    •	        While manufacturing also declined as a share of GDP over the past decade, the availability
              of a large pool of labor in Java (population of 139 million), where most manufacturing
              firms are located, helped Indonesia avoid an absolute contraction of manufacturing and a
              Dutch Disease; and
    •	        The commodities boom has tipped exports toward commodities (65 percent of total exports
              in 2012) exposing Indonesia to large terms-of-trade shocks that could rapidly translate into
              mounting external imbalances, as seen over the past year.

     Figure 1.1. Real GDP growth, 1990-2012                        The next chapter looks at the social
         Percent                                                   transformation associated with the above
                   Average
         15         growth
                                                                   shifts in the economy. The economic and
                                                 Average
                   of 1990 -                    growth of
                                                                   social transformations of the past decade
         10        96: 8.0%                      2003 -12:         call for a gradual shift towards productivity-
                                                   5.7 %           driven growth to deepen the structural
          5                                                        transformation (Chapter 3). The rest of
                                                                   the present chapter examines the quality of
          0
                                                                   macroeconomic policymaking post 1997/98
         -5                                                        (Section 1), describes how the massive income
                                                                   and wealth effects of the commodities
     -10                                                           boom filtered into domestic demand via
                                                                   the corporate sector, households and public
     -15                                                           finance (Section 2), discusses the subsequent
                                                                   shift in the structure of production,
                                                                   employment and exports, and looks at the
     Source: World Development Indicators 2013 (WDI), World Bank   environmental cost of growth in the decade
     and World Bank staff.                                         (Section 5).

    1. The Turnaround in Macro Policymaking Post-1997/98
    Indonesia has made remarkable progress over the past decade in terms of
    macroeconomic stability. As highlighted above, buoyed by strong global commodity demand,
    output growth was strong and consistent, grounded on increasing private sector investment,
    robust domestic consumption and generally sustainable external surpluses. There were fears
    during late 2008 that the economy would be dragged into another major crisis, just over ten years
    after the 1997/98 crisis but, in the end, Indonesia’s economic resilience to global financial market
    and economic instability was notable.

    The resilient economic performance over the 2008/09 global financial crisis reflected
    both strong initial conditions—fiscal and financial sector balance sheets and macro
    policies—along with a proactive and precautionary approach to crisis preparedness and
    mitigation. Indeed, both of these factors are linked to the legacy of the 1997/98 crisis. The
    strength in macro policies and fiscal, corporate and financial sector balance sheets was the result
    of ten years of deleveraging and measures to address vulnerabilities exposed by, or resulting
    from, the 1997/98 crisis. The Government’s policy response in late 2008 and early 2009, in
    particular the arrangement of contingent fiscal financing facilities, also reflected a strong desire
    not to see a repeat of the social, economic and financial impact of the 1997/98 crisis and a focus
    on maintaining key development expenditures, such as on infrastructure, which had been hit in
    the previous crisis.


                                                             27
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                           Chapter I




          The legacy of the 1997/98 crisis
          The origins and evolution of the 1997/98 financial crisis are described in detail elsewhere.29 In
          sum, the build-up of currency and maturity mismatches, high leverage and exposure to
          risky investments, weak supervisory and regulatory structures and corporate governance,
          along with macro external imbalances, were exposed as the Rupiah came under pressure
          following the devaluation of the Thai baht in mid-1997. Exchange rate depreciation, credit
          contraction, increased interest rates, sharp falls in asset quality and political turmoil precipitated
          a fall of real investment by one-third in 1998, contributing to a GDP contraction of 13 percent
          (Mansoor et al, 2003). Poverty rates rose markedly.30

          The level of government debt increased dramatically, moving from 40 percent of GDP
          in 1997 to over 100 percent in 2000. The fiscal balance moved into deficit but, constrained
          by the adjustment program, only reached 2.8 percent by FY 1999/2000, putting pressure on
          development expenditures. Domestic government debt rose from zero before the crisis to 50
          percent of GDP in 2000 due to the issuance of bank recapitalization and liquidity support
          bonds. The depreciation of the rupiah also increased the local currency value of the pre-existing
          government debt, which was owed predominantly to external official creditors.

          The fiscal legacy of the crisis was a debt position with significant interest rate, exchange
          rate and maturity risks: the floating rate “recapitalization” bonds accounted for around one
          third of the domestic debt at end-2000; around 46 percent of public debt was external debt
          at end-2000 and; domestic debt amortizations rose sharply from 2004. Debt service costs
          increased markedly (from 4 percent of GDP in 1996 to 8 percent in 2002) and there were
          concerns that high government financing needs would crowd out private borrowing.
          Addressing the fallout of the crisis
          To address the debt service burden and potential crowding out effects there was a
          considerable focus on reducing the overall level of government debt. Official external debt
          was also rescheduled in the early 2000s through Paris Club negotiations. Limits on the fiscal
          deficit (3 percent of GDP) and debt level (60 percent of GDP) were put in place from 2003
          (Blöndal et al, 2009). Fiscal deficits remained below this level (averaging 1.2 percent of GDP
          from 2000 to 2010). Currency appreciation plus strong nominal GDP growth also contributed to
          the impressive reduction in government debt to less than 25 percent of GDP in 2012.

          There was also a focus on addressing the above-mentioned interest rate, exchange rate
          and maturity risks in the debt stock, as well as cleaning up corporate and financial sector
          balance sheets. As a result, rollover and interest rate risk for government debt and corporate
          leverage ratios have declined notably. Inflation targeting and central bank independence were
          introduced and the commitment to the flexibility of the exchange rate maintained, helping to
          limit the build-up of external imbalances. Financial supervisory and regulatory reforms have also
          continued.
          29 See Ghosh, S.R. (2013) East-Asian Crisis of 1997. In: Gerard Caprio (ed.). The Evidence and Impact of Financial Globalization,
          Vol. 3, pp. 669-688. Oxford: Elsevier Inc.; Ghosh, S.R. (2001) Managing Financial Integration – Lessons from East Asia: Indonesia
          Case Study; Mansoor, A. M. Takagi, S. Barnes, K. and Cohen, B. H. (2003): The IMF and Recent Capital Account Crises: Indonesia,
          Korea and Brazil. IMF Independent Evaluation Office Report and; Feridhanusetyawan, T. and Pangestu, M. (2003)”Managing
          Indonesia’s Debt,” Asian Economic Papers, MIT Press, vol. 2(3), pages 128-154.
          30 Chapter 2 discusses Indonesia’s performance in reducing poverty during the past decade or so.




                                                                        28
                                                                                 Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                                                                                  Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Good policies in bad times: policy response to the global financial crisis
    In late 2008, domestic bond yields and the exchange rate came under pressure, and
    there were concerns Indonesia could be entering another crisis period, similar to
    1997/98, despite the strong macro positions.31 But the authorities responded proactively to
    these pressures, and allowed the exchange rate to adjust. The Government moved to introduce
    a responsive fiscal stimulus package, focusing primarily on tax adjustment given the ongoing
    public expenditure disbursement challenges. In addition, a key innovation was the Government’s
    decision to put in place a contingent financing facility with development partners, including
    the World Bank, in early 2009. This facility aimed both to reduce the risk that there would be
    increases in financing costs or reduced market access, and to limit the risk that, conditional
    on a financing crisis occurring, key expenditures would be adversely affected, as had been the
    experience in 1998.

    The Government has also put in place a range of other measures to improve crisis
    monitoring, preparedness and response. These include a set of Crisis Management
    Protocols, policies to improve budget execution and improve targeting of social spending. The
    2012 revised Budget and 2013 Budget also included provisions to allow for an adjustment in
    spending or financing in response to a crisis, requiring parliamentary approval within 24 hours.
    Notwithstanding the progress, given the continued uncertainty in the global environment,
    there remains a need for continued efforts in these areas of crisis preparedness. Furthermore,
    the quality of fiscal spending, particularly the burden of fuel subsidies, can be improved,
    notwithstanding the overall balance sheet strength.

    The overall improvement in macro policy management paved the way for Indonesian
    policymakers to focus more on structural reforms and growth. Structural reforms had
    momentum for most of the past decade but stalled in recent years and, as will be seen in the next
    section, the considerable structural shifts in the economy were mostly driven by the commodities
    boom Indonesia experienced in the period 2003-12.


    2. The Transformational Impact of the Commodities Boom
    The significant rise in commodity prices in 2003-11 led to massive income and wealth
    effects in Indonesia. These effects filtered into corporate revenues, household incomes and
    government revenues, and led to a significant jump in domestic demand for goods and services.
    The direct rise in the value of resource assets, as well as that of other assets purchased on the
    back of commodity incomes or commodity wealth, significantly encouraged consumption
    against these assets. Furthermore, much of the significant rise in government resource and non-
    resource revenues was transformed into consumption through fuel subsidies, while infrastructure
    investment, for example, remained relatively stable. This stability of infrastructure investment at
    relatively low levels contrasts with the rapid increase in the investment-to-GDP ratio in the past
    5 years and highlights the dominance of construction in investment, with building investment
    accounting for 85 percent of total fixed investment.


    31 Ref: IMF (2012), Indonesia: Sustaining Growth during Global Volatility.




                                                                  29
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                Chapter I




          The commodities boom: a significant and unforeseen positive shock

          From 2003 to 2011, the world went through one of the greatest commodities booms of
          all time. Rapid growth in China, India and other emerging economies translated into rapid
          increases in demand for many commodities and a sharp rise in prices. Indonesia, one of the
          most commodity-abundant countries in the world, benefited substantially from this boom
          (Table 1.1).32 Benchmark international prices for coal, crude palm oil, rubber and crude oil—all
          important export commodities for Indonesia—each rose threefold, in real US dollar terms,
          between 2000 and 2010 (Figure 1.2).

           Figure 1.2: Global commodity prices increased                         Table 1.1: Indonesia benefited substantially,
           dramatically                                                          given its exports, 2012
           (USD price index, 2000 = 100)                                         (%)
           900
                    Index 2000                                                     Commodities                 Share in             Share of
           800                                       Rubber                                                Indonesia’s          Indonesia in
           700                                                                                            total exports           total world
                                                                                                                   (%)           imports (%)
           600
                                                                  Coal             Coal                              13.8                  17.0
           500                                   Copper
                                                                                   Natural gas                       10.8                   5.0
           400
                                                                                   Crude Palm Oil                      9.3                 52.4
           300                                 Palm oil                            Crude oil                           6.5                  0.7
           200                 Non-energy
                                                                                   Rubber                              4.2                 14.6
                                                                   Energy
           100                                                                     Copper                              1.4                  5.0
                                   Crude oil              Natural gas
             0                                                                     Nickel                              1.3                 17.6
                 1995
                 1996
                 1997
                 1998
                 1999
                 2000
                 2001
                 2002
                 2003
                 2004
                 2005
                 2006
                 2007
                 2008
                 2009
                 2010
                 2011
                 2012




                                                                                   Coffee                              0.7                  4.2
                                                                                   Cocoa                               0.5                  6.0
           Source: World Bank and World Bank staff calculations.                 Source:UN-COMTRADE via WITS and World Bank staff
                                                                                 calculations.

          Impact on Indonesia’s terms-of-trade and corporate wealth
          The dramatic rise in commodity prices, coupled with a positive supply response in some
          cases (coal, palm oil, natural gas but not crude oil), led to a sharp improvement in the
          terms-of-trade, export earnings and in Indonesia’s external trade balance. Indonesia’s
          terms-of-trade doubled between 2003 and 2011. During this period, total annual export earnings
          tripled to US$203.5 billion, thanks to a sharp increase in commodity exports. Indonesia’s trade
          surplus reached record levels during this period (averaging US$19.3 billion per year) and the
          commodities boom significantly contributed to the balance of payments (BOP) surplus in 2003-
          11 (Figure 1.3).




          32 Indonesia is the world’s biggest exporter of thermal coal used in power plants, shipping about US$2 billion of the fuel every
          month, mainly to China and India. It is the world largest exporter of crude palm oil, supplying more than half of the world’s total
          exports.




                                                                            30
                                                                                                    Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                                                                                                          Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Figure 1.3: Commodity export earnings drove                       Figure 1.4: Equity indices rose significantly, in
     the trade surplus and the sharp rise in foreign                   part driven by mining assets
     exchange reserves                                                 (eom index, Dec 2000=100)
     (US$ billion, nominal terms)
    140                                                                 3000
                                                                                                      Mining               Overall
    120                                                                 2500

    100
                                                                        2000
                                                                                                         Agri
      80
                                                                        1500
                  Commodity export
      60
                                                                        1000        Manuf
      40                         Non-commodity export
                                                                         500                                            Cons.
      20                                                                                                                Goods
                                                Trade balance              0
       0




                                                                                                            Jan-10
                                                                                                           Sep-07



                                                                                                           Mar-11
                                                                                              Nov-01




                                                                                                           Nov-08
                                                                                                            Jul-06




                                                                                                            Jul-13
                                                                                              May-05




                                                                                                           May-12
                                                                                               Jan-03
                                                                            Sep-00
                                                                            Mar-97




                                                                                              Mar-04
                                                                             Jul-99
                                                                            May-98
                                                                            Jan-96
     Source: BPS, BI and World Bank staff calculations.                Source: WDI, BPS, CEIC, and World Bank staff calculations.


    The prosperity generated by the resources sector is also illustrated in the significant
    increase in corporate wealth and the Indonesian stock market. Much of the rise in the
    stock market since the mid-2000s was related to the commodities boom with mining, coal and
    crude palm oil assets witnessing particularly large price increases in value until March 2011
    (Figure 1.4). These price increases led to 20-fold rise in the mining equity price index from end-
    2002 to end-2012 and a 14-fold increase for agriculture and contributed to a 10-fold increase in
    the overall equity index.33 Sixteen out of the 21 billionaires in the Forbes 2010 list of Indonesia’s
    40 richest people are from the coal and palm oil sectors. Due to these sizeable equity price
    increases, and new equity issuance, the local equity market valuation rose from an average of
    16 percent of GDP over 2000-02 to 49 percent over 2010-12 (above the pre-1997/98 crisis
    average of 37 percent in 1995-96). The mining and agriculture sectors contributed around one-
    fifth of this increase in capitalization-to-GDP, just below the contribution from finance and
    the combined contribution from consumer goods, and trade and services. Indonesia’s overall
    equity index is highly correlated with global commodity prices (although this relationship may
    reflect the relationship of the latter with global and domestic demand conditions more broadly).
    As shown in Figure 1.6, the correlation with international risk appetite is also high, particularly
    during periods of financial market turbulence.




    33 The finance sub-index also increased 10-fold while manufacturing saw a 13-fold rise.




                                                                   31
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                  Chapter I




           Figure 1.5: Indonesian equity price are highly                      Figure 1.6: … but also the risk appetite of
           correlated with global commodity prices…                            international investors
           (eom index, Dec 2000=100)	                                          (eom index, Dec 2000=100)
                         VIX S& P equity volatility index (RHS      )                            IDN equity correlation with average
                         Average global commodity pr       ices (in                              global commodity prices in US dollars
                                                                                    1. 0
                         USD, LHS )
                         JC I local e quity in dex (LHS )                           0. 8
                                                                                    0. 6
            1000                                                        100
                                                                                    0. 4
                                                                                    0. 2
                                                                                    0. 0
                                                                                   -0 .2
             100                                                        50         -0 .4
                                                                                   -0 .6
                                                                                   -0 .8          IDN equity correlation with VIX S&P
                                                                                   -1 .0          equity volatility index (inverted)
               10                                                       0               Jan-95         Jan-00           Jan-05       Jan-10
                Jan-95         Jan-00     Jan-05      Jan-10
           Source: CEIC and World Bank staff calculations.                     Source: World Bank, CBOE,CEIC and World Bank staff
                                                                               calculations.
                                                                               Note: End of period equity prices and VIX. Global commodity
                                                                               prices are average of energy and non-energy prices. Correlation
                                                                               is rolling 60 week level correlation.


          Contribution to Indonesia’s investment recovery
          The commodities boom has also supported the marked rise in the nominal investment-
          to-GDP ratio in Indonesia over the past decade. After falling dramatically after the 1997/98
          crisis, Indonesia’s investment-to-GDP ratio has recovered strongly over the past five years,
          moving up to 32 percent in 2012 (compared with ratios of 27 percent in South Korea, 30
          percent in India and the extremely high 46 percent in China, for example). While much of this
          increase has been due to rising investment prices, real investment growth has averaged an annual
          8.4 percent over 2008-12 (up from 7.6 percent over 2003-07), and has tracked commodity prices
          (Figure 1.7). Indeed, recent work on short-term investment dynamics in Indonesia found that
          terms-of-trade gains contributed around one-third to investment growth over 2005-11 (with
          lower volatility of interest rates and the real exchange rate also supportive).

          However, much of the rise in the investment rate has gone into construction, but
          with limited change in infrastructure investment rates. Indonesia’s nominal investment
          is dominated by building investment (accounting for 85 percent of investment in 2012, and
          a similar share of its nominal growth over the past five years). However, the rise in aggregate
          construction investment, for example, through channeling of earnings from commodity
          businesses, has not followed through into a rise in the ratio of infrastructure investment-to-GDP
          (as discussed in more detail later in this report).




                                                                              32
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                                                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Figure 1.7: Indonesia’s real investment growth                       Figure 1.8: …but the marked rise in nominal
     has tracked commodity price movements...                             investment-to-GDP has not been reflected in
     (YoY growth, %)                                                      the infrastructure investment rate
                                                                          (%)
      100%                       Real gross fixed             20%             35
                                                                                       Gross fixed capital
         80%                     capital formation (RHS)      16%             30
         60%                                                  12%
                                                                              25
         40%                                                  8%
                                                                              20
         20%                                                  4%                                                      Construction
            0%                                                0%              15

       -20%                                                   -4%             10                Infrastructure investment
                 USD commodity
       -40%      prices (Indonesia's                          -8%              5
                 top ten export, LHS)
       -60%                                                   -12%
                                                                               0




                                                                                   1994
                                                                                   1995
                                                                                   1996
                                                                                   1997
                                                                                   1998
                                                                                   1999
                                                                                   2000
                                                                                   2001
                                                                                   2002
                                                                                   2003
                                                                                   2004
                                                                                   2005
                                                                                   2006
                                                                                   2007
                                                                                   2008
                                                                                   2009
                                                                                   2010
                                                                                   2011
                                                                                   2012
     Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.                       Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.

    Contribution to Indonesia’s nominal GDP growth and household incomes
    Finally, through indirect linkages, the rise in commodity prices has meant that the
    commodities sector has driven a sizeable share of nominal income growth over this
    period. Commodity-related sector accounted directly for around one-fifth of real GDP growth
    between 2002 and 2012 (around one-tenth each from primary and secondary commodities
    subsectors). Given the rise in commodity prices, these sectors’ contributions to nominal GDP
    have been much greater (around two-fifths). Indeed, as Figure 1.9 shows, Indonesia’s nominal
    GDP has become highly correlated with growth in the commodities sector. In part, this may
    reflect the second-round effects from commodity-related activity on GDP via demand for other
    goods and services.34

     Figure 1.9: The commodities sector                                   Figure 1.10: Nominal GDP is highly correlated
     contributed substantially to growth in nominal                       with growth of the commodity sector
     GDP                                                                  (%)
     (Contribution to YoY nominal growth, %)
    60                                                                80
                                                                      70                      Commodity
    50                           Overall economy                                              sectors
                                                                      60
    40
                                                                      50
    30                            Commodity                           40
                                  sectors
                                                                      30                              Overall
    20
                                                                      20
    10
                                                                      10
     0                                                                    0
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005
         2006
         2007
         2008
         2009
         2010
         2011
         2012


                                                                               1995
                                                                               1996
                                                                               1997
                                                                               1998
                                                                               1999
                                                                               2000
                                                                               2001
                                                                               2002
                                                                               2003
                                                                               2004
                                                                               2005
                                                                               2006
                                                                               2007
                                                                               2008
                                                                               2009
                                                                               2010
                                                                               2011
                                                                               2012




     Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.                       Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.

    34 These effects are hard to quantify but using the 2008 Input Output table (the most recently publicly available data), a one unit
    rupiah rise in final demand for the commodity manufacturing sector increases total economic output by 2.14 units (with a direct
    effect on own commodity manufacturing sector output of 1.37 unit and indirect effect on the output of other sectors of 0.77). The
    mining sector multiplier is lower at 1.31 (primarily direct effects).



                                                                     33
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                              Chapter I




           Figure 1.11. GDP per capita increased sharply The average purchasing power of the
            4,500
                     USD, constant 2005                                    population has increased dramatically over
            4,000                                                          the past decade, supported by a steady rise
            3,500                                                          in GDP per capita and rapid consumer
            3,000                                                          credit growth. GDP per capita increased
            2,500                                                          from US$2,737 to US$4,272 (in constant
            2,000                                                          2005 PPP terms) between 2001 and 2012.
            1,500
                                                                           Consumer lending also increased dramatically,
            1,000
                                                                           complementing household revenues. Consumer
                                                                           credit saw an average annual growth of 18
              500
                                                                           percent in real terms over the period 2004-12.
                0
                                                                           Because this rapid rise in consumer lending
                                                                           occurred in a context of rising incomes and
                                                                           bank deposits, the level of household leverage
           Source: World Development Indicators 2013 (WDI), World          remains relatively limited, however (at under 20
           Bank and World Bank staff.
                                                                           percent of GDP).

          As a result, the percentage of individuals consuming between twice and eight times
          the poverty line increased from 32 percent in 2005 to 40 percent in 2012.35 That is an
          addition of 20 million middle-class consumers in seven years. The rise in incomes led to a rapid
          growth in domestic demand. In particular, “non-tradable” services such as real estate, tourism,
          restaurants, transport, communications, and financial services have seen a rapid rise in demand.36
          But demand for manufactured and food items, both domestically produced and imported, also
          increased significantly. Real private consumption growth averaged 4.5 percent per year over
          the period 2003-12, with peaks of 5.3 percent in 2008 and 2012, and private consumption now
          accounts for 55 percent of nominal GDP (2012).
          Supply-side response and the structural transformation
          (i) The economy tipped towards services…
          Driven by a sharp increase in demand, the services sector expanded significantly over
          the past decade to become Indonesia’s engine of growth and employment. The services
          sector, broadly defined, contributed an average 3.3 percentage points (pp) to total GDP growth
          against 1.8 pp for industry and 0.6 pp for agriculture in 2003-12. The services sector consists
          of a large number of service branches—wholesale and retail trade; hotels and restaurants;
          community, social, personal and government services can be labeled “traditional non-tradable
          services” and transport, storage and communications; finance, insurance, real estate and business
          services can be considered as more “modern services”. Transport and communications, financial
          services and retail trade, hotel and restaurants drove the rapid expansion of services in the past
          decade.


          35 Individuals consuming twice the poverty line have a 5 percent chance of sliding into poverty in the next year.
          36 These activities are mostly “non-tradable” in the sense of standard trade theory, i.e., consumers/ users can hardly arbitrage
          between sourcing them domestically or internationally, contrary to tradable manufacturing goods and services that can be imported.
          A consumer in Jakarta can only choose between different hotels or shopping malls in Jakarta. Engel’s Law stipulates that services
          tend to have a higher income elasticity of demand than either agriculture or manufacturing.




                                                                         34
                                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                                                                                                                            Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    The expansion of the services sector was driven by a large addition of new workers. As
    discussed in detail in Chapter 2, 82 percent of the total 20 million new jobs created in 2001-11
    were in the services sector.37 Greater openness to investments also underpinned the expansion
    of the sector. Between 2001 and 2008-10, the share of transport and communications, financial
    services and retail trade, hotel and restaurants in total foreign investment flows almost doubled
    to an average of 63 percent in 2010, before slowing back to 34 percent in 2012 as FDI into
    manufacturing picked up significantly. The reduction of barriers to entry into these sectors by
    the private sector and foreign investors (greater competition) has been one of the major enabling
    factors in realizing these investments. There is strong evidence that the liberalization of the
    retail trade in 1998, telecoms from 1999 and air transport in 2004 have had a robust impact on
    investment and growth in these sectors.38

     Figure 1.12: The services sector remains the Figure 1.13: …and the largest employer
     largest in the economy…                      (% of total employment)
     (% of GDP)
                                                                                            60
           Primary   Services   Processing industry   Other industries
      42
                                                                                            50   1990 -1997        1999 -2003        2003 -2012
      35                                                                                                                                    Services
                                                                         Percent of total


                                                                                                  Agriculture
      28                                                                                    40

      21                                                                                    30
      14
                                                                                                   Industry
                                                                                            20
       7

       0                                                                                    10
                     1994-1997                   2010-2012                                    1990 1992 1994 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011

     Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.                         Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.

    (ii)     …but the structural transformation has been less dramatic than in other fast-growing economies
    In fast-growing economies, a rapid rise in services is often the flip side of a rapid
    decline in the share of agriculture in employment. The rise in services and relative decline
    in agriculture, while both sectors faced high consumer demand, is consistent with “Engel’s Law”
    effects in consumption. This “law” stipulates that demand for services tends to increase more
    with income thanks to higher income elasticity of demand of services relative to agricultural
    products (Chenery and Syrquin, 1975; Chenery, Robinson and Syrquin 1986).39 In addition,
    supply of services to customers in urban areas is less constrained than supply of agriculture,
    explaining a more rapid response of domestic production to rising demand. Indeed, while
    production and consumption of services often occur simultaneously (investments are often
    made where the demand is), a key challenge for agriculture is to remain competitive in distant
    markets (e.g., urban centers), due to high transport and distribution costs (see Chapter 4 on
    infrastructure).
    37 The implications of the expansion of the service sector on poverty and vulnerability are examined in Chapter 2.
    38 See, for instance, Dharmawan, Gusti, Ngurah, Irwan (2012). The Effect of Air Transport to Economic Development in
    Indonesia, Erasmus University of Rotterdam, Erasmus School of Economics.
    39 Engel’s effects refer to the Engel’s Law, introduced by Ernest Engel in 1857, which stipulates that as households’ income
    increases, the percentage of income spent on food decreases while the proportion spent on other goods and services increases.




                                                                     35
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                                                              Chapter I




          While Indonesia’s structural transformation is broadly consistent with global patterns,
          there are noticeable differences with countries like Brazil, China, India and South Korea
          (Figures 1.14 and 1.15). As expected, rising GDP per capita has led to a movement of labor
          from agriculture to urban services. However, while the share of agriculture in GDP declined
          from 24 percent in 1980 to 11 percent in 2012, 35 percent of total workers are still employed in
          agriculture in Indonesia. Only Brazil displays a slower structural transformation but GDP per
          capita has not increased there as much as in Indonesia over the past three decades, being largely
          stagnant at around US$8,000-US$11,000 in that period (as in a typical case of a “middle-income
          trap”). Another important difference is that the rise of services (as a share of GDP) in Indonesia
          has been less rapid than in Brazil, China, India and South Korea.

           Figure 1.14. Structural change led to slower                                               Figure 1.15. …while the increase in the share
           decline in agriculture in Indonesia than in                                                of services was slower compared with India,
           South Korea, China and India…                                                              China, Brazil and South Korea
           40                                                                                         70                         Brazil, '00
                                                                                                                                            Brazil, '12
                      India, 80                                                                                                       Brazil, '05                        Korea, '0 5
                    China, '80                                                                        60                                                   Korea, '0 0              Korea, '1 2
           30         India, '90                                                                                     India, '12 Brazil, '90
                      China, '90                                                                                    India, '05
                   Indonesia, '8 0                                                                                India, '00      Brazil, '80
                      India, '00                                                                      50                                     Korea, '9 0
                                                                                                               Indonesia, 90   Korea, '8 0
                    Indonesia, 90
           20          India, '05                                                                          India, '9 0          Indonesia, '1 2
                                                                                                                                   China, '12
                         India, '12                                                                                  Indonesia, '0 5
                                          Korea, '8 0                                                 40                China, '05
                       Indonesia, '0 0                                                                      India, '80 China, '00
                                                                                                                                Indonesia, '0 0
                       China, '00
                            China, '05      Brazil, '80
                Indonesia, '0 5                                                                                  Indonesia,   '8 0
           10       Indonesia, '1 2
                                     China, '12
                                                    Korea, '9 0
                                     Brazil, '90                                                      30       China, '90
                                                              Korea, '0 0
                                           Brazil, '12                    Korea, '0 5
                                Brazil, '05                                             Korea, '1 2
                    Brazil, '00                                                                                 China, '80
            0                                                                                         20
                0        5,000        10,000        15,000       20,000        25,000      30,000          0          5,000          10,000      15,000     20,000        25,000      30,000
           Source: World Development Indicators.                                                      Source: World Development Indicators.


          The changes in the agriculture sector itself feature a sharp contrast between estate
          crops, which benefited from the commodities boom, and food crops, which faced
          significant challenges. Agriculture grew by an annual average of just 0.6 percentage points
          in 2003-12, contributing only 10 percent to aggregate growth in that period. This performance
          reflects the net impact of lackluster growth for most food products, largely offsetting the rise
          in palm oil and rubber production. The high prices of these products on world markets have
          supported investment, production and yields in these sectors, and eroded the incentive to
          invest in large-scale production in other agricultural products, including horticulture (crowding
          out effect). The OECD (2012) finds that diversification away from food staples into palm oil
          production and other high-valued commodities drove agricultural total factor productivity in
          the past decade (explaining 60 percent of agriculture growth in that period).40 This structural
          transformation within agriculture, combined with rapid domestic demand for food driven by
          rising per capita incomes and urbanization, has led to a rapid rise in imports of horticultural
          products and a movement of labor from agriculture into urban services.



          40 OECD Agriculture Policy Review Report, 2012, p.5-6.




                                                                                                 36
                                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                                                                                                                                   Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    What about manufacturing? After leading overall growth until the 1997/98 crisis,
    manufacturing has remained subdued in the past decade. The industrial sector (which
    encompasses manufacturing, mining and quarrying and utilities) contributed an average 1.8
    percentage points to growth in 2003-12 or 31 percent. Manufacturing output did not decline in
    absolute terms (growing by an annual average 4.8 percent in real terms), despite an appreciation
    of the real exchange rate engendered by the commodities boom (Figure 1.16). As shown in Box
    1, large surplus labor on Java (population of 139 million) and moderate increases in real wages in
    West and East Java, where most manufacturing industries are located, kept manufacturing growth
    from falling more sharply in 2003-11.
     Figure 1.16: The real exchange rate                          Figure 1.17: …but minimum wages increased
     appreciated over the past decade                             much less in labor-abundant West Java and
     (Index, 2000=100)                                            East Java than in Jakarta and resource-rich
                                                                  provinces
                                                                  (annual average of monthly nominal provincial minimum
                                                                  wages, Rp’000)
      600                                                         1800                     2003-2008                         2011-2013

      500                              Devaluations               1500
                         51
                                                                  1200
      400                                                          900

                  39           44                                  600
      300
                                      46                           300
      200
                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                             Riau (74)
                                                                                                              Jakarta (80)


                                                                                                                              Papua (83)
                                                                                             East Java (56)




                                                                                                                                           East Kalimantan
                                                                          West Java (58)




      100




                                                                                                                                                    (56)
                                               95
        0



     Source: World Development Indicat Source:Bruegel database,   Source: Ministry of Manpower and Transmigration via CEIC,
     see www.bruegel.org                                          and World Bank staff calculation.
     Note: CPI-index based real exchange rates ors.




                                                              37
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                Chapter I




          Box 1.1 Did Indonesia experience Dutch Disease41
           A typical source of Dutch Disease is a rise in the price of non-tradable goods relative to tradable goods
           (the real exchange rate, or RER). Such a rise in the RER often occurs during commodity booms and/
           or currency appreciation that can accompany massive capital inflows into a country. However, Dutch
           Disease is only material if the rise in the RER leads to a shift of resources (labor and capital) away
           from non-resource tradable sectors towards the resource and non-tradable sectors, inducing a decline
           in output and exports in the former. The non-resource tradable sectors are often price-takers in global
           markets and cannot pass the increases on to consumers in non-tradable prices (including wages). Firms
           in the non-tradable services sector generally have that possibility (of passing on to consumers the
           increases in prices and wages), which explains why they tend to develop in tandem with commodities
           booms.

           Figure 1.16 shows that Indonesia’s RER appreciated in the past decade, following more than two
           decades of overall sharp depreciation, during which with Indonesia rose as a global manufacturing
           powerhouse. However, the appreciation of the RER in the past decade is not associated with a decline
           in manufacturing output and exports. While non-commodity exports have been markedly outpaced by
           commodity exports, the former still grew modestly in 2003-12 at an aggregate level. Some traditional
           industries (mainly textiles, wood products and paper products) have performed poorly, while others (e.g.,
           chemicals and machinery and apparatus) have showed remarkable growth.

           That Indonesia likely did not experience Dutch Disease has also been found by other studies (IMF
           2010).42 For instance, the IMF found that the “marked appreciation in recent years followed rapid
           income and productivity gains—mainly earlier in this decade—and served to revert much of the
           overshooting experienced during the 1997/98 crisis. As a result, today, the exchange rate is broadly in
           equilibrium with economic fundamentals.” (p. 7).

           Another key factor explaining the dodging of Dutch Disease (at the aggregate level) is the moderate
           increases in real wages for most of the commodities boom period in Java, where most manufacturing
           industries are located. Indonesia has a diverse resource endowments and spatial production pattern.
           Natural resources are mainly produced in Kalimantan, Papua and Sumatra. In contrast, the bulk of
           manufacturing industries are located on Java (in West Java and East Java in particular), Indonesia’s most
           populous island with around 139 million people or 58 percent of the total population. The surplus labor
           in Java has contributed to keeping wage rates in check and maintaining the competitiveness of labor-
           intensive manufacturing in West and East Java. In contrast wage rates in the more resource abundant
           regions of Kalimantan, Riau and Papua as well as in Jakarta grew faster (Figure 1.17).43 Between 2008
           and 2012 minimum wages in Indonesia grew, on average, by 10 percent per year. A significant departure
           from this moderate pace in minimum wage increases occurred however in 2013, with for instance
           25 provinces increasing their minimum wage by an average 30 percent and Jakarta increasing it by 44
           percent. Going forward, ensuring that wage increases are commensurate with productivity growth is
           crucial to maintaining competitiveness in Indonesia’s manufacturing provinces.




          41 The term Dutch Disease refers to the adverse effects on Dutch manufacturing of the natural gas discoveries of the 1960s,
          essentially through the subsequent appreciation of the Dutch real exchange rate (i.e., the rise in the price of non-tradable goods,
          including wages, versus tradable goods).
          42 IMF Country Report No. 10/285. Indonesia Selected Issues.
          43 In the second quarter of 2013, Java contributed 58 percent to Indonesia’s total economic growth. Far behind Java are Sumatra
          (24 percent) and Kalimantan (9 percent). Within Java, the Greater Jakarta area accounts for 16.5 percent of the country’s total
          economic growth, followed by East Java (15 percent) and West Java (14 percent).




                                                                          38
                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                                                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    3. Over-reliance on Commodity Exports Has Fueled Vulnerability
    Changes in the composition and destination of exports
    The commodities boom, combined with a rapid increase in domestic demand, has
    made Indonesia increasingly dependent on commodity exports. As Figure 1.19 shows,
    commodities have overtaken manufacturing as Indonesia’s largest exports. Over two-thirds of
    the country’s exports are commodities or commodity-related manufacturing products. Because
    most of the commodities are exported unprocessed, the overall “sophistication” of Indonesia’s
    exports has also declined. High-technology exports as a share of total manufacturing exports
    declined from 16 percent to 11 percent from 2005 to 2008.44

     Figure 1.18: The contribution of commodities                        Figure 1.19: …leading to a commodities-
     to export growth has exceeded that of                               dominated export structure since 2006
     manufacturing products since 2003…                                  (share to total export, %)
     (nominal export growth, %; contribution to export growth,
     %)
       40                                                              70                    Manufacturing         Commodity
                                                                                             based                 based
              Total export                                             60
       30
                                      Manufacturing
                                      based                            50
       20
                                                                       40
       10
                                                                       30
        0
                                                                       20
                                    Commodity
      -10                             based                            10

      -20                                                                0
                                                                             1995
                                                                             1996
                                                                             1997
                                                                             1998
                                                                             1999
                                                                             2000
                                                                             2001
                                                                             2002
                                                                             2003
                                                                             2004
                                                                             2005
                                                                             2006
                                                                             2007
                                                                             2008
                                                                             2009
                                                                             2010
                                                                             2011
                                                                             2012
            1995
            1996
            1997
            1998
            1999
            2000
            2001
            2002
            2003
            2004
            2005
            2006
            2007
            2008
            2009
            2010
            2011
            2012




     Source: COMTRADE via WITS and World Bank staff                      Source: COMTRADE via WITS and World Bank staff
     calculations.                                                       calculations.


    High commodity prices were accompanied by sharply accelerating demand from within
    Asia. The increase in commodity prices, for both renewable and non-renewable resources, was
    accompanied by sharply accelerating demand from neighboring countries. Most noticeable was
    the quadrupling of exports to India, the tripling of exports to China and, because of its already
    high starting level, “only” a doubling of exports to Japan. As a result, exposure to ASEAN,
    China and India increased markedly although the overall exposure to the region remained
    broadly stable.




    44 It is worth noting that for some commodity products, exporting in an unprocessed form is rather the norm. This is the case
    for coal for instance. This is also the case for copper concentrate for which most of the value-added is already obtained at the
    “concentrate” (i.e., minimal processing) level.




                                                                    39
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                            Chapter I




           Figure 1.20: Exports went largely to Japan, the Figure 1.21: …but the increasing importance of
           EU and the US in the 1990s…                           commodities has meant more exports going to
           (annual average of exports by destination 1990-97, %) China and India post-2003
                                                                  (annual average of exports by destination 2003-12, %)

                                                                                                          USA,
                                                    USA,
                                OTH,                                                                      10.09
                                                    13.48                                 OTH,
                                23.09                                                     25.82                   EUR25,
                                                                                                                   11.39
                                                         EUR25,
                                                          14.62
                            ASEAN,                                                                                  JPN,
                             13.80                                                                                  19.48
                                                                                        ASEAN,
                                                                                         19.65
                IND, 0.60                        JPN,
                                                 30.64                                                    CHN,
                                                                                                          8.83
                     CHN,
                     3.76
                                                                                                 IND, 4.74
           Source: COMTRADE via WITS and World Bank staff                 Source: COMTRADE via WITS and World Bank staff
           calculations.                                                  calculations.

          Increased vulnerability to changes in commodities markets

          As seen over the past year, the increased reliance on commodity exports could be a
          source of vulnerability as their prices tend to be highly volatile, potentially exposing
          the economy to large terms-of-trade shocks that could rapidly translate into mounting
          external imbalances. Not only do international commodity markets tend to be generally
          volatile, but the prices of and demand for particular commodities are often very sensitive to a
          few large buyers, such as (in recent times) China. Along with commodity intensity, therefore,
          comes significant export price and concentration risk. Of particular interest in this regard are
          developments in China, both in terms of the level and composition of growth. For example,
          the IMF estimates that the elasticity of Indonesia’s exports with respect to Chinese growth is
          significant, at 0.7 percent, and presents simulation evidence that an investment slowdown in
          China sufficient to slow Chinese growth by 1 percent could reduce Indonesia’s GDP by 0.3-0.5
          percent.45

          Managing these external imbalances, and especially external financing risks arising from
          a basic balance deficit and reliance on portfolio and otherinvestment inflows, constitutes
          one of the key challenges facing Indonesian policymakers, particularly in the context
          of potential tapering in US quantitative easing from January 2014. As argued in Chapter 3,
          for the longer term, the structural shift of the economy towards higher productivity is crucial in
          reducing external balance risks.




          45 IMF Country Report No. 12/278, Indonesia Selected Issues: China’s Growth Pattern: Implications for Indonesia (p23), 2012




                                                                       40
                                                                             Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    4. The Commodities Boom Has Also Sharpened Environmental Concerns
    Growth over the past 10 years has gone hand-in-hand with rapid deforestation and
    environmental degradation. According to FAO data, Indonesia’s deforestation rate
    reached 2 percent, or 1.87 million hectares, per year in the mid-2000s. Although the
    latest figures show a decline in the deforestation rate, Indonesia still has one of the highest
    rates of deforestation in the region (Figure 1.22). Deforestation over the past decade was
    typically accompanied by forest and land fires, as well as peat conversion thereby augmenting
    the country’s greenhouse gas emissions. Estimates suggest that 80 percent of the Indonesia’s
    greenhouse gas emission originates from land use and land cover changes. A key driver of
    deforestation and land cover changes has been palm oil plantations, which grew exponentially
    over the past decade. Substantial economic pressures remain to convert forests to other uses
    (e.g. mining production, urbanization) and there are substantial governance issues in land-use
    licensing processes.

    According to the World Bank CEA study (2009), Indonesia’s natural capital (about
    one quarter of total wealth) is being rapidly depleted, but not offset by commensurate
    investments in human or produced capital. The health impacts of outdoor and indoor air
    pollution are estimated at US$4.6 billion per year, or about 1.6 percent of the country’s gross
    national income (GNI) in 2008. Significant economic losses are also caused by other types
    of environmental degradation, especially deforestation, soil depletion, and coastal/marine
    degradation. To date, less than 20 percent of power generation comes from hydroelectric,
    geothermal and other renewable sources. The large energy subsidies highlighted above (the
    second-largest expenditure category, behind only transfers to subnational governments)
    represent a major distortion, encouraging the overuse of energy in all sectors and by households,
    and undermining investment in renewable energy.

    The Government has put forward some initiatives that can help to promote a greener
    economy, but these initiatives need to be better coordinated and scaled up. For example,
    in the energy and manufacturing sectors, some new tax incentives have been put in place to
    encourage investment in the development of geothermal energy and the replacement of the old,
    inefficient machinery in the textile sector. The national REDD initiative is another important
    effort to deal with land-use and forest-conversion issues through a national strategy and policy
    actions, backed by an innovative funding pledge from Norway for disbursement against policy
    milestones.




                                                   41
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                                                                                Chapter I




            Figure 1.22: Although improving recently,      Figure 1.23: Total primary energy
            deforestation rates in Indonesia are among the consumption per US$ of GDP
            worst among peers                              (PPPIndex,1990=100)
            (deforestation rates, CAGR, % )
             2.5                                                                                                                                                 Malaysia               Philippines   Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                 Indonesia              Singapore     Vietnam
             2.0
                                                                                        1990-2000                                                                World                  India         China
             1.5                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                        2000-2011                                                      170
             1.0
             0.5                                                                                                                                       150
             0.0
                                                                                                                                                       130
            -0.5
            -1.0                                                                                                                                       110
            -1.5                                                                                                                                           90
            -2.0
                                                                                                                             Cambodia
                                                                                      Lao
                                                                                            Malaysia
                                                                  Thailand
                                                                             Brunei




                                                                                                                                        Timor-Leste
                                                                                                                   Myanmar
                                                           Fiji
                             China
                                     Philippines
                   Vietnam




                                                                                                       Indonesia
                                                   India




                                                                                                                                                           70

                                                                                                                                                           50




                                                                                                                                                                1991




                                                                                                                                                                2001
                                                                                                                                                                1990

                                                                                                                                                                1992
                                                                                                                                                                1993
                                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                                                                1997
                                                                                                                                                                1998
                                                                                                                                                                1999
                                                                                                                                                                2000

                                                                                                                                                                2002
                                                                                                                                                                2003
                                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                                2005
                                                                                                                                                                2006
                                                                                                                                                                2007
                                                                                                                                                                2008
                                                                                                                                                                2009
                                                                                                                                                                2010
            Source: FAOSTAT, 2012 from Malaysia Economic Monitor (MEM) June                                                                            Source: US Energy Information Agency
            2013.
            Note: Negative figures denote deforestation.




                                                                                                                                                      42
                      Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter I                       Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap


            Chapter II. The Economic
             Transformation’s Social
                     Impacts




               43
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                Chapter II




                          Chapter II. The Economic
                       Transformation’s Social Impacts

          Indonesia has successfully restored macroeconomic stability following the severe 1997/98 crisis
          and has become more prosperous thanks in part to favorable international commodity and
          capital markets (Chapter 1). But has prosperity been shared widely? Has the poor and near-poor’s
          ability to cope with shocks such as sudden food price increases, illness or floods increased?
          And has access to quality services, such as education, health, water and sanitation and electricity
          improved significantly over the past decade?

          This chapter addresses these questions. It shows that:

          •	    Sustained growth has helped reduce poverty through significant job creation. Twenty million
                new jobs were created between 2001 and 2011, 18 million of which were in urban areas,
                helping Indonesia to halve poverty from 24 percent in 1999 to 12 percent in 2012.
          •	    At the same time, about 65 million people remain highly vulnerable to shocks. This high
                level of vulnerability reflects the quality of jobs created. Most of the new jobs were created
                in low productivity (and informal) sectors where real earnings growth is sluggish.
          •	    Income inequality increased in line with the rapid rise in commodity and other asset prices
                (including land and properties) which proportionately benefited the rich and equality of
                opportunity indicators have worsened.
          •	    Access to services, such as education, health, water, sanitation and electricity, has improved
                steadily over the decade but large disparities across income levels and geographical areas
                remain.

          While achievements in poverty reduction are commendable, Indonesia has reached a stage where
          a wider view of poverty, vulnerability and income inequality is warranted. In particular, because
          the number of people floating between the poor and the middle class is much larger than the
          number of poor, more emphasis on supporting the transition of vulnerable people to the
          middle class is called for, while continuing to strengthen poverty reduction programs targeting
          the poorest. Such an approach is consistent with a growth strategy that emphasizes productivity
          growth and a faster structural transformation as discussed in Chapter 3. The rest of the present
          chapter describes the pattern of poverty, vulnerability and inequality (Section 1); highlights the
          key drivers of poverty reduction and vulnerability (Section 2) and; reviews progress in access
          to key services against the backdrop of Indonesia’s decentralization that devolved much of the
          service delivery responsibility to subnational governments (Section 3).




                                                           44
                                                                                                                                                                  Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                                                                                                                 Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    1. Poverty
    Trend in income-poverty
    Economic growth and the rise of the services sector in urban areas have been effective in
    reducing poverty. Remarkably, poverty in Indonesia was halved from 24 percent in 1999
    to 12 percent by early 2012 (Figure 2.1). The high rate of poverty in 1999 reflects a sharp rise
    during the 1997/98 crisis. Nonetheless, the 0.5 percentage point drops in 2012 and 2013 are the
    smallest declines in the past decade, with the exception of the increase in 2006 due to mainly to a
    sharp increase in global prices (Figure 2.2).46

     Figure 2.1: Official poverty rates and annual                                                      Figure 2.2: Change in poverty, 2003-13
     change, 1996-2013
                                30                                                                                                 2. 5
                                                                                                                                   2. 0
                                25
                                                                                                                                   1. 5

                                                                                                     Percentage Point Change in
                                                                                                        National Poverty Rate
                                20
        Percent of Population




                                                                                                                                   1. 0
                                15                                                                                                 0. 5

                                10                                                                                                 0. 0
                                                                                                                                  -0.5
                                 5
                                                                                                                                  -1.0
                                 0                                                                                                -1.5
                                     1996

                                            1999

                                                   2001

                                                          2003

                                                                 2005

                                                                        2007

                                                                               2009

                                                                                      2011

                                                                                             2013




                                                                                                                                          2003
                                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                                        2005
                                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                                                                                                    2009
                                                                                                                                                                                           2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2013
     Source: BPS.                                                                                       Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.

    The significant role of growth-driven job creation in poverty reduction

    The key driver of poverty reduction has been growth-driven job creation. Indonesia has
    traditionally been successful in reducing poverty through job creation. In 1990-96, the economy
    posted average 8 percent annual growth and the poverty rate declined by around 25 percent.
    Following a sharp reduction in growth and employment creation in 1997-2001 (the Asian
    financial crisis), both GDP and employment growth rebounded in the second half of the 2000s.
    In 2007-11, the economy experienced a similar degree of sensitivity of employment to economic
    growth as in the period 1992-96 (with an employment-elasticity-to-growth ratio of around 0.5).
    Just as was the case in the 1990s, economic growth generated massive numbers of new jobs,
    especially in urban areas.
     
    Between 2001 and 2011, 20 million jobs were created, 89 percent of which were located
    in urban areas. Total urban employment has grown by a total of 45 percent since 2001 and
    has gradually overtaken rural employment over the past decade. Furthermore, since 2008 jobs
    in urban areas have been growing faster than the working age population (Figure 2.3). While

    46 Indonesia undertook a fuel subsidy reform that year by increasing fuel prices at the pump. The higher fuel prices from the subsidy
    reform would have played a small part, but were more than offset by temporary cash transfers to the poor.




                                                                                                    45
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                       Chapter II




          the working age population has continually increased, since 2005 the share of the employed to
          the working age population rose from 60 to 64 percent, reaching its mid-1990s levels.47 A large
          number of the jobs in urban areas were captured by women. Female workers have less secure
          terms of employment and are more likely to work part-time (51 percent of women workers work
          part-time), or be working in the informal sector. The female participation rate remains low at 52
          percent, despite a sharp increase registered in urban areas since 2005.

           Figure 2.3: Massive numbers of jobs were created, 20 million in total, almost 19 million of which
           were in urban areas
                                       Urban vs. Rural areas Contribution to Total Employment Growth (2001-2012)
                                  24
                                  22                                                                            Total increase since 2001
                                  20                                                                     3.8        Rural   6.3%
                                  18
              Percentage points




                                                                                                                    Urban 45.8%
                                  16                                                              9.2
                                  14                                                        9.3                     Total employment growth
                                  12                                                 7.7                            since 2001
                                  10                                           6.2                                  Working age population (15+)
                                   8
                                                                 2.6    6.0                                         growth since 2001
                                   6                       1.9
                                   4                1.9
                                              1.1                                                                   Urban share of Working age
                                   2      1.1
                                              1.1    1.3   1.5   2.5    4.06    .8   7.89    .8   10.6   18.2       population (15+) growth
                                   0    0.2
                                  -2
                                       2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
           Source: BPS Sakernas data (employment survey)


           Consistent with the transformation of the Figure 2.4: Close to 17 million of all new jobs
           economy towards non-tradable services             between 2001 and 2011 were created in the
           described in Chapter 1, this sector was the services sector
           source of 17 million of the 20 million new (million)
           jobs created (82 percent). Within services,
                                                                25
           out of the total job growth, 30 percent
           occurred in community, social and personal           20
           services (where 6.9 million new jobs were            15
           created), 28 percent in wholesale, trade and
           retail (5.7 million new jobs) and 14 percent         10
           in construction (2.9 million new jobs). The            5
           industry sector (currently 21 percent of total
           employment) was able to create only 4 million          0
                                                                      Total   Services Industry Agriculture
           new jobs, while in agriculture (where 35              -5
           percent of total workers are still employed)
           some 860,000 jobs were lost. Within industry, Source: BPS.
           employment in mining, oil and gas rose fast but the labor absorption capacity of these sectors
           is limited. Most of the jobs created within industry occurred in manufacturing with 3.3 million
           new jobs created, slightly above construction.

          47 Out of a population of 174 million people aged over 15, Indonesia can count on a total labor force of 118 million, of which 110
          million are employed (Sakernas, 2012).




                                                                                     46
                                                                                                                            Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                                                                     Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Figure 2.5: Most services subsectors created a large number of jobs
     (percent)
                                        Sectors' Contribution to Total Employment Growth (2001-2012)

                                   24                                                  22.0            Total % increase since 2001
                                   22                                             19.8
                                   20                                       19.2                           Social & personal services, 55.4%
                                                                                         6.7
                                   18                                                                      Finance, insurance, & real estates, 136.0%
                                   16                                  15.5
                                                                                         1.7               Transport, storage & communications, 12.4%
                                   14                             12.9                   0.6
                                   12                                                                      Wholesale, retail, & trade, 32.6%
                                                             10.0                        6.3
             %




                                   10                                                                      Construction, 77%
                                    8
                                                         5.1                                               Electricity, gas, & water, 76.9%
                                    6     2.23 .2 3.5                                    3.3
                                    4                                                    0.1               Manufacturing, 27.1%
                                    2 0.9                                                3.6               Mining and quarrying, 68.5%
                                    0                                                    0.7
                                                                                        -0.9               Agriculture, -2.2%
                                   -2
                                      2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012               Total employment growth (%) since 2001
     Source: BPS, Sakernas data (employment survey)


    2. Vulnerability
    Vulnerability to sliding back into poverty remains high
    While official poverty is relatively low at 12 percent, an additional 27 percent of the
    population lives just above the poverty line, and small shocks can drive them back into
    poverty.48 In 2012, a significant 65 million Indonesians lived between the official poverty line
    and less than 50 percent more than that poverty line (Figure 2.6). These individuals, hovering
    just above the poverty line, are considered highly susceptible to sliding into poverty. In fact, over
    half of the poor each year were not poor the year before (Figure 2.7), and one quarter of all
    Indonesians finds themselves in poverty at least once in a three-year period.

     Figure 2.6: Close to 40 percent of the                                                  Figure 2.7: Composition of poor relative to
     population was poor and vulnerable in 2012                                              previous year

                                   50         Between 1.0x and 1.5x Poverty Line
                                              Below Poverty Line                                                                              Existing Poor
                                   40
        Percentage of Population




                                                                                                                                              Newly Poor
                                   30                       Vulnerable: 62m
                                                                                                       56%                44%
                                   20

                                   10
                                                            Poor: 30m
                                    0


     Source: Susenas data, World Bank staff calculations.                                    Source: Susenas data, World Bank staff calculations.


    48 Here the vulnerable are defined as those individuals consuming between 1.0 and 1.5 times the poverty line (i.e. living on less than
    50 percent more than the poverty line).




                                                                                        47
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                    Chapter II




          Vulnerable households face high food price risks
          Food makes up around 65 percent of total poor household consumption. Consequently,
          even relatively small increases in food prices can have a significant effect on individual welfare,
          and on the national poverty rate.49 It is estimated that a 10 percent increase in the overall cost of
          food would result in a relative increase in poverty of 3.5 percentage points. This was evident in
          2006 when food prices picked up significantly at a time when world rice prices surged. By March
          2006, the poverty basket inflation was running at 18 percent year-on-year, driven by higher rice
          and food prices. In 2006, poverty increased from 15.7 percent to 17.8 percent, the first annual
          increase in Indonesian poverty since the 1997/98 financial crisis.

          The food item that has the biggest impact on the poor and near-poor is rice. Rice alone
          makes up 23 percent of poor households’ total expenditure. It is estimated that a 10 percent
          increase in rice prices would result in the national poverty rate being 1.3 percentage points higher
          than it would otherwise be. For every one poor household that benefits from higher rice prices
          (as net rice producers), there are three poor households that are net consumers of rice and are
          harmed by higher prices. In addition, there are important nutritional consequences of reduced
          purchasing power, as rice comprises 50 percent of the total calorie intake and 23 percent of the
          total protein intake of poor households’ total food consumption. Rice prices were particularly
          high in 2010-12. Over these three years, rice prices increased faster than any other item in the
          CPI basket (Figure 2.9).

          Imports of rice, to fill the gap between domestic production and consumption, total
          around 1.0 to 1.5 million tons a year. The Government’s near-term objective is to become
          self-sufficient in rice. To help ensure sufficient food for poor and vulnerable households and to
          mitigate the impact of rice price increases, the Government has long implemented a subsidized
          rice program called Raskin (BerasMiskin). Under this program, beneficiaries are entitled to buy
          around 15kg of rice per month at Rp1,600 per kg, representing a significant subsidy to market
          prices of around Rp5-6,000 per kg. In 2013, rice was procured for 15.5 million households, or
          around 25 percent of Indonesia, down from 18.5 million in previous years. Officially this rice is
          targeted using the national Unified Database of poor and vulnerable households. In practice,
          Raskin suffers from leakages before rice reaches households, and from informal redistribution
          of rice to non-beneficiary households, both of which result in substantial dilution of benefits.
          In fact, household survey respondents report being able to buy only 4kg of Raskin per month.
          Consequently, the program is not effective in mitigating high food prices for the poor. More
          efficient management and distribution of public rice stocks is important. Equally important is to
          further broaden and improve the set of instruments to address food availability, access, and price
          stability to enhance efficiency and effectiveness.




          49 Food price shocks (short run) reflect various domestic demand and supply factors and international food price shocks that
          sometimes play out simultaneously. On the demand side, key factors are seasonal effects (Ramadan, “Lebaran” or the celebrations
          at the end of Ramadan and Christmas) and temporary income effects (pay rise, bonus, etc.). On the supply side, prices can suddenly
          jump due to seasonal effects (harvests), supply shocks (droughts, pests, floods, typhoons, earthquakes and volcanoes) and input cost
          shocks (e.g. fertilizer prices). Domestic food prices are also affected by adjusted world prices that reflect nominal world prices, shocks
          to the exchange rate and sudden changes in import regulation (i.e., changes in tariffs, quotas, non-tariff barriers).




                                                                            48
                                                                                             Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                                  Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Figure 2.8: Food price growth (excl. rice) has Figure 2.9: Rice prices have grown faster than
     been low, but domestic rice price growth has any other item in the CPI basket over the past
     been strong                                    3 years
     (percent)                                      (percent)
     45                                                           Growth in past 3 years to June 2012
                        Rice (domestic)                          60                                                       60
                                                                 50                                                       50
     30                                                          40                                                       40
                                     Food excluding rice         30                                                        30
     15                                                          20                                                        20
             Core CPI                                            10                                                        10
                                                                  0                                                         0
      0                                                         -10                                                       -10
                                                                         n        r                           i
                                                                     icke Flou ern) oil CPI eef l rice chil ugar stic)
                                                                  Ch            ( i nt king ore at/B exc Red      S me
    -15                                                                      ce
                                                                           Ri Co
                                                                                       o   C Me od
                                                                                                                  e (do
                                                                                                Fo           Ri
                                                                                                                c
      Feb-03 Jun-04 Oct-05F eb-07 Jun-08 Oct-09F eb-11 Jun-12
     Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.             Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.

    Vulnerable households are highly exposed to health shocks
    Health shocks have a significant impact on households, not only because of the large
    out-of-pocket payments associated with the treatment of the illness itself, but because
    of lost income when a working member of the family falls ill. Out-of-pocket spending
    accounts for 40 percent of total health spending. This is a high level, especially for the poor and
    vulnerable. The high level of out-of-pocket spending for health reflects relatively low levels of
    insurance coverage and shallow protection even among those covered, compounded by generally
    low levels of public spending on health. Households cope with catastrophic payments for health
    care by depleting their savings, selling off their assets, and reducing their consumption of food
    and other necessities. Health care may be forgone early on in an illness, leading to more acute,
    costly care being needed later on. It is estimated that almost 2.3 million individuals currently fall
    into poverty annually due to catastrophic health spending.

    A large number of individuals, mostly in the “vulnerable” category (i.e., those
    consuming only 50 percent more than the poverty line), have inadequate or no access
    to social protection services. About half the population has access to health insurance,
    including civil servants, the military, about 25 percent of formal private workers, and the poor
    and near-poor who are eligible for the Jamkesmas program (which is being merged with other
    social health insurance programs under the single-payer Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional program
    in 2014).Those who are non-poor and in the informal sector (“the missing middle”) have
    almost no coverage at all. Low insurance coverage combined with generally poor access to good
    quality health care, drinking water and proper sanitation (see next section), implies that over 40
    million workers are at risk of lost or decreasing productivity and wages, due to ill health and
    prolonged recovery from medical issues. The Government’s goal is universal health coverage of
    all Indonesians by 2019, including workers in both the formal and informal sectors, under the
    national social security program, but this timeline is tight and universal health coverage will likely
    take considerably longer.




                                                           49
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                             Chapter II




          There are gender differences in vulnerability
          Gender differences in terms of opportunities imply that women tend to be more
          vulnerable to shocks than men.50 Women constitute most of the self-employed and unpaid
          family workers, making them more susceptible to personal and financial insecurity. The gender
          wage gap is larger than in other countries in east Asia, with women only earning about 70
          percent of what men earn, in part because of gender differences in choice of fields of tertiary
          education and, mostly, because female workers tend to have less secure terms of employment
          and are more likely to be self-employed, doing unpaid family work or working in the informal
          sector. Being a woman increases the probability of working in the informal sector by 24
          percent.51 Women-owned SMEs are mostly self-employed by necessity. Indonesia’s social
          assistance programs favor female-headed households (FHH) but as typically the sole income
          earner in the household, female-headed households tend to be more vulnerable to shocks and
          their poverty rates tend to be more volatile.

          Ongoing reforms that aim to increase women’s representation in politics and
          participation in decision-making positions may help reduce vulnerability in the future. In
          part thanks to Law No.2/2008 on Political Parties and Law No.10/2008 on General Elections,
          which mandates 30 percent participation by women in parliaments, the rate of women’s political
          participation increased from 11 percent in 2004 to 18 percent in 2009. The past decade has also
          seen key achievements in the regulatory framework on gender equality in development planning
          and budgeting. For instance, a gender analysis pathway has been made compulsory in the
          development of the national and subnational annual development and its budget. However, the
          implementation of these frameworks remains unclear. Finally, Indonesia is a signatory to most
          major international conventions upholding principles of gender equality and is one of the few
          countries that have a dedicated Ministry of Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection.

          The job market is the key source of vulnerability
          Whether an individual is vulnerable or not depends to a large extent on whether he/she is
          working and on the type/quality of job he/she is in. Table 2.1 reveals some details about the
          characteristics of the 65 million vulnerable individuals. About 21 million of them are children
          from poor families; among the 44 million vulnerable adults, about one third (15 million) do not
          work, 42 percent (18 million) work in agriculture and 10 percent (2.9 million) work in wholesale,
          retail, hotel and restaurants. The proportion of vulnerable workers within each sector is relatively
          high in all sectors except communications and banking/finance/business services. For instance,
          more than a quarter of workers in agriculture, construction and transport can be classified as
          vulnerable.




          50 The World Bank’s World Development Report (2011) framework for analyzing gender issues emphasizes four dimensions:
          endowment, opportunities, voice and agency and cross-cutting dimensions. Gender disparities in endowment (e.g. education and
          health) have been significantly reduced as shown in the next section.
          51 World Bank Indonesia Jobs Report (2010).




                                                                        50
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Table 2.1: Vulnerable adults either do not work or mostly work in some well-identified sectors
                                                      # of vulnerable people                      Proportion      Proportion of
                                            Children            Adult             Total         of vulnerable vulnerable adults
                                           (age 10-14)        (age 15+)                              adults to in each sector to
                                                                                                  total adults  total vulnerable
                                                                                                population in             adults
                                                                                                  each sector
     Communication                                      0           67,198            67,198                12.5                      0.2
     Banking, financing & business                      0           93,451            93,451                  7.5                     0.2
     services
     Transport                                     1,617        1,153,040         1,154,657                 25.4                      2.6
     Construction                                  3,387        1,889,363         1,892,750                 29.3                      4.3
     Public services                               9,955        2,349,605         2,359,560                 17.6                      5.4
     Wholesale, retail, hotel &                   38,953        4,555,104         4,594,057                 19.8                     10.4
     restaurant
     Agriculture and other sectors               173,735       18,347,156        18,520,891                 28.4                     41.8
     Not working                             20,501,483        15,452,754        35,954,237                 26.0                     35.2
     Total                                   20,729,130        43,907,671        64,636,801                 25.4                   100.0
    Source: Susenas data, World Bank calculations.
    Note: “Working” is defined for individuals above 10 years old as having worked at least day in the past week.


    Agriculture and “wholesale, retail, hotel and restaurant” which employ the largest
    number of vulnerable workers have the lowest levels of labor productivity in the
    economy. Agriculture and wholesale, trade, hotel and restaurant (dubbed “low-end services”)
    employ 35 and 21 percent of total workers. They happen to be the sectors with the lowest
    productivity and skill-content in the economy (Figure 2.10). Furthermore, less than 10 percent
    of workers in these sectors have a tertiary level of education and more than 60 percent do
    not have a contract. Because of the weight of these sectors in total employment, the overall
    picture of the economy is one that feature a predominance of low value-added, low skilled, low
    productivity sectors (Figure 2.10).

     Figure 2.10: Agriculture and low-end services have the lowest levels of labor productivity in the
     economy
                                                  Sectors relative productivity vs. skill content
                       Value added per       (bubble area = sector share in total employment in 2012)
                       worker 2005
                                  -2012
                         8
                         4                    Mining 1.4%                                         Finance 2.4%
                         0
                         6                                      Electricity, gas 0.2%
                         2              Manufacturing 13.9%
                         8                                                           Soc. & pers. services
                         4 Construction 6.1%          Transport 4.5%                       15.4%
                         0
                       9.6                            Trade & hotel &
                       9.2                           restaurant 20.9%
                       8.8
                       8.4                   Agriculture 35.1%
                       8.0
                           -10   -5     0      5       10      15      20       25     30      35     40     45     50
                                     % of employed with tertiary education by sector in 2012
     Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations
     Note: Labor productivity is measured as the value-added (in constant 1990 PPP$) per person employed.




                                                                    51
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                     Chapter II




          In dynamic terms, sectoral labor productivity growth has generally decelerated in the
          second half of the 2000s with the exception of agriculture. The sharpest decline in labor
          productivity growth occurred in manufacturing: aggregate labor productivity growth in that
          sector dropped to only 1 percent in 2010 and close to zero percent in 2011, against more than
          4 percent in 2005 following a rebound from the 1998-1997 crisis. Within the services sector,
          transport and communications were the subsectors that held up well in terms of productivity
          growth, preventing an otherwise sharper decline of productivity dynamics of the overall services
          sector (Figure 2.11). Finally, as shown in chapter 1, the rise in agricultural labor was mainly driven
          by palm oil, rubber and other estate crops that have received large investments over the past
          decade. Agriculture productivity however remains much lower that its levels in the mid-1990s.

           Figure 2.11: Sectoral labor productivity trends
           (constant 1990 PPP value-added per worker)
                                               Indonesia: Productivity growth by sector (%)
                               12. 0              (5-year moving average)
                               10. 0
                                                                                              Services
                                8. 0          Agriculture                                     (excl Transport
                                                                           Manufacturing      & Comm)
                                6. 0
                                4. 0
                                2. 0
                                0. 0
                               -2.0    1995                    2000                    2005               2010
                                                                         Services
                               -4.0

           Source: BPS, Bank staff calculations


          Somewhat consistent with sectoral trends in productivity growth, real wage growth has
          been relatively modest over the past decade despite rapid increases in nominal wages.
          Although average nominal wage for all sectors (including both formal and informal sectors)
          almost tripled between 2001 and 2012, the average real wage rose by only 21 percent in that
          period. This sluggish rise in real wage is consistent with the weak productivity growth in most
          sectors combined with a sharp rise in the cost of living (CPI) over 2001-2011. The sectoral
          breakdown shows important differences: wages in mining have been growing twice as fast
          as the national average. On the other hand, wages in a potentially skill-intensive sector such
          as manufacturing have remained constantly below the national average, consistent with that
          sector’s poor productivity growth. These dynamics have had an important effect on poverty and
          vulnerability, as discussed below.




                                                                         52
                                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                                                          Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Figure 2.12: Relative to the huge increase in                                  Figure 2.13: …while sector differences in the
     nominal wages, real wage increases have been                                   real wage increases were large between 2001
     sluggish between 2001 and 2012…                                                and 2012
                                                                                                   Sector
                         IDR thousand                                                                        21%
                                                                                             Aggregate                           176%
                              1,800                                                                          Real, 14%          Nominal,
                                                                                          Other services
                              1,600                                                                                               162%
                                                                                               Finance      6%
                              1,400                                                                                          137%
                              1,200 175.8%                  21.3%                       Transport&comm.       27%
                                                                                                                                    188%
                              1,000                                                         Trade&hotel     16%
                                                                                                                                  161%
                               800                                                         Construction          32%
                               600                                                                                                    202%
                                                                                                Utilities   14%
                               400                                                                                             159%
                                        2001 2012            2001     2012                Manufacturing      20%
                               200                                                                                                168%
                                0                                                                Mining          39%
                                                                                                                                           231%
                                            Nominal                 Real                                         37%
                                                                                             Agriculture                                 220%


     Source: BPS, sakernas data                                                     Source: BPS, sakernas data


    3. Inequality of income and opportunity
    Income inequality has increased over the past decade
    Indonesia’s poor and vulnerable households have seen a much slower income growth
    than their most affluent counterparts, leading to a rise in inequality over the decade.
    Indeed, one reason for persistent poverty and vulnerability, despite sustained economic growth,
    is that growth has not been shared equally. Between 2003 and 2010, real annual growth of per
    capita consumption was 1.3 percent for the poorest 40 percent of households, compared with
    3.5 percent for the next 40 percent, and 5.9 percent for the top 20 percent (Figure 2.14).52

     Figure 2.14: Growth incidence curve, 2003-10
                                              12%                            40%                                            80%
                                8
      Annualized growth (%)




                                6
                                              Average Growth for all Households

                                4


                                2


                                0
                                    1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58 61 64 67 70 73 76 79 82 85 88 91 94 97
                                                             Household Per Capita Consumption Percentile
     Source: Susenas and World Bank calculations.




    52 A Growth Incidence Curve (GIC) shows the annual growth rate in consumption between two periods for each percentile of the
    distribution. Thus, the GIC indicates how the average consumption growth for all households is distributed across the distribution.
    See World Bank (forthcoming) Inequality of Income and Consumption in Indonesia.




                                                                                   53
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                              Chapter II




          Inequalities in household consumption, as measured by the Gini coefficient, were relatively stable
          over the final 15 years of the Suharto era, fluctuating between 32 and 36, although beginning to
          increase towards the end of the period (Figure 2.15). With the rich being most adversely affected
          during the Asian financial crisis, the Gini fell from 36 in 1996 to 30 by 2000. However, since the recovery
          from the crisis, it has been steadily rising, reaching 41 by 2012.

           Figure 2.15: Consumption Gini coefficient, 1980-2012
                                           45
                                                                                                 Asian            Reformasi
                                                                            Suharto
                                           40                                                    Financial
                                                                           New Order             Crisis
                        Gini Coefficient




                                           35

                                           30

                                           25

                                           20



           Source: Susenas


          Indonesia has experienced one of the fastest rising rates of inequality in the East
          Asian region (Figure 2.16), although consistent and reliable international comparisons
          are difficult.53 The speed of the increase is reason for concern. Arguments have been made
          that inequality should be expected to rise as a country develops and some people participate
          earlier in economic growth than others, before falling as the rest of the population catches up.54
          However, there is mixed empirical support for this.55 More importantly, the speed of the increase
          in Indonesia raises concerns, even if some increase is part of a natural process of development.
          Moreover, as discussed below, an increasing amount of consumption inequality in Indonesia is
          explained by circumstances of birth, which is both inequitable and means the country’s human
          capital base is not being best utilized.56

           Figure 2.16: Gini Coefficients in East Asia, 2000-12
                                                                      15
                                            Percentage Point Change




                                                                                       Change over Period (LHS)
                                                                      10

                                                                       5

                                                                       0

                                                                      -5

                                                                 -1 0




          53 Comparing Gini coefficients across time and countries is difficult, due to different welfare measures (income or consumptions),
          different welfare aggregates (e.g. whether housing, durables and self-production are included in the consumption aggregate, and in
          what manner), and different within-country purchasing power adjustments (spatial cost of living). These differences can affect both
          levels and changes in levels. Moreover, the choice of start and end points also affects trends over time. Work has begun on an East
          Asian data portal which will facilitate more consistent comparisons.
          54 The well-known Kuznets Curve (Kuznets, 1955).
          55 See, for example, Clarke (1995), Barro (2000) and Forbes (2000).
          56 A decomposition of the Theil L Index of consumption inequality for children under 18 years old indicates 27 percent is due to
          differences in birth circumstances (predominantly parents’ education, urban-rural and regional locations) in 2002, compared to 37
          percent by 2012.

                                                                                                   54
                                                                                                            Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                                             Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Start Year                                2000    2004    2002    2002         1999    2002    1999      2000     2004       2001
     End year                                  2012    2009    2008    2008         2005    2008    2009      2009     2008       2007
     Start Value                                 30     37.9    32.6    32.8         39.2    37.6    43.1      46.1     41.9       39.5
     End Value                                  41.1    46.2    36.7    36.5         42.5    35.6    40.0      43.0     37.9       31.9
    Source: World Development Indicators and Susenas.
    Notes: Some coefficients are for income and some for consumption. Change per year has been calculated over a different period for
    each country, as indicated in the table. All data are earliest and most recent available for the period 2000-2012


    Inequality of opportunities has worsened
    An increasing amount of inequality can be explained not by a lack of skill or effort, but
    by circumstances of birth. If inequalities of outcomes, particularly economic, are the
    result of individual efforts, we may be less concerned. However, if they are due to systemic
    differences among people in access to opportunities, there is more cause for policy remedies.
    The World Bank 2006 World Development Report examines inequality of opportunity along
    three dimensions: health (e.g., access to services), education (e.g., access to schools and teachers)
    and voice or power (e.g., ability to influence deeper institutions in society, such as governance,
    access to land, control of labor, and market regulation; power and voice can also be examined
    within the household). Recent work on the Human Opportunity Index (HOI) has also looked at
    access to safe water and sanitation, and infrastructure and communications.57 The key focus of
    such work is the degree to which opportunity and access vary systemically along dimensions such
    as gender, race, religion, disability, location, and family background. The HOI approach attempts
    to quantify some of the contribution of inequalities of opportunity to inequalities of outcome.58

    Over the past decade, the proportion of inequality among children explained by
    differences in characteristics at birth has been increasing. In 2002, 27 percent of child
    consumption inequality was due to differences in their gender, the gender and employment status
    of the head of their household, their parents’ education, and their region and location of birth.
    By 2012, this had reached 37 percent (Figure 2.17), driven mainly by parents’ education, and
    growing up in a rural area, as well as the region of Indonesia (Figure 2.18).
     Figure 2.17: Proportion of child consumption                               Figure 2.18: Role of birth circumstances in
     inequality due to birth circumstances                                      child consumption inequality
                                          40
        Percent of Inequality Explained




                                          35
                                                                                                                      Gender
                                          30
                                          25                                                                          HOH Gender

                                          20                                                                          Region*Urban
                                          15                                                                          HOH Employed
                                          10                                                                          Parents'
                                           5                                                                          Education
                                           0
                                               2002             2012
     Source: Susenas, World Bank staff calculations              Source: Susenas, World Bank staff calculations
     Note: Decomposition of Theil L (GE 0) for children under 18
     living at home

    57 See, for example, Paes de Barros et al (2009).
    58 This calculation will be done as part of an ongoing World Bank on inequality in Indonesia.




                                                                               55
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                            Chapter II




          The role of the commodities boom in rising income inequality
          There is evidence that the commodities boom in 2003-12 played a significant role in
          the widening income gap observed in Indonesia. Theoretically, the distributional impact
          of a commodity-price shock can be modest if resources (in particular labor) are mobile across
          sectors. However, if there are constraints on inter-sectoral factor mobility, the distributional
          consequences of a price shock might be significant. The low level of labor intensity of
          most resource sectors (in particular oil, gas and mining) typically prevents the absorption
          of a significant portion of the labor force in response to a boom in prices. Thus rises in
          commodity prices tend to disproportionately benefit the owners of assets. Consistent with this,
          Bhattacharyya and Williamson (2013) show that resource booms tend to exacerbate inequality.59

          In the case of Indonesia, the commodities boom has played a distinct role in the
          differentiated growth of income between the rich, and the poor and vulnerable fueling
          inequality. As seen in Chapter 1, the sharp rise in commodity prices led to a significant wealth
          effect, manifested in the rise in corporate wealth and the stock market between mid-2000 and
          2011. Mining, coal and crude palm oil assets witnessed particularly large price increases in value
          until March 2011, leading to 20-fold rise in the mining equity price index, a 14-fold increase in
          the agriculture index and contributing to a 10-fold increase in the overall equity index.60 Sixteen
          out of the 21 billionaires in the Forbes 2010 list of Indonesia’s 40 richest people owned assets
          linked to the coal and palm oil sectors. Furthermore, the rich owners of assets such as land,
          houses, and office buildings in metropolitan areas such as Jakarta have also disproportionately
          benefited from the sharp rise in land prices over the past decade. The rise in asset prices, which
          supports income growth for the rich, is in sharp contrast to sluggish growth in real wages of the
          poor and vulnerable as seen above. Indeed, the gap between rich and poor has widened.

          It is important to note, however, that the commodities boom has also indirectly
          supported the incomes of the non-rich, including the poor, vulnerable and households
          in the middle class as seen in Chapter 1. Indeed, the commodities boom has had a strong
          correlation with nominal GDP, and has supported demand of goods and services. Rising
          demand has powered real GDP growth in the services sector in urban areas, in turn driving
          employment generation and overall growth. The rich have simply enjoyed a rise in assets
          (including assets built in urban areas such as office buildings and residences) and income that is
          much larger than other income categories.

          Has fiscal policy helped to redress increasing inequality?
          By allocating a large portion of the revenues generated by the resources sector to pro-
          rich energy subsidies, fiscal policy may have exacerbated inequality. The commodities
          boom has benefited public finance directly through tax and non-tax payments from the resources
          sector and indirectly through the spending effect it has generated in the economy. Natural
          resource revenues (from tax and non-tax payments) increased dramatically in 2003-12 (Figure
          2.19). Oil revenues increased more than fourfold between 1999 and 2012 to Rp.182 trillion in
          59 Bhattacharyya, S and J G Williamson (2013), “Distributional Impact of Commodity Price Shocks: Australia over a Century”,
          CEPR Discussion Paper 9582, August.
          60 The finance sub-index also increased 10-fold while manufacturing saw a 13 times rise.




                                                                       56
                                                                                                            Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




      2012 (US$17 billion), gas revenues fivefold to Rp.105.9 trillion in 2012 (US$10 billion), mining
      revenues almost fourfold to Rp.78.5 trillion in 201261 (US$7.3 billion) while forestry and fisheries
      revenues increased by 860 percent from a low basis to Rp 6 trillion in 2012 (US$560 million).62 A
      large share of the increased government revenues was channeled into energy subsidy spending,
      which crowded out infrastructure spending (Figure 2.20). For instance, the 2012 spending on
      fuel subsidies of Rp.212 trillion was equivalent to total central government spending on capital
      (Rp.140 trillion) and social expenditures (Rp.75 trillion) combined. It was three times the 2012
      budget allocation to central government infrastructure spending.

      The large expenditures on fuel subsidies are akin to an additional income transfer
      disproportionately benefiting rich households. About84 percent of all benefits go to the
      top half of households by consumption, and only 16 percent to the bottom half, 40 percent of
      benefits go to the richest 10 percent of households, and less than 1 percent to the poorest 10
      percent. In addition, not only do the poor (as measured by consumption levels) receive fewer
      benefits from fuel subsidies, they also are likely to suffer more from the poor provision of
      infrastructure; they live in the areas that are most flood-prone and often have the most difficulty
      accessing key basic services.

                 Figure 2.19: Natural resource revenues                    Figure 2.20: But much of public spending
                 increased dramatically in nominal terms                   went to fuel subsidies as opposed to
                 (Rp billion)                                              infrastructure
                                                                           (share of total expenditure, %)
                                   400,000         Resource Non Tax         50
                                                   Revenue from
                                   350,000         Forestry and Fishery                    Fuel subsidies          Infrastructure
   Revenue (IDR Billion Nominal)




                                                   Resource Tax             40
                                   300,000         Revenue from
                                                   Forestry and Fishery
                                   250,000         Resource Non Tax         30
                                                   Revenue from Mining
                                   200,000         Resource Tax
                                                   Revenue from Mining      20
                                   150,000         Resource Non Tax
                                                   Revenue from Gas
                                   100,000         Resource Tax             10
                                                   Revenue from Gas
                                    50,000         Resource Non Tax
                                                   Revenue from Oil          0
                                       -           Resource Tax
                                                   Revenue from Oil

       Source: Ministry of Finance and World Bank staff calculations.       Source: Ministry of Finance.
       Note: Figure 2.20 does not include the data for 1998-2002 for easier interpretation of the data. The data in 1998-2002 are blurred
      by two factors: (i) a change in the budget reporting methodology in 2000 and (ii) the 1997/98 Asian financial crisis.
       



      61 Note that for mining, forestry and fisheries, data on non-tax revenues are unavailable from 1998 to 2002. Therefore, we use the
      period 2003-12 for analysis of the revenues from mining, forestry and fisheries.
      62 In 2012, oil made up 49 percent of total resource revenues, gas 29.4 percent, mining 20 percent while forestry and fishery
      accounted for 1.6 percent. For oil and gas, in addition to company tax, the production sharing contracts provide for non-tax revenues
      from government equity shares (similar to a profit-based royalty) and government share of the first tranche petroleum (similar to
      an output-based royalty); signature and production bonuses are additional sources of non-tax revenues. For mining, in addition to
      company tax, non-tax revenues are mainly collected from output-based royalties, including both ad valorum and specific royalties.
      Coal overwhelmingly dominates non-tax mining revenues, accounting for 90 percent of mineral non-tax revenues in 2011.




                                                                      57
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                              Chapter II




          4. Access to Basic Services
          Has the economic transformation of the past decade been associated with significantly
          improved access to basic services? Clearly, the past decade has seen continuous progress in
          access to key services such as education, health, water and sanitation and electricity. However,
          progress has been uneven and unequal, leading to wide disparities across geographic and
          income levels, and undermining the inclusiveness of growth. In general, access to services is
          disproportionately low for the poor and vulnerable, with the notable exception of education,
          where remarkable progress was made in access equity.

          The population’s access to quality basic services should be examined against the
          backdrop of the significant decentralization that occurred in the early 2000s. Since
          then, subnational governments have taken over primary responsibility for delivering nearly all
          public services. The assignment of new functions to local governments was accompanied by
          significant reallocation of funding. Subnational expenditure grew from 2.7 percent of GDP in
          2000 to 7.2 percent of GDP in 2011. Today subnational governments manage nearly the same
          proportion of public spending as the central government, when central government spending on
          subsidies and interest payments are excluded. The vision and expectation behind this increase in
          responsibilities and financial capacity were to enhance the response to service delivery needs.

          Education
          Reflecting Indonesia’s clear political commitment to education, the poor’s access to
          education has increased dramatically with children from poor families enrolling earlier
          and staying in school longer. A constitutional mandate to allocate at least 20 percent of the
          total government budget to education has led to a more than doubling of spending in real terms
          since 2002. The biggest payoff for this increase has been improvements in access and equity.
          The share of 15 year olds from the poorest consumption quintile that are still enrolled in school
          increased from 60 to 80 percent between 2006 and 2010. However, beyond the age 15, the share
          of children from the poorest quintile enrolled drops dramatically (Figure 2.21). Access to early
          childhood education, senior secondary and above still remains low particularly for the poor. In
          higher education, total participation has increased from 12 percent in 2000 to 26 percent, yet less
          than 4 percent of 19-22 year olds from the poorest 40 percent enter higher education. Gender
          disparities are not a problem in terms of access, although boys tend to drop out of all levels of
          education more than girls.

          The current greatest challenge for Indonesia is to improve the quality of education
          for all income groups. For instance, international tests such as PISA rank Indonesia below
          many regional peers. In 2012, out of 470,000 15-year old students in 65 countries, Indonesia
          ranked 57th in reading, math and scientific literacy, scoring 402 out of 600 (against an OECD
          average of 493). Many parts of Asia scored a lot better: Shanghai (1st, 556), South Korea (2nd,
          539), Hong Kong (4th, 533), Singapore (5th, 526), Japan (8th, 520) and Thailand (50th, 421).
          Other emerging economies outside Asia did better as well: Turkey (41st), Russia (43rd) and
          Brazil (53rd). Reforms to improve basic education, senior secondary and higher education are
          underway and remain challenging. See Chapter 5 and World Bank (2012) for more details.




                                                          58
                                                                                                  Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                                       Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Figure 2.21: Percentage of children enrolled by age (%)
     100                                             2006             100
      90                                                              90
                                                     2010                                                            2006
      80                                                              80                                             2010
      70                                                              70
      60                                                              60
     50                                                               50
     40                                                               40
      30      Poorest Quintile                                        30
      20                                                                       Richest Quintile
                                                                      20
     10                                                               10
      0                                                                0
             6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
                                                                            6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
     Source: World Bank (2013)63


    Health
    Indonesia has made steady progress on several key population health outcomes over
    the past few decades. Life expectancy has steadily increased to almost 70 years in 2011, up
    from about 45 years in 1960. The under-five mortality rate has declined steadily from 216 per
    1,000 live births in 1960 to 82 in 1990 and 32 in 2011. At current trends, Indonesia is projected
    to meet the child-health related Millennium Development Goal (MDG) which calls for a two-
    thirds reduction in under-five mortality between 1990 and 2015. Indonesia’s overall achievements
    in this indicator are broadly consistent with what might be expected for its level of income.
    Nevertheless, many comparator countries in the region such as the Philippines, Cambodia,
    Vietnam, and Thailand perform far better than Indonesia relative to their income levels in the
    area of infant and under-five mortality (Figure 2.22).

     Figure 2.22: Indonesia child and infant mortality is about average for its income level




     Source: WDI

    63 World Bank (2013): Spending More or Spending Better: Improving Education Financing in Indonesia, in collaboration with the
    Ministry of Education.




                                                                 59
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                    Chapter II




           Figure 2.23: Maternal mortality ration trends in Indonesia, 1990-2015




          Source: Joint WB-UN estimates Indonesia census
          DHS; Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME)
          Note: Shaded are represents joint WB-UN estimation uncertainty


          However, the Indonesian health sector faces considerable challenges. These include the
          relatively poor state of maternal health, a “double burden” of nutrition, persistent geographic
          and income-related inequalities in access and health outcomes, and high levels of out-of-pocket
          (OOP) spending for health despite high and increasing coverage rates. The maternal mortality
          ratio, recently estimated at 220 per 100,000 live births, is higher than that of India and Myanmar,
          and much higher than what would be expected for Indonesia’s income level. At current trends,
          Indonesia will miss the MDG target for maternal health (Figure 2.23). Although utilization of
          maternal health services such as antenatal care and skilled birth attendance is relatively high, only
          63 percent of deliveries occur in health facilities.

          Another key challenge is child malnutrition, contrasting with over-nutrition problems
          in older children and adults and raising the propensity of non-communicable diseases.
          Indonesia is on-track to attain the nutrition-related MDG related to reducing the prevalence
          of underweight among children under five (current estimates place the prevalence rate around
          18 percent). However, reducing the prevalence of other malnutrition-related indicators such as
          early childhood stunting remains a challenge.64 Stunting increases the propensity of becoming
          overweight and of cardiovascular diseases during adulthood. Changing consumption patterns
          and lifestyles associated with increasing urbanization are exacerbating the situation, such that
          over-nutrition problems are already affecting the majority of adults. Unless action is taken now,
          not only tackling maternal and child under-nutrition but also tackling the over-nutrition problems
          in older children and adults, the prevalence of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) will increase
          dramatically, undermining Indonesia’s economic progress in coming decades.

          In fact, NCDs are becoming one of the biggest health challenges facing Indonesia.
          NCDs now account for the largest share of the overall burden of disease in Indonesia. Whereas
          in 1990 only about 37 percent of morbidity and mortality in the country was due to NCDs, by
          2010 this number had risen to 58 percent (Figure 2.24). This trend is expected to continue in

          64 RisetKesehatanDasar (Riskesdas) 2010 estimates giziburuk (4.9 percent); gizikurang (13 percent).




                                                                         60
                                                                                 Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter II                                                                                      Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    the coming years, not just in Indonesia but also across the region. From a health financing and
    service delivery perspective, what sets NCDs apart is their chronic nature: they are generally
    typified by long durations and slow progression rates, but they can also result in rapid premature
    death (e.g., with stroke and cardiovascular conditions). NCDs are also generally more expensive
    to treat and require sustained case management, often requiring multiple contacts with the health
    system over one’s lifetime. Management of NCDs also requires primary care services to play
    an important and effective role in screening and delivering preventive interventions which, for
    most NCDs, are far more cost-effective than treatment at advanced stages of progression. There
    is also evidence to suggest that NCDs are more likely to result in catastrophic health spending,
    placing households at risk of impoverishment.

     Figure 2.24: Burden of disease by cause in Indonesia, 1990-2010
     (%)
                    1990                                 2000                            2010

                               Injuries                           Injuries                          Injuries
                           7                                  9                                 9

                                                                                 33
                                              43                             Communicable
                             37
                     Non-Communicable     Communicable            49                                58
             56
         Communicable                              Non-Communicable                   Non-Communicable




     Source: IHME


    In general, the performance of the health system in Indonesia reflects a host of factors,
    including relatively low public spending in health, low household access to formal
    insurance, shallow financing protection among those with formal insurance coverage,
    poor quality, and delivery issues related to Indonesia’s big-bang decentralization (see
    below). Public spending on health is only 0.9 percent of GDP in Indonesia, much lower than
    Thailand (2.9 percent), China (2.7 percent), and Vietnam (2.6 percent). In 2012, health claimed
    only 5.3 percent of total public spending, and less than 2 percent of central government
    spending (compared with 18 percent of central government spending on fuel subsidies, for
    instance). At the same time, more than half of the population still remains without any health
    insurance coverage despite progress in the past decade. As mentioned above, OOP spending
    remains high, accounting for 40 percent of total health spending.

    Water and sanitation
    Access to safe water and sanitation, a major factor in health and overall welfare, has
    increased since 2001 but is still below 70 percent of the population. According to
    household survey data (Susenas), access to safe water has increased from 47 to 64 percent
    between 2001 and 2012. Households’ access to sanitation also increased, albeit only from 54 to
    67 percent in that period. Still, Indonesia lags behind the Philippines and Vietnam, as well as
    Malaysia and Thailand. A 2008 study estimated poor sanitation nationwide cost US$6.3 billion
    annually in health care costs, lost productivity, water resource and fishery losses, declining land




                                                         61
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                 Chapter II




          values and tourism losses. Sewerage coverage is minimal, with only 2 percent of urban areas
          having access to centralized systems. Of the estimated 85,000 tons per day of solid waste
          generated by Indonesia’s urban population of 110 million, only about 40 percent ends up in
          landfills, with many of these landfills being open dumps. In rural areas, while the number of
          community-managed piped water schemes has grown steadily, these cover less than 20 percent
          of the rural population and there is inadequate emphasis on sustainability of operations.
           
          A number of steps have been taken to improve delivery in the water sector, but progress
          remains uneven. The Government undertook legislative and regulatory steps to improve
          delivery in the water sector in the mid-2000s (Water Resources Law No. 7/2004 and the
          Government Regulation No. 16/2005). In rural areas, the Government is scaling up community-
          based schemes for both water and sanitation, including a community-led sanitation program
          targeted to reach 20,000 villages by 2014. In urban areas, there have been some improvements
          in the operational and financial performance of public urban water utilities over the past decade,
          with the number of utilities classified as ‘healthy’ increasing from 38 to 173 between 2004 and
          2012. However, weak capacity and governance, and the lack of access to financing, remain key
          constraints. The Government has launched debt restructuring, and loan subsidy and guarantee
          schemes, although to date these initiatives remain fragmented and their uptake relatively slow.
          Meanwhile, efforts to expand sewerage and sludge management systems remain at a nascent
          stage.

          Electricity
          Access to electricity, largely governed by the state-owned electricity utility, PLN, has
          progressed steadily over the past decade but millions of individuals still lack reliable
          electricity. According to the latest Susenas data (household survey), the percentage of
          households with access to electricity increased from 86 percent in 2001 to 95 percent in 2012
          (92 percent of households were served by PLN against 3 percent connected from non-PLN
          sources). However, this statistics focused on the demand-side are in contradiction with official
          data from PLN, which point to a household electricity coverage rate of 74 percent. This
          discrepancy reflects large differences in quality (number of continuous hours of access) and a
          large number of households have unreliable or low quality access.

          To further increase access to electricity, the Government strategy consists of improving
          the regulatory framework, strengthening the enforcement of existing regulations and
          boosting investments. The recently enacted Energy Law and the Electricity Law provide a
          renewed legal framework for the energy sector, with an emphasis on economic sustainability,
          energy security, and environmental conservation. Following a first phase in the early 2000s,
          a second “Fast-Track Program” to construct an additional 10,000 MW of capacity has been
          launched, of which 60 percent will be from renewable resources, with geothermal accounting for
          about 4,800 MW and hydropower for most of the rest. Domestic consumption of petroleum
          products in the country has been heavily subsidized, which has supported the development of
          power generation largely based on diesel and other petroleum-based fuels. The country has been
          unable to significantly reduce its dependence on petroleum-based fuels, with a fast-growing
          demand from the transport sector and shortages of natural gas in the domestic power generation
          market as about half of total gas production is exported.




                                                         62
       Part 2
Indonesia in the Next
 Decade: Generating
     Prosperity
Chapter III. The Road to
   Shared Prosperity
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                      Chapter III




                 Chapter III. The Road to Shared Prosperity

          Within the next two decades, Indonesia aspires to generate prosperity, avoid a middle-income
          trap and leave no one behind as it tries to catch up with high-income economies. These are
          ambitious goals. Realizing them requires sustained high growth and job creation, as well as
          reduced inequality. Can Indonesia achieve them? This report argues that the country has the
          potential to rise and become more prosperous and equitable. But the risk of “floating in
          the middle” is real. Which pathway the economy will take depends on: (i) the adoption of a
          growth strategy that unleashes the productivity potential of the economy; and (ii) consistent
          implementation of a few, long-standing, high-priority structural reforms to boost growth and
          share prosperity more widely. Indonesia is fortunate to have options in financing these reforms
          without threatening its long-term fiscal outlook. The difficulties lie in getting the reforms
          implemented in a complex institutional and decentralized framework. But Indonesia cannot
          afford to not try harder. The costs of complacency – and the rewards for action -- are too high.

          This chapter (i) highlights the key domestic and external factors that will shape economic
          prospects as well as the risks and potential cost of complacency; (ii) describes the growth
          strategy that is likely to help Indonesia realize its aspirations; (iii) identifies key priority areas for
          reforms that will be elaborated on in the next chapters of the report and (iv) discusses specific
          reforms options to address cross-cutting implementation challenges.

          1. Key Opportunities and Risks
          Over the next decade, four domestic and external factors—which good policies can turn into
          powerful drivers of growth, or “pull factors” —will shape economic prospects. These factors
          are Indonesia’s demographics, the urbanization trend, commodity prices, and developments in
          China.

          Key opportunities
          •	    Demographics. Indonesia is fortunate to have abundant labor. Between 2013 and 2020, the
                working-age population will increase by 14.8 million, reaching 189 million from the current
                174 million. Today, 50 percent of the population is under the age of 30. This increasingly
                educated and IT-savvy youth is an asset that can be used to boost overall productivity and
                economic growth. With the right policies in place to utilize this labor, Indonesia is poised to
                benefit from a demographic “dividend”, before the population starts to age in 2025-30.
          •	    Urbanization. Urbanization is increasing at an annual pace of about 4 percent, making
                Indonesia one of the most rapidly urbanizing countries in the world. By 2025, 68 percent
                of the population is projected to live in urban areas, compared to 52 percent in 2012. As
                income rises and existing large metropolitan areas such as Jakarta and Surabaya become
                saturated, the demand for consumer durables, shopping space and housing will increase
                significantly in smaller cities. Connecting these cities and their inhabitants to rural areas,
                metropolitan areas and the global economy will be essential to attracting firms and achieving
                shared prosperity. Empirical evidence shows that urbanization supports growth and poverty
                in Indonesia only in the presence of adequate infrastructure (Lewis, 2014).



                                                              66
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter III                                                                                                            Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    •	        Global commodity prices. The softening of commodity prices since 2011 poses challenges
              for Indonesia in the short term, as seen in their impact on Indonesia’s trade balance, but it
              offers an opportunity to enhance the quality and diversity of investments in Indonesia. Over
              the past decade, high commodity prices tilted investment incentives in favor of the resource
              sector and non-tradable sectors (e.g., the real estate sector) against manufacturing and other
              tradable sectors. The share of manufacturing in total investment dropped to 12 percent in
              2002-11 against almost one-fifth in 1990-96. Going forward, lower commodity prices should
              increase the relative profitability and attractiveness of manufacturing and can help Indonesia
              develop its industrial base. Commodity price falls over the past two years, through their
              impact on the current account, are now translating into depreciation in the real effective
              exchange rate, helping manufacturing exports and competitiveness. With reforms to reduce
              the constraints faced by manufacturing firms (see below), weaker commodity prices may be a
              blessing in disguise.

     Figure 3.1: Commodity prices are projected to Figure 3.2: Indonesia’s real effective exchange rate
     decline further over the next decade              is now adjusting to recent commodity price falls
     (index, 2005 = 100; real commodity price indices) (index, 2000 = 100; weighted commodity price index, real
                                                       effective exchange rate)
                         Index, 2005 = 100, real 2005 USD terms           Index, 2000 = 100                             Index, 2000 = 100
    200                                                                    500                                                         210
                    Non-energy commodities
                                                                                                                                       190
                                                                           400
    150
                                                                                                                                       170
                          Agriculture
                                                                           300           REER (RHS)                                    150
    100
                                                                           200                                                         130
                                          Energy                                                                                       110
     50
                                                                           100
                                                                                              Index of IDN's 6 Major                   90
                                                                                              Export Commodities (LHS)
         0                                                                    0                                                        70
             1980            1995             2010                2025        Oct-00     Oct-03       Oct-06      Oct-09      Oct-12
     Source: Bank staff using UN population data                         Source: Bank staff calculation using UN population data


    •	        Developments in China. China’s rapidly rising wages present Indonesia with a potential
              in regaining a comparative advantage in labor-intensive export sectors. China’s nominal
              wages have grown by an annual average of almost 15 percent since 2001 which, together
              with slowing productivity growth in low-skilled sectors in recent years, has seen Chinese
              unit labor costs grow by almost 70 percent since 2005 (Economist Intelligence Unit,
              2012). Meanwhile, ongoing Yuan appreciation, with the real effective exchange rate up
              30 percent since 2005, is further eroding China’s competitiveness in manufactured goods.
              These pressures, combined with slower overall economic growth as China rebalances,
              are likely to prompt investors to look beyond China’s coastal areas. These dynamics offer
              ASEAN countries, including Indonesia, an opportunity to attract more investments in the
              manufacturing industries.

    However, while none of these potentially favorable factors will be captured without reforms, two
    risks remain: a risk of a slowdown in long-term growth and a risk of growth not being inclusive.




                                                                     67
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                                                                                  Chapter III




          Risk of a growth slowdown
          International experience shows that growth slowdowns can occur at all levels of income
          (Bulman et al, 2012). Recent evidence suggests that their frequency is higher for middle-
          income countries (IMF, 2013). As an example, Brazil grew fast in the 1960s and 1970s. But from
          1981, when its GDP per capita stood at US$3,939 (slightly above Indonesia’s GDP per capita
          today), it suffered a prolonged relative growth slowdown, until 2004.65 Similarly, also starting
          from 1981, when its GDP per capita was US$6,965, Mexico saw more than 20 years of slowing
          growth. Figures 3.4 and 3.5 show clearly that difficulty in managing shocks have led to repeated
          boom-bust growth pattern which held prevented significant progress in GDP per capita. These
          examples suggest that Indonesia cannot take its solid growth performance for granted. Instead,
          this growth was partially driven by a very favorable external environment: the commodity boom
          of 2003-11 combined with low global interest rates since 2009 supported corporate revenues,
          household incomes and government revenues, and led to a significant jump in domestic
          demand.66 But, since 2011, commodity prices have softened significantly. With the normalization
          of US growth, the Fed’s quantitative easing policy—which led to low global interest rates—is
          being gradually unwound, increasing financing costs. Without structural reforms, the risk of a
          growth slowdown for Indonesia is very real.

           Figure 3.3: Brazil, Mexico and South Africa’s GDP per capita, relative to the US and in absolute
           terms

               0.6             Ratio to USA                                                     Absolute numbers in constant 2005 USD
                               USA = 1.0                                            1981, $25,902                                                                                 2010, $42,001
               0.5


               0.3                                                                                1981: $6,965
                                   S.Africa                                                                                                 Mexico                  2010: $7,834
                                                               1981: $5,486
               0.2                                                                                                                                                2010, $5,794
                                                                                                  1981: $3,939
                             Brazil                                                                                                                                     2010, $5,618
               0.0
                     1960
                            1962
                                   1964
                                          1966
                                                 1968
                                                        1970
                                                               1972
                                                                      1974
                                                                             1976
                                                                                    1978
                                                                                           1980
                                                                                                  1982
                                                                                                         1984
                                                                                                                1986
                                                                                                                       1988
                                                                                                                              1990
                                                                                                                                     1992
                                                                                                                                            1994
                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2012



           Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators




          65 A commodity-rich country similar to Indonesia, Brazil benefitted significantly from a commodity boom in 2004-11. This
          favorable external factor explains parts of the strong growth recovery in that country in that period.
          66 More specifically, the direct rise in the value of resource assets (palm oil, rubber, coal, gas, etc.), as well as the value of other
          assets purchased on the back of commodity incomes or wealth (real estate properties, land and securities), significantly encouraged
          consumption and investment against these assets and generated multiplier effects in the economy.




                                                                                                         68
                                                                                                Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter III                                                                                                     Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Figure 3.4: GDP per capita changes in Brazil                   Figure 3.5: GDP per capita changes in Mexico
     (in response to GDP growth)                                    (in response to GDP growth)
                        2000-2012                 1990-1999                             2000-2012                 1990-1999
                        1980-1989                 1970-1979                             1980-1989                 1970-1979
                        1961-1969                                                       1961-1969
    12%                                                             12%
    10%
     8%
                                                                     7%
     6%
     4%
     2%                                                              2%
     0%
    -2%
                                                                    -3%
    -4%
    -6%
    -8%                                                             -8%
          7.07         .5         8.08             .5         9.0         8.0            8.5              9.0                 9.5
                   Ln GDP per capita (constant 2005 USD)                                          (constant
                                                                                Ln GDP per capita ( constant 2005 USD)
     Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators               Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators

    Risk of growth not being inclusive enough
    Even if Indonesia manages to avoid a prolonged growth slowdown, growth may not be
    inclusive. From 1999 to 2012, poverty was cut by half: from 24 percent to 12 percent. However,
    in 2012, about 65 million people hovered between the national poverty line and 50 percent above
    the latter. They and the poor are highly vulnerable to food price increases, health shocks and
    natural disasters. Vulnerability persists partly because the poorest families enjoy only a very small
    increase in real income, compared to those more fortunate. As seen in Chapter 2, in 2003-10,
    real growth of per capita consumption was 1.3 percent per annum for the poorest 40 percent
    of households, compared with 3.5 percent for the next 40 percent, and 5.9 percent for the top
    20 percent. Moreover, consumption inequality in Indonesia is increasingly determined by access
    to opportunities. In 2002, 27 percent of child consumption inequality was due to differences in
    their gender, the gender and employment status of the head of their household, their parents’
    education, and their region and location of birth. By 2012, this reached 37 percent. Going
    forward, equitable growth needs to be fostered and not taken as granted.

    A key dimension of growth inclusiveness is job creation. In the context of Indonesia,
    the inclusiveness of growth cannot be separated from the level of growth itself. Indeed high
    growth is needed in part because millions of individuals will reach working age and enter the
    labor market in the next decade or so. As Figure 3.6 shows, the population of working age is
    projected to increase significantly in the next 10 years before fading away as the dependency ratio
    bottoms out. As a result, between 2013 and 2020, the active population will increase by 14.8
    million in Indonesia, reaching 189 million from the current 174 million (Figure 3.5). Although
    not all of them will seek employment, the majority (maybe overwhelming majority) of them will
    do so. In the next 10 years, labor market participation is likely to increase gradually as progress in
    education and rapid urbanization are expected to support greater labor market participation of
    women (which is currently only 52 percent compared with 86 percent for working age men) and
    the youth.




                                                              69
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter III




             Figure 3.6: Projection of the population in                                                  Figure 3.7: The demographic dividend is
             working age (15+)                                                                            projected to continue until 2030 before reversing
                                        Population aged 15+ projection                                                    90                                                                                 90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dependency ratio: children and elderly to
                    200
                                                                                                                          80                                                                                 80
                    180
          Million




                                                                                                                          70                                                                                 70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 working age (%)
                                                                                                                               Dependency ratio (%)




                                                                                                        % of population
                    160
                                                                                                                          60                                                                                 60
                    140
                                                                                                                          50 Working age: 15 to 64 (%)                                                       50
                    120                                                                                                   40                                                                                 40
                    100                                                                                                   30      Children: 14 and                                                           30
                                                                                                                                  below (%)
                     80                                                                                                   20                                                                                 20
                     60                                                                                                   10          Elderly: above 64(%)                                                   10
                                                                                                                          0                                                                                  0
                          1990

                                 1993

                                         1996

                                                1999

                                                       2002

                                                              2005

                                                                     2008

                                                                            2011

                                                                                   2014

                                                                                          2017

                                                                                                 2020



                                                                                                                               1950
                                                                                                                                       1960
                                                                                                                                              1970
                                                                                                                                                     1980
                                                                                                                                                            1990
                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                                                                                                 2020
                                                                                                                                                                                        2030
                                                                                                                                                                                               2040
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2050
             Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators                                             Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators


           The task is thus to create millions of jobs in order to further reduce poverty and
           strengthen the middle-class. This can only be done by nurturing fast-growing economy
           given current employment elasticity. In the period 1990-2012, the estimated elasticity of
           employment to growth was 0.5, meaning that 1 percent in GDP growth translated into 0.5
           percent employment growth, on average across sectors.67 Using this estimated elasticity, it is
           possible to project future employment under different growth scenarios: a “current scenario”,
           which projects real GDP growth on the basis of the trend observed between 1990 and 2012
           (i.e., an average annual real growth rate of 5 percent), a “full potential” scenario, which projects
           a 6.5 percent yearly growth rate, and a “pessimistic” scenario, assuming a 4.0 percent growth rate
           reflecting for instance a persistent economic slowdown.68

           To guard against a fall in the employment rate, growing at the country’s full potential is
           required. Under the “full growth potential” scenario, the country would create 12.4 million new
           jobs by 2020, which would lead to an increase in the employment rate to 65.3 percent. Under the
           “current growth” scenario, the economy would generate 10.2 more million jobs by 2020, leading
           to only a modest increase in the employment rate, below 1 percentage point (from the current
           63.7 to 64.1 percent), as shown in Figure 3.4. Finally, under a “pessimistic growth scenario”,
           new job creation would reach only 7.3 million by 2020, which would imply a reduction in the
           employment rate to below today’s level, a scenario that would undermine the country’s efforts to
           further reduce poverty.

           For a labor-abundant economy that needs to absorb millions of new entrants in the labor
           market, growing by 6.5 percent versus 5 percent makes a huge material difference. The
           difference in terms of job creation is more than 2.2 million jobs over the eight years! And if
           67 The elasticity of employment to growth has been estimated using panel data on value added and employment composition for
           9 economic sectors between 1990 and 2012. The estimation yielded an elasticity of 0.5, and slightly higher (0.54) for the sub-period
           2000-12. The latter is identical to the elasticity estimated for the Philippines between 1997 and 2010 (Philippines Development
           Report, The World Bank, September 2013).
           68 In 2011, using a growth accounting methodology, the IMF estimated Indonesia’s growth potential at 7.0 percent. We assume here
           a slightly lower growth potential, in light of the two fundamental shifts in the global environment, namely softer commodity prices
           and high cost of borrowing in line with prospects of US Fed’s tapering, and the adjustment of Indonesia’s economy to these shocks.
           IMF Article IV (2011). Selected Issues.




                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                            Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter III                                                                                                                                 Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    past trends are any guide, this difference will translate into different welfare outcomes. As seen
    in Chapter 2, in 2001-11, rapid economic growth allowed the creation of 20 million jobs which
    helped to cut poverty significantly. In the next decade, job creation will continue to be the key
    lever for poverty reduction in Indonesia.

     Figure 3.8: Total employment under different                  Figure 3.9: The employment rate under
     growth scenarios                                              different growth scenarios
                    Employment projection: 2012-2020                            Employment rate projection: 2012-2020
           130                                                     78
     Million




                            Employment 1990-2012
           120                                                     74                                 Employment rate 1990-2012
                            Full potential scenario
                                                                                                      Full potential growth (6.5%)
                            Pessimistic scenario
                                                                   70                                 Current scenario
           110              Current scenario
                                                                                                      Pessimisistic growth scenario (4%)
                                                                   66
           100
                                                                   62
               90
                                                                   58
               80                                                  54

               70                                                  50
                    1990
                    1992
                    1994
                    1996
                    1998
                    2000
                    2002
                    2004
                    2006
                    2008
                    2010
                    2012
                    2014
                    2016
                    2018
                    2020


                                                                         1990
                                                                         1992
                                                                         1994
                                                                         1996
                                                                         1998
                                                                         2000
                                                                         2002
                                                                         2004
                                                                         2006
                                                                         2008
                                                                         2010
                                                                         2012
                                                                         2014
                                                                         2016
                                                                         2018
                                                                         2020
     Source: World Bank staff using UN population data             Source: World Bank staff using UN population data

    2. Growth Strategy
    Given the opportunities and risks discussed above, and Indonesia’s aspiration of shared
    prosperity, what would be the country’s best growth strategy going forward? Quite simply,
    a country can increase its income per capita by a combination of improving labor productivity or
    increasing the share of the population employed.69 Because the latter increases very slowly over
    time, cross-country evidence shows that 92 percent of the differences in GDP per capita across
    nations (a proxy of prosperity) are explained by differences in aggregate labor productivity (IMF,
    2013). Thus, for Indonesia’s GDP per capita to converge rapidly to high-income economies,
    boosting economic growth through increasing labor productivity will be crucial. A productivity-
    driven growth strategy is also important for Indonesia to reduce vulnerability and enhance
    competitiveness in the private sector. Indeed, the political pressure for increasing wages is
    unlikely to weaken in Indonesia. In this context, the only way to accommodate wage increases
    without jeopardizing competitiveness is to increase labor productivity.

    Aggregate labor productivity growth has two sources. First, a movement of labor (and
    capital or other inputs to production) from low to higher productivity growth sectors increases
    aggregate productivity of an economy (this is called “structural change effect”, see McMillan
    and Rodrik, 2011). For instance, when workers leave agriculture and work in higher productivity
    sectors (e.g., as a result of investment in agriculture that increases yields), the aggregate
    productivity of the economy increases. The second source of aggregate productivity growth is
    productivity growth within economic sectors, e.g., higher productivity in agriculture, thanks to
    the use of higher-yielding seeds or higher productivity in manufacturing thanks to the entry of
    new innovative firms.
                                                                       GDP          GDP       Workers          GDP
    69 This proceeds the decomposition of GDP per capita as follows:   Population   Workers * Population   .   Workers   is the aggregate labor productivity
        Workers
    and Population the proportion of the total population employed.




                                                                71
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                Chapter III




          The good news is that productivity gaps across Indonesia’s economic sectors are,
          providing scope for boosting productivity through structural change. Table 3.1 shows the
          gap in labor productivity levels between agriculture and other sectors of the economy, measured
          as the ratio of sectoral productivity to agriculture. Moving a worker from agriculture to the low-
          end services subsectors (wholesale and retail trade and personal, social services and construction)
          leads to a doubling of productivity on average. This movement has largely occurred over the
          past decade and has been the key driver of poverty reduction. Seventeen of the 20 million jobs
          created in 2001-11 occurred in services, mostly in the low-end segment. Today, more than 50
          percent of workers are employed in agriculture and low-end services. In the years to come,
          Indonesia should seek to expand the movement of labor and job creation in the manufacturing
          sector and high-end services.70 Despite the sharp decline in manufacturing productivity growth in
          the past decade, the average productivity of workers in manufacturing industries remains fully
          five times higher than that in agriculture.71 Indonesia will see rising productivity growth if most
          of the 15 million additional individuals that will join the labor force by 2020 are employed in
          manufacturing and high-end services (versus low-end services).

          The scope for increasing “within sector” productivity growth is also large in Indonesia.
          This type of productivity growth typically requires greater use of capital by workers (more
          modern machines and equipment), improvements in the quality of labor (better trained workers),
          adoption of new technology (including through FDI and joint-venture with foreign firms) and
          competition within sectors that lead to a larger number of efficient firms. The Government
          of Indonesia has, in its development plans, stated its objective of upgrading the country’s
          industries to enhance value-addition. International experience shows that countries that are
          successful in achieving this have (i) adopted a clear and consistent industrial strategy; (ii) removed
          regulatory and administrative bottlenecks to investment and business conduct and; (iii) partnered
          and coordinated with the private sector to supply the right skills, infrastructure and specific
          institutional support in the sectors where the country has latent or overt comparative advantage.
          As shown below, important multi-faceted reforms will need to be implemented if Indonesia is to
          realize this.

          Table 3.1: Labor productivity differences across sectors remain significant
          (Sector labor productivity (real terms) compared with labor productivity in agriculture)
           Sector                                                  2000-03                        2005-08                            2009-12
           Agriculture                                                   1.0                          1.0                                1.0
           Low-end services                                              2.4                          2.5                                2.2
           Manufacturing industries                                      5.7                          5.8                                  5
           Transport and communication                                   2.8                          3.5                                5.5
           Financial services                                           21.5                         20.5                               14.6
           Mining and quarrying                                         46.8                         26.7                                 18
           Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.


          Moving to a productivity-driven growth model will be a significant switch for Indonesia.
          Over past decades, growth has in large part been supported by capital accumulation and
          employment growth with limited contribution of total factor productivity (TFP). Van Der
          70 The skills requirement for entering the high-end services sector is however higher, implying that the scope for job creation in
          manufacturing is much larger given the average levels of skills in the labor force.
          71 In the past decade, labor productivity in agriculture increased (driven by rubber, palm oil, coffee and tea) and dropped to almost
          zero in manufacturing. The sharpest decline in labor productivity growth occurred however in mining and quarrying. See Chapter 2.



                                                                          72
                                                                                                  Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter III                                                                                                        Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Eng (2008) finds that TFP explained only 33 percent of growth in 2000-07 and played no role
    in growth prior to 2000.72 This is to be contrasted with China and South Korea, where TFP
    explained more than 50 percent of growth during that period. The aggregate productivity level
    of Indonesia—measured by average value-added per worker- is also low by regional standards.
    For instance, Malaysia’s average productivity per worker is more than 5 times Indonesia’s.
    Average labor productivity in Indonesia is also lower than in Thailand, the Philippines and China
    (Chapter 3). Differences in productivity reflect the structure of economies. In Indonesia, more
    than 50 percent of workers are in two low productivity sectors: agriculture and the low-end
    services subsector (retail trade, hotels & restaurants). This weighs heavily on average productivity.

    3. Priority Reform Areas
    The reform agenda for high, sustained, growth encompasses two components: (i) good
    macroeconomic management to prevent the build-up of imbalances and maintain
    macroeconomic stability and (ii) structural reforms to support Indonesia’s long-term growth
    agenda. Both are necessary to ensure steady growth toward high-income status.

    The good news is that when it comes to macroeconomic management, Indonesia’s track
    record is overall solid, resembling much more South Korea’s than (Figures 3.5 and 3.6).
    Indonesia has had its lot of destructive crises: two big financial crises, in the mid-1960s and in
    1997/98 and many natural disaster crises, the largest of which was the 2004 Tsunami. Because
    of their magnitude, these crises have engendered major casualties with a material impact of
    GDP per capita. For instance, with the 1997/98 Asian financial crisis, Indonesia’s GDP per
    capita contracted by 14.5 percent, the largest of any country affected by that crisis. It took 6
    years for Indonesia to retrieve the level of GDP per capita the country reached in 1996—not a
    bad performance given the magnitude of the shock.

     Figure 3.10: GDP per capita changes in South Figure 3.11: GDP per capita changes in
     Korea (in response to GDP growth)            Indonesia (in response to GDP growth)
                          2000-2012                1990-1999                              2000-2012                   1990-1999
                          1980-1989                1970-1979                              1980-1989                   1970-1979
                          1961-1969                                                       1961-1969
     12%                                                              12%


      7%                                                               7%


      2%                                                               2%


     -3%                                                              -3%


     -8%                                                              -8%
           7.0             8.0              9.0                10.0         5.0   5.5      6.0        6.5    7.0        7.5       8.0
                     Ln GDP per capita (constant 2005)                            Ln GDP per capita (constant 2005)
     Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators                 Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators


    72 Van der Eng, Pierre (2008) ‘Capital Formation and Capital Stock in Indonesia, 1950-2007.’ Working Papers in Trade and
    Development No.24. Canberra: School of Economics, ANU College of Business and Economics, Australian National University.




                                                                 73
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                             Chapter III




          Indonesia’s experience of crisis management in 2009 illustrates how a pro-active stance
          and response can mitigate the potential negative impact of global volatility. In late 2008,
          domestic bond yields and the exchange rate came under pressure, and there were concerns
          Indonesia could be entering another crisis period, similar to 1997/98, despite the strong macro
          positions. But, the authorities responded proactively to these pressures, and allowed the exchange
          rate to adjust. A responsive fiscal stimulus package, focusing primarily on tax adjustment, helped.
          A contingent financing facility with development partners, including the World Bank, in early
          2009 served to send a signal of further lines of defense to markets. A range of other measures
          to improve crisis monitoring, preparedness and response were put in place. Thanks to these
          measures, growth reached 4.6 percent in 2009 and moved to 6.2 percent in 2010.

          Since May 2013, Indonesia has had to adjust to a changing world, against the
          background of a current account deficit that moved into deficit in 2012, following 15
          years of yearly surplus.73 With the US Fed monetary “tapering” of its quantitative easing policy
          and softer commodity prices, monetary policy has tightened while the rupiah has been allowed
          to depreciate significantly (24 percent between January and December 2013), broadly supporting
          macro stability. Notwithstanding the progress however, given the continued uncertainty in
          the global environment, there remains a need for continued efforts in these areas of crisis
          preparedness, and the quality of fiscal spending, particularly the burden of fuel subsidies, can be
          improved further, notwithstanding the overall balance sheet strength.

          The structural reform agenda can be decomposed in two inter-related and intertwined
          components (Figure 3.12). Policies aimed at supporting productivity and overall economic
          growth. Three policy priorities are identified and discussed thoroughly: (i) closing Indonesia’s
          infrastructure gap (chapter 4); (ii) closing the skills gap in the labor force (chapter 5) and (iii)
          improving the functioning of product, labor, land and financial markets (chapter 6). These
          policies would not only relax constraint on growth but would help unleash the productivity and
          competitiveness potential of the country, in a mutually reinforcing way.

          The second component of the structural reform agenda comprises reforms to ensure
          that the prosperity generated in shared more widely. As shown in chapter 2, a large number
          of households classified as non-poor in terms of income/consumption are poor in many other
          dimensions, including access to decent housing, transportation, water, sanitation, health and
          education. At the same time, despite Indonesia’s success in reducing poverty, the slowing pace of
          progress in recent years and high vulnerability remain a concern. Finally, Indonesia’s hard-fought
          poverty reduction outcomes are constantly under threat, due to the country’s vulnerability to
          natural disasters such as earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, floods, landslides and forest
          fires. Addressing these issues would be crucial in fostering an inclusive and resilient society.
          Chapter 7 discusses policy option to increase access to quality essential services for all; Chapter 8
          is on strengthening social protection, social security and social assistance (chapter 8) and chapter
          9 discusses the importance of and policy options to manage natural disaster risks and build
          resilience better.


          73 As discussed in chapter 1, the movement of the current account into deficit mainly reflects the sharp decline in commodity price
          since 2011 which has dramatically reduced exports while strong GDP growth meant high import growth.




                                                                         74
                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter III                                                                                            Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Figure 3. 12: The DPR’s policy focus:

                  Generating prosperity                              Sharing prosperity more widely


                                                                           Improving local access to
                    Closing infrastructure gap        Labor                     services
                                                   productivity
                                                     growth
                                                                              Strengthening social
                       Closing skills gap              &                          protection
                                                 Improved living
                      Better functioning         standards for all
                                                                                 Managing natural
                      of markets                                                  disaster risks




    The proposed policy focus is consistent with Indonesia’s Master Plan for “Acceleration
    and Expansion of Indonesia’s Economic Development 2011-2025” (MP3EI). The MP3EI
    is based on three pillars: (i) fostering centers of growth across economic corridors by facilitating
    industrialization; (ii) strengthening national connectivity to link growth poles across and within
    economic corridors; and (iii) complementing connectivity by improving human resources
    capabilities and increasing investments in R&D. The plan sets an ambitious target for Indonesia
    to grow above7.0 percent annually through 2025. Under the plan, the private sector has a
    central role in driving economic development, particularly in generating investments, creating
    employment opportunities and fostering innovation.

    4. Addressing cross-cutting Implementation Challenges
    The public administration plays an important role in delivering both the regulatory legal
    environment and services vital for a prosperous and equitable state. As the economy
    grows, the administration has to be responsive in providing a sound regulatory climate to sustain
    investment and to deliver core infrastructure and services for the needs of individuals and
    companies – including roads, health care, environmental safety, etc. However, some of the
    systems and practices within the public administration will not serve its future needs and could
    undermine future growth.

    Public administration during the Suharto “New Order” era was highly centralized and
    hierarchical. Decision making was largely confined to a small core in the central government
    in Jakarta, reflected in the planning processes led by Bappenas, and personnel management
    carried out by MenPAN-RB. Once policies were established at the center the focus of the
    administration was on establishing regulations and operating procedures to instruct the
    implementation of the policies.

    Following the crisis of 1998 it was recognized that this centralized model was no longer
    appropriate and a range of political and administrative reforms emerged. These included
    the extensive decentralization initiative, a more active role of the parliament in the conduct of
    economic and fiscal policy, and the emergence of a range of alternatives sources of policy within
    the bureaucracy.




                                                      75
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                     Chapter III




          In spite of the changes in the roles and responsibilities of the public institutions
          many of the elements of the pre-1998 era structures remain. A central planning function
          continues with annual, five year and long term plans, MenPAN-RB continues to control
          the administrative apparatus, and while there are now multiple stakeholders formulating
          and implementing policy at both the national and sub-national level there are no effective
          coordination mechanisms across government. The outcome has been poor delivery of
          services by government institutions, inconsistent policy settings across sectors, and a lack of
          responsiveness of the administration to the priorities of the government and citizens.

          To support a rapidly developing economy attention needs to be given to refocusing the public
          administration to establish:
          •	 A stronger Center of Government to manage the policy process and resolve policy conflicts
          •	 Streamlined bureaucracy for enhanced accountability
          •	 More strategic management of human resources across the public administration
          •	 Better planning and budgeting procedures to deliver improved results with public spending
          •	 Stronger accountability for service delivery at the local level
          Stronger Center of Government
          As the roles and functions of the State grow in size and complexity, there is an
          increasing need for a strong Center of Government (CoG) to coordinate policy
          development across sectors and to manage competing demands amongst ministries
          and agencies. The specific institutional roles within the CoG vary by country based on the
          structure of the government, but there remain several core functions that must be played to link
          long term policy planning with the allocation of resources and to manage potential conflicts in
          policy directions that may occur. In this regard, CoGs works best when there is a close working
          relationship between the head of the government and the minister of finance, but not all core
          functions relate to budget. In 2004 OECD/Sigma provided an outline of some of the core
          functions one would expect in an effective CoG.74 Those functions include:

          1.	   strategic planning & annual work planning
          2.	   policy document review: quality assurance; inter-ministry mediation
          3.	   monitoring government performance
          4.	   coordination of horizontal policies/priorities
          5.	   preparation of government/cabinet sessions
          6.	   legal conformity of draft laws

          In Indonesia several different institutions, starting with the Presidential Administration,
          play some role in the coordination of policies including the three Coordinating
          Ministries, the Ministry of Finance, Bappenas, MenPAN-RB, the Vice President’s office,
          the delivery units (UKP4 and TPN2k), and others. However, ministries have been able
          to implement new policies and regulations that conflict with other regulations or that conflict
          with the President’s policy objectives. Policy management is also more difficult because of the
          challenges to coordinate separate planning and budgeting processes for different parts of the
          74 SIGMA Paper 35: Coordination at the Centre of Government: The Functions and Organization of the Government Office
          (OECD; Paris, 2004).




                                                                    76
                                                                             Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter III                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    budget. In the future, Indonesia authorities may want to consider how to refine the mandates
    and functions of the various institutions that support the CoG, and to empower the President’s
    Office (or its designate) to play a stronger role in managing the policy process.
    Streamlined Bureaucratic Procedures and Structures
    Organizational structures and heavy bureaucratic processes are obstacles to Government
    implementing its policy commitments and reform objectives. Over-specified regulations,
    overlapping institutional structures, lack of delegation of authority, and diffused decision-making
    all contribute to a culture of inaction within the public administration. The state apparatus,
    including the government processes, and structures has not benefited from the same scope of
    reform as other parts of the State.

    The current Bureaucracy Reform (BR) concept has centered on documenting reform
    plans in pre-determined reformed areas, but it is questionable whether it has led to
    substantial productivity gains despite the increasing wage bill costs. BR allowances
    are granted based on vetted reform plans and not on actual reform outcomes and increased
    productivity. Going forward, the Government may wish to consider refining the approach to
    BR to focus on streamlining decision-making and accountability, empowering institutions and
    managers to take decisions, and providing more flexibility for institutions to manage for results
    rather than manage compliance with regulations. Institutions could be encouraged to rationalize
    ex-ante controls and to replace them with a hierarchical line of delegation of authority and a
    corresponding line of accountability.
    Strategic Management of Human Resources
    The effectiveness and efficiency of the public administration, including front-line
    service delivery, is affected substantially by the quality of the human resources. While
    the implementation of bureaucratic reform has enhanced the transparency and effectiveness of
    recruitment and the levels of compensation for staff, some substantial challenges remain ahead
    for the public sector. The functions of institutions will change over time, and human resource
    policies need to enable institutions to adapt to the new requirements. The quantity of staff may
    remain unchanged in the aggregate, but the composition of skills across the ministry or agency
    may need to change substantially.

    Currently, institutions face substantial rigidities in changing the composition of
    employment within their institutions; so even when a function is no longer needed the
    institution lacks mechanisms to release the associated staff. The public administration
    would benefit from more strategic management of its human resources to identify the
    functions and skills where staff will and will not be needed in the future. This would need to
    be accompanied by some flexibility to adapt the organizational structures to the business needs
    of the agency. For example, rigid adherence to span of control norms may not be appropriate,
    while some functions may be dissolved in order to focus on more strategic priorities.

    The incentives for motivating staff performance will also be critical to achieving greater
    organizational accountability. The 2014 law on the civil service (ASN) could represent a
    major change in how the government administration is managed and will perform. However, the




                                                   77
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                              Chapter III




          precondition is that 20+ implementing regulations required under the law are drafted in a way
          that supports reform rather than the status quo. The two-year window given for preparing and
          issuing these regulations is important. If drafted well they can enhance the professionalism of
          the civil service by strengthening merit-based recruitment and promotion and by increasing the
          internal equity and transparency of the pay system.
          Delivering results with public spending
          In recent years public spending has increased substantially in real terms but citizens
          see little evidence of improvement in the quality of infrastructure or public services.
          For instance Government spending on the national road network tripled between 2005 and
          2011, but average costs also rose three-fold, and therefore outputs did not increase in line with
          higher spending. As discussed chapter 4, Indonesia needs to make a substantial investment in
          infrastructure and enhanced public services if it is to meet the future needs of the country. To
          deliver this effectively requires changes in both the strategic planning of resources, and how
          performance is instilled in the spending of the administration.

          The planning processes used by the government are fragmented and fail to support a
          strategic allocation of resources. The five year plan attempts to provide a framework for
          national engagement in a sector – covering central and local government and the private sector.
          While the scope of engagement is broad, the activities covered are limited. For example, only
          about one quarter of central government expenditure is covered by the plan – i.e. capital and
          related operating costs. Personnel expenditures, subsidies and transfers are beyond the scope
          of the plan while revenue policies are not considered. The outcome is that important trade-
          offs such as between fuel subsidy expenditures and high value infrastructure investment are not
          given attention during the preparation of the budget. Going forward there is a need to make the
          planning processes more strategic and integrated.

          Since 2000 a number of performance management processes have been introduced,
          but the results have been disappointing so far. Line agencies furnish separate performance
          reports to the central agencies using a large number of performance indicators – for example,
          the Government’s budget document contains over 40,000 output indicators while other countries
          have less than 10 percent of this number. In most cases the performance information is not
          linked to resource management decisions. While steps are being taken to simplify the indicators
          and link reporting to budget decisions but the effect will be limited unless line agencies are given
          more responsibility to manage resources.
          Refocus Local Governments to be Accountable for Improving Service Delivery
          Despite substantial transfers to subnational governments, regional autonomy has failed
          to deliver the improvements in local public services that were expected when launched in
          2001. Transfers to subnational governments now make up about one-half of the state budget,
          net of subsidies and interest payments, (about 6 percent of GDP), and over 80 percent of this
          amount accrues to subnational governments at the lowest level—kabupaten/kota. However, the
          quality of services is problematic:
          •	 School enrollments have increased at all levels of education but Indonesian children’s
              performance on international learning assessments has remained stagnant in math and




                                                          78
                                                                             Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter III                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




         deteriorated in science.
    •	   While the length of local roads has increased the overall quality has deteriorated.
    •	   The percentage of households with access to safe water has actually dropped from 50
         percent to 48 percent since 2001.

    International experience reveals that weak accountability and poor local public services
    go hand in hand. Accountability here comprises two separate dimensions: (1) a demand by
    citizens for improvements to service quality, and (2) a response by local governments to meet
    constituents’ demands. Addressing the poor performance requires measures focused on each
    dimension.

    Till now there has not been much pressure exerted by citizens on service providers to
    improve the quality of services. This may be because they are reasonably satisfied with the
    quality of service they receive. Conversely it could be that citizens are unaware of the limited
    quality of the service, or how to express their demands. International experience shows a variety
    of approaches have been helpful for improving citizen engagement. These include sharing
    information about public service quality with local citizens, including comparative studies of one
    locality with other similar ones.

    From the perspective of service providers there are a number of constraints imposed
    by the current funding mechanisms that inhibit performance. First, there is a one-size
    fits all approach in the intergovernmental finance system, despite the diversity of issues faced
    by regions in Indonesia. The uniform treatment of heterogeneous subnational units in policy
    design and implementation is a problem for the proper resourcing of provinces and districts.
    Large municipalities, small- and medium-sized cities, and rural districts are all treated more
    or less equivalently from a fiscal point of view. Furthermore, perverse incentives in the grant
    allocation system encourage spending on salaries and administration at the expense of a more
    balanced use of resources that promotes service delivery outcomes.




                                                   79
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




                                 80
Chapter IV. Closing
 Indonesia’s Large
Infrastructure Gap
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                  Chapter IV




                        Chapter IV. Closing Indonesia’s Large
                                 Infrastructure Gap

          Indonesia has lost more than 1 percentage point of additional GDP growth due to under-invest-
          ment in infrastructure, chiefly transportation. Firm surveys show that problems with transporta-
          tion are among the worst business constraints for manufacturing firms. Household and village
          survey data show that one-quarter of urban populations and more than half of rural dwellers
          have poor access to transport services. Prohibitive transport costs undermine the competitive-
          ness of firms. Raw material producers find themselves unable to tap growing opportunities
          linked to final consumer demand. It is cheaper to import oranges from China than to source
          them from Kalimantan. Realizing Indonesia’s growth and structural transformation goals will
          depend, to a large extent, on closing the country’s large infrastructure gap.

          Despite rising government spending in recent years, Indonesia’s core infrastructure stock, such
          as road networks, ports, electricity, telecommunication facilities, has not kept pace with eco-
          nomic growth. In real terms, the infrastructure stock grew by only 3 percent annually in 2001-11,
          against 5.3 percent for GDP growth. The slow growth in the infrastructure capital stock, in a
          context of high economic and vehicle fleet growth, contributes to serious major gaps, congestion
          problems and poor logistics performance, seriously undermining productivity growth, competi-
          tiveness and poverty reduction efforts.

          Going forward, closing fully or partially the infrastructure gap would support growth and pros-
          perity through several channels. As the investments are being made, the spending effect would
          support short-term growth and jobs. As the investments translate into infrastructure stock,
          private investment is crowded-in and the productive capacity, productivity and long-term growth
          are supported. And as infrastructure services are delivered, firms’ competitiveness increases and
          the population’s access to services is improved.75 Aggressively boosting investments in infrastruc-
          ture would thus be transformational for Indonesia.

          The Government is trying to close the infrastructure gap through the Medium-Term Develop-
          ment Plan (Rencana Pembangunan Jangka Menengah Nasional, RPJMN) and the Master Plan for
          the Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia Economic Development(Master Plan Percepatan-
          dan Perluasan Pembangunan Ekonomi Indonesia, MP3EI).A number of policies and initiatives
          were introduced, including significant budget increases for capital spending and a strengthened
          institutional and regulatory framework for Public Private Partnerships (PPP). However, overall
          progress on infrastructure output and services on the ground remains slow, due to a range of
          implementation and coordination challenges reviewed in this chapter.

          75 Indeed, theoretically, augmenting the stock of public capital through investment in infrastructure directly raises the productivity
          of other factors (e.g., labor, land) and stimulates economic output. As shown by Barro (1990), it can increase the long-term growth
          trajectory of an economy under certain conditions, e.g., presence of economies of scale. There are indirect effects as well. Availability
          of high quality infrastructure may reduce the need for own-provision of certain inputs such as roads, water or electricity (Agenor and
          Moreno-Dodson, 2006) and support the formation of human capital (Galaini et al., 2005).




                                                                            82
                                                                                                                                                          Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IV                                                                                                                                                                          Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   1. Under-Investment in Infrastructure and the Cost to the Economy
   Indonesia’s total investment ratio has recovered in recent years
   Indonesia’s investment ratio has remarkably increased in recent years, even exceeding
   the levels of before the 1997/98 crisis. Gross fixed capital investment (construction, machin-
   ery and equipment, transport and equipment) grew by an average annual growth of 8.0 percent
   between 2001 and 2011, leading to nominal investment ratio of 33 percent of GDP in 2012 and
   contributing to Indonesia’s high economic growth in recent years. As a result, Indonesia’s overall
   capital stock ratio-to-GDP has risen from an estimated 1.7 times GDP in 1995 to 2.1 times GDP
   in 2011.
     Figure 4.1: Investment ratio                                                                      Figure 4.2: Real growth of total capital stock
     (as a % of nominal GDP)                                                                           (%)
      35                                                                                               12

      30                                                                                               10                      Real growth of total capital stock
      25
                                                                                                         8
      20
                                                                                                         6
      15
                                                                                                         4
      10

       5                                                                                                 2

       0                                                                                                 0
           1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012                                                       1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010
     Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.                                                    Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.

   Sustaining, or increasing, investment above this level will require Indonesia to: (i)
   mobilize foreign savings and channel these into long-term productive investments, such
   as infrastructure; and/or (ii) boost the level and availability of investment financed from
   domestic savings. Boosting the latter being a long-term endeavor (given the age structure of
   the population and the limited availability of adequate saving instruments in the financial sector),
   much emphasis is warranted on foreign direct investment (FDI). While the flow of FDI into
   Indonesia has continued to rise in recent years, at 2 percent of GDP, there is much room to
   catch up with Malaysia and China where the ratio stands at around 4 percent of GDP.

     Figure 4.3: Investment, savings and current account deficit
                          Percent of GDP
                    50
                                                                                                                      Gross national savings
                    40                           Total investment

                    30

                    20

                    10
                                          Net FDI inflows
                      0
                                                 Current account balance
                    -10
                          1990
                                 1991
                                        1992
                                               1993
                                                      1994
                                                             1995
                                                                    1996
                                                                           1997
                                                                                  1998
                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                     2003
                                                                                                                            2004
                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                 2007
                                                                                                                                                        2008
                                                                                                                                                               2009
                                                                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                                                             2011
                                                                                                                                                                                    2012




     Source: BPS.




                                                                                                83
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                          Chapter IV




          But improving the quality of investment will be even more important going forward.
          Much of the capital stock increase is related to construction (housing, shopping outlets and
          other buildings), while other forms of capital have played a smaller role.

           Figure 4.4: Composition of investment                           Figure 4.5:Infrastructurecapital stock growth
                 Building                      Machinery and equipment       14
                 Transportation                Other                         12
           100
                                                                             10
            90
            80                                                                8              Real growth of total
            70                                                                6
            60
            50                                                                4
            40                                                                2
            30
                                                                              0
            20
                                                                             -2                    Real growth of
            10                                                                                     infrastructure capital
             0                                                               -4
                                                                                  1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

           Source: BPS and World Bank staff calculations.                  Source: October 2013 IEQ and World Bank staff calculations.

          However, infrastructure investment (as a proportion of GDP) is lagging behind…
          Indonesia’s total investments in infrastructure collapsed during the 1997/98 financial cri-
          sis and have not fully recovered since. Total infrastructure investment declined from an aver-
          age 7 percent in 1995-97 to around 3-4 percent of GDP in recent years. The level of investment
          in infrastructure in Indonesia is much lower than that in neighbouring countries such as Thai-
          land, and Vietnam where it has exceeded 7 percent of GDP, not to mention China where it has
          stood at 10 percent of GDP over the past decade.76 The relatively low infrastructure investment
          in Indonesia has resulted in a slow real growth in the infrastructure capital stock (road networks,
          ports, power, telecommunications, waterways, etc.) since the 1997/98 crisis (Figure 4.5).

          The decline in infrastructure investment as a proportion of GDP is broad-based across
          government, state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the private sector (Figure 4.6). Private
          sector investment experienced the biggest fall, a particular concern given the increasing focus
          on public-private partnerships (PPP) to finance Indonesia’s infrastructure development.77 SOEs’
          investment also dropped by about 1.8 percent of GDP. Total (local and central) government
          investment declined by 0.9 percent from an average of 3.3 percent of GDP during 1995-97 to
          2.4 percent of GDP over 2008-11. The recent uptick in Indonesia’s infrastructure investment
          ratio reflects a rapid rise in investments by subnational governments, partly compensating for the
          sharp decline in private sector, state-owned enterprise (SOEs), and central government invest-
          ments (Figure 4.6). Subnational governments are now the largest source of infrastructure spend-
          ing in Indonesia (Figure 4.7).
          76 See the March 2013 IEQ for the World Bank’s recent estimates of infrastructure investment in Indonesia and for the regional
          context see Asian Development Bank; World Bank; Japan Bank for International Cooperation (2005) Connecting East Asia: A New
          Framework for Infrastructure.
          77 See discussion of the government Master Plan for the Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia Economic Development-
          MP3EI below.




                                                                        84
                                                                                                            Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IV                                                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Figure 4.6: Infrastructure investments                           Figure 4.7: Subnational governments have
     have fallen sharply with the exception of                        become the largest source of infrastructure
     subnational governments                                          spending
     (nominal infrastructure investment levels as share of GDP,       (% of total)
     percent)
    10         Average (1995-97)                                                             Central gov.           Sub-national gov.
               Average (2008-11)                                         Percent             SOE                    Private
      8                                                                 100
                                                                                                                      17         10
      6                                                                               31            29       23
                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                 30
      4
                                                                         60                                  39       44
      2                                                                                             33
                                                                                      37
                                                                         40                                                      39
      0                                                                                              9
                                                                                      7                      20       27
                                                                         20
                                                                                      26            30
                                                                                                             18                  21
                                                                                                                      12
                                                                          0
                                                                                     1995-      1998-       2001-    2007-      2010-
                                                                                     1997       2000        2006     2009       2011

     Source: March 2013 IEQ and World Bank staff calculations.        Source: March 2013 IEQ and World Bank staff calculations


   The Government has demonstrated a strong commitment to increasing infrastructure
   funding through significant increases in capital expenditure allocations. As Figure 4.8
   shows, the central government’s actual capital spending increased steadily over the past three
   years, even if it typically fell short of the amount allocated due to a less-than-100-percent
   execution rate (the latter averages 84 percent in recent years). In 2013, the central government’s
   capital spending allocation reached Rp 188 trillion, or 2.0 percent of GDP and, for 2014,
   the recently approved allocation stands at Rp 184 trillion (or 1.8 percent of GDP). However,
   compared with estimated investment needs identified by the RPJMN, these allocations were
   insufficient.

     Figure 4.8: Actual capital spending increased steadily but fell short of allocations in recent
     years
     (Rp trillion)
              200                                Budget          revised Budget            Actual
              180
              160
              140
              120
              100
               80
               60
               40
               20
                0
                       2005         2006        2007        2008              2009            2010          2011       2012
     Source: Ministry of Finance.




                                                                   85
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                     Chapter IV




          …imposing higher costs in terms of economic growth…
           Indonesia’s economic growth in 2001-11                                       Figure 4.9: Growth would have been higher
           would have been much higher had the coun-                                    with higher investments in infrastructure
           try devoted a higher share of the GDP to in-                                 (average real GDP growth over 2001-11 under differ-
           frastructure.78 Infrastructure investment growth                             ent infrastructure capital stock growth scenarios, percent)
                                                                                       8
           has neither kept space with real GDP growth nor
           the overall capital stock. As a result, Indonesia’s                         7
           infrastructure capital stock has gradually declined                         6
           relative to output and as a share of the total                              5
           capital stock over the past decade.79 In 2001-11,
                                                                                       4
           Indonesia’s real infrastructure stock grew by 3                                                                                 7.0
           percent annually, against 5.3 percent real GDP                              3                               5.8
                                                                                                   5.3
           growth in that period. Assuming a causal relation-                          2
           ship between changes in infrastructure capital                              1
           stock and changes in output, had the growth rate                            0
           in infrastructure capital stock stood at 5 percent                                    Actual            Scenario I          Scenario II
           instead of 3 percent, real GDP growth would                                        (3 percent)         (5 percent)         (10 percent)

           have been 5.8 percent, a 0.5 percentage difference.                          Source: See World Bank IEQ March 2013.
           Real GDP growth would have reached 7.0 percent
           if the real infrastructure growth had stood at 10
           percent (Figure 4.9).

          …and under-investment cuts across most key infrastructure subsectors
          (i) Road infrastructure
          Despite recent progress, a decade of under-investment in road infrastructure has con-
          tributed to serious capacity gaps, congestion problems and poor logistics performance.
          The road sector accounts for 40 percent of total infrastructure investments and plays a critical
          role in facilitating inter-urban passenger movements and in linking communities and markets
          throughout the country. The Government has increased road infrastructure expenditure to
          Rp.70 trillion/year (about US$6.0 billion/year), and road investment has now returned to 1.6
          percent of GDP, the same amount as before the 1997/98 financial crisis (World Bank, 2012).80
          Nonetheless, this level of investment trails the amount required by the rapid growth in the
          vehicle and motorcycle fleet on Indonesia’s roads (11 and 16 percent annual growth between
          2001 and 2011, respectively), leading to lower capacity and enormous pressures and congestion.81
          Progress with expressway and toll-road development has been particularly slow. In 2012, toll
          road length was only 778 km versus 3,000 km in Malaysia and 65,065 km in China. Yet Indone-
          sia’s first toll roads were built in 1978.
          78 For more details on the estimation of Indonesia’s infrastructure stock and its implications for the economy see Indonesia’s
          Economic Quarterly, in October 2013 on which this section draws.
          79 In particular, infrastructure capital stock has not kept pace with the overall increase in capital stock (of which infrastructure is
          a part of) leading to a decline in the ratio of infrastructure capital stock to the total capital stock. For more details, see World Bank’s
          October 2013 IEQ.
          80 World Bank (2012): Investing in Indonesia’s Roads: Improving Efficiency and Closing the Financing Gap - road sector public
          expenditure review 2012.
          81 Large spending on fuel subsidy creates a perverse incentive of supporting the growth in vehicle fleet while reducing the
          budgetary space to increase central government spending on infrastructure resulting in reduced life expectancy of road infrastructure.




                                                                             86
                                                                                                Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IV                                                                                                Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   The investment requirement to narrow the gap with high-performing regional peers and
   converge towards best international standards is enormous. The rehabilitation of unser-
   viceable roads, the widening of national roads and the construction of new inter-city express-
   ways, urban expressways, national roads and regional roads would require between US$60 and
   US$85 billion. To fully meet international standards, it is estimated that total investment to the
   tune of US$120 billion is required.

   The quality of the increased spending is also an issue. Spending on national roads has
   increased threefold between 2005 and 2011, but has only led to a 20 percent output increase in
   terms of roads preserved and developed. From 2005 to 2011, the national road network was
   mostly extended through the re-classification of 8,000 km of main roads, especially through
   minor widening of strategically located roads. But these efforts will not further the goal of devel-
   oping a high-standard arterial network that will best meet the needs of the economy. Lack of
   maintenance of subnational roads is a serious concern as new road development takes priority
   over road maintenance. It is estimated that adequate subnational road maintenance would require
   doubling the current spending level (World Bank, 2012).

   Low connectivity between cities and ports also constitutes a constraint to competitive-
   ness and growth. As centers of economic activity, cities need to be well connected to markets.
   With the limited number of, and access to, ports, airports, railways and road-based logistics trans-
   portation, shipping costs within Indonesia are often more expensive than the costs of import-
   ing from Singapore or China. Access between cities and rural areas also needs to be improved,
   as cities should be well connected to markets and sources of inputs. In particular, the transport
   has the largest immediate impact on firms and household, while being a key factor in the access
   to essential services such as health and education. The road sector plays a critical role in linking
   communities and markets throughout the country.82 Consequently, its efficient functioning is im-
   portant for sustaining growth and reducing poverty. The example in Box 4.1 illustrates the link
   between the costs of poor transportation and the incomes of cattle producers in Sumbawa.




   82 The road sector assures 70 percent of freight-ton movements and 82 percent of passenger-km.




                                                               87
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                       Chapter IV




          Box 4.1: The cost of poor access to infrastructure services: cattle producers from Sumbawa would
          have been richer with better transport services
           Because of its favorable agro-ecological conditions for raising cattle, Sumbawa (West Nusa Tenggara) is
           Indonesia’s largest producer of cattle. In 2012, this region represented 10 percent of the country’s pro-
           duction of livestock. In its current form, the supply chain of cows from Sumbawa to Jakarta involves
           (i) transporting the cows by local trucks from farmers to Bima (the closest local port to main farm loca-
           tions), (ii) shipping them in special vessels to Surabaya (662 km from Bima) and (iii) further transporting
           them by trucks overland from Surabaya to Jakarta (another 660 km)—see map below.

           The transportation cost breakdown helps identify the segments of the supply chain where costs are the
           highest. The cost breakdown shows that about 35 percent of the total costs are incurred within a short
           distance (20 km), while bringing the cattle from the farms to the port of Bima. This includes waiting
           time before the trucks can enter the port of Bima. Local collection of cattle in Sumbawa is poorly orga-
           nized, causing traders spending considerable time finding out which farmers have cattle ready for sale.

           Transporting the cows from Bima to Jakarta accounts for 50 percent of the total transport costs. It
           includes loading in Bima, shipping to Surabaya, port charges in Surabaya and trucking from Surabaya to
           Jakarta. Local taxes and duties account from 15 percent of total costs.

           By the time the cows arrive in Jakarta, high transportation costs have made them uncompetitive vis-à-vis
           imports. Indeed, it is cheaper to import livestock from Australia to Jakarta and Surabaya than from east-
           ern Indonesia (controlling for quality). Improving supply chain at the local level and upgrading of port
           in Bima would dramatically improve the competitiveness of Sumbawa in supplying cattle.




          (ii) Port infrastructure
          For an archipelago economy, the efficiency of ports is crucial. Despite this, port capacity
          remains very limited in Indonesia. Tanjung Priok, the country’s largest port handling over
          two-thirds of total merchandise trade, has a capacity of only about 6 million 20-foot equivalent
          units (TEUs) per annum versus 10.5 million TEUs per annum in Laen Chabang Port (Thailand)
          and 30 million TEUs per annum in Singapore. While ongoing investments could increase
          Tanjung Priok’s capacity to 11 million TEUs by 2017, when the new international container
          terminal will come on stream, Indonesia will still lag behind Thailand and Singapore as these
          countries are also implementing ambitious expansion plans.83

          Currently, Indonesia compares poorly with other developing Asian countries on trade
          logistics measures such as container charges and import lead times (Figure 4.10).84 Despite
          tangible improvements in the port’s management and productivity in recent years, container
          83 By 2018, Singapore and Thailand target a capacity of 55 and 18 million TEUs per annum respectively.
          84 For more details on Indonesia’s port logistics performance, see World Bank’s October 2013 IEQ.




                                                                        88
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IV                                                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   “dwell time” has been highly variable and increasing.85 For goods that are intermediate products
   in a supply chain, on-time delivery is crucially important. In some cases regulatory uncertainty
   on the port of entry is a source of delay (some agricultural products can only enter Indonesia
   through the port of Surabaya). Lack of reliability and high levels of uncertainty bring costs that
   can potentially discourage investments, increase inventories and associated storage costs, and
   dampen the scale expansion of an enterprise. The example of an ice cream company in Java,
   described in Box 4.2, illustrates this.

     Figure 4.10: Indonesia’s cost and efficiency                        Figure 4.11: Container dwell time has been
     lags most regional competitors                                      increasing at Tanjung Priok, Indonesia’s main port
     (import lead time, days, and container charges, US dollar)          (average import dwell time, days)
        Median lead time for imports for ports/airports (days)              10. 5
        Avg. charge (USD) for 40-foot container (RHS)
                                                                             9. 5
    6    5. 4                                                    2,500
                 5. 0
    5                                                                        8. 5
                                                       2,225     2,000
    4           1,238                                                        7. 5
                         2. 8                                    1,500
    3                           2. 62     .6
         701                                    1. 7             1,000       6. 5
    2                           397                     1. 4
                        341             302
    1                                                            500
                                                500                          5. 5
    0                                                            0
                                                                             4. 5
                                                                                Jan-07    Jul-07    Jan-08     Jul-08     Jan-09     Jul-09


     Source: Logistics Performance Indicators 2012, World Bank           Source: Jakarta International Container Terminal (JICT)


   Box 4.2: Access to imported input and performance of an ice cream company in Java
    This ice cream factory in Java, employing 400 workers, is a fine example of a booming business: demand
    is growing annually by more than 20 percent; the factory is gradually upgrading/modernizing produc-
    tion lines and is now exporting to Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam and Australia. The milk powder, a key
    input, is imported from Australia. Local milk has been tried, but its lower quality and unreliable sup-
    ply meant reduced customer satisfaction with the quality of the ice cream and much lower sales and
    competitiveness. Hence, until the quality and reliability of domestic milk increases dramatically, domestic
    sourcing is not a viable option for the company.

     But the expansion plans beyond 2014 are clouded by a number of factors, the most crucial of which is
     certainty and timeliness of access to imported inputs.86 requent changes in agricultural import poli-
     cies create uncertainty about access to imported input. For instance, customs clearance is sometimes
     delayed because it is not clear whether milk powder is among the agricultural products that should enter
     Indonesia through the Port of Surabaya. Additionally, once released, it may take containers from to 3 to
     8 hours to reach the factory due to road congestion.



   85 Dwell time is defined as the elapsed time that cargo spends within the port limits, from the moment it is unloaded from the
   vessel and is on the ground until it leaves the port premises by road or rail. Lowering dwell times allow ports to increase volume,
   revenue and foster competition with other similar ports in the country or regionally. Dwell time figures are commonly used to attract
   shipping lines and cargo traffic to a port, giving port authorities and container terminal operators strong incentives to improve this
   performance indicator.
   86 Other difficulties include securing industrial land in the ideal greater Jakarta area.




                                                                       89
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                  Chapter IV




          (iii) Power
          At 74 percent (according to PLN data), Indonesia’s electrification ratio is below many of
          its neighbors, including Malaysia, Thailand and China (close to 100 percent). As shown
          in chapter 2, the access rate looks much better when examined from household surveys, as these
          include all forms of electricity, including illegal and poor quality connections. It is estimated that
          closing the gap would require 66.8 GW of incremental generation capacity and 477 TWh power
          supply capacity for a total investment over US$200 billion. If the objective were to close the gap
          in the next 10 years, that would mean an investment of US$20 billion per year.

          Other key challenges facing the power sector include: (i) high transmission losses and
          significant electricity theft87; (ii) high subsidization (about US$10 billion in 2012) reducing the
          capacity of PLN to invest; and (iii) the reliance of most power generation on conventional fossil
          fuel sources, such as oil, natural gas and coal. To date, less than 20 percent of power generation
          comes from hydroelectric, geothermal and other renewable sources. The recently enacted En-
          ergy Law and Electricity Law provide a renewed legal framework for the energy sector, with an
          emphasis on economic sustainability, energy security, and environmental conservation. A second
          “Fast-Track Program” to construct another 10,000 MW of capacity has been launched, of which
          60 percent will be from renewable resources, with geothermal accounting for about 4,800 MW
          and hydropower for most of the rest.
          (iv) Water supply and sanitation
          Access to safe water and sanitation stood at 64 percent and 67 percent, respectively, in
          2012, behind the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia and Thailand. In rural areas, while the number
          of community-managed piped water schemes has grown steadily, they cover less than 20 per-
          cent of the rural population and there is inadequate emphasis on sustainability of operations.
          Sewerage coverage is minimal, with only about 2 percent of urban areas having access to cen-
          tralized systems. Of the estimated 85,000 tons per day of solid waste generated by Indonesia’s
          urban population of 110 million, only about 40 percent ends up in landfills, with many of these
          landfills being open dumps. The cost associated with these outcomes is high, including contami-
          nation of fresh water sources, health care costs, productivity losses and water fisheries losses. A
          2008 study estimated these costs at US$6.3 billion annually.

          Water supply mainly managed by Indonesia’s PDAMs (Perusahan Daerah Air Minum),
          water utility companies that are owned by district governments with a large network of
          facilities throughout the country (there are 328 PDAMs in total) are responsible for water
          supply and for regulating the sector. In rural areas, the Government is scaling up community-
          based schemes for both water and sanitation, including a community-led sanitation program
          targeted to reach 20,000 villages by 2014. In urban areas, there have been some improvements in
          the operational and financial performance of urban water utilities over the past decade, with the
          number of utilities classified as ‘healthy’ increasing from 38 to 173 between 2004 and 2012. It is
          estimated that about half of Indonesia’s piped water is lost in transmission. A key challenge is to
          improve the performance of the PDAMs.

          87 It is estimated that 10 percent of the power is lost during transmission and distribution, against 4 percent in Malaysia and 6
          percent in Thailand (McKenzie, 2012).




                                                                           90
                                                                            Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IV                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   Beyond the necessary restructuring of many PDAMs, capacity-raising investment needs
   are large. Indonesia’s National Development Planning Board (Bappenas) estimates that invest-
   ments in several areas is required: (i) the construction and rehabilitation of water treatment
   plants; (ii) the development of water supply pipework; (iii) the expansion of the centralized
   sewerage system; (iv) the development of communal sewerage and disposal system; and (v) the
   restoration of rivers and lakes to conserve watershed. For Indonesia to close the gap with the
   Philippines and Malaysia, an investment of US$64 billion is required.
   (v) Water resources
   Indonesia is keen in developing/mobilizing its water resources, consistent with its objec-
   tive of food security, especially in rice which represents 24 percent of the poor’s budget.
   Although the country enjoys abundant precipitation, water resources are under stress. Indeed,
   the distribution of precipitation and water resources is uneven, punctuated by a monsoon
   climate that creates floods during the wet season and water shortages during the dry season.
   Due to poor maintenance of existing irrigation systems (which reflects the fact that there is no
   cost-recovery system and little engagement of local governments), the percentage of irrigation
   infrastructure in good condition has declined over the past decade, while urbanization has caused
   a reduction in total irrigated areas. Going forward, demand for rice is projected to continue ris-
   ing in absolute terms (even if the share of rice in households’ budget is likely to decline), while
   urbanization will encroach further irrigated land, calling for greater efficiency in water resource
   management.

   The challenges going forward include: (i) the maintenance of existing irrigation
   schemes despite urbanization and industrialization pressures; (ii) managing river catch-
   ments to prevent flooding; and (iii) development of dam storage. Development of large
   new rice fields will be difficult due to conversion of land to more lucrative uses. Thus enhanc-
   ing productivity in rice production by investing in R&D and extension and better management
   of existing irrigation schemes would be sensible. Nevertheless, investment needs in the water
   resource sector are not trivial. According to Bappenas, investment needs to enhance the perfor-
   mance of integrated water management, develop multi-purpose reservoirs, enhance the man-
   agement of major city flood prevention schemes, enhance coastal protection infrastructure and
   increase food supply by increasing the potential in swamplands. All of these measures would
   help to close the gap with Thailand by 2019 and would cost about US$81 billion.

   2. Not Only About Money
   The under-investment in infrastructure discussed above partly reflects complex institu-
   tional and regulatory issues. The key challenges have been: (i) dealing with land acquisition; (ii)
   ensuring coordination across various agencies, between central and subnational governments and
   across different plans; and (iii) putting in place a PPP framework.
   Land acquisition complexities
   A lack of clarity in regulations governing land acquisition and the compensation to land-
   owners has caused delays to infrastructure projects, particularly toll roads. Presidential
   Regulation No.36/2005 on Land Acquisition for Infrastructure Development was ineffective in
   supporting land acquisition for public purposes because the rules and procedures in the regula-




                                                  91
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                  Chapter IV




          tion were vague in the face of a complex problem. Indeed, as in many developing countries, it is
          not unusual that many individuals claim the rights to land when that land is needed for a public
          project. Legitimate or illegitimate landowners also frequently hold onto their land to benefit from
          an appreciation in value or enhance their negotiating power. Thus investors in infrastructure,
          whether public or private, have to overcome this hurdle before shovels hit the ground, leading
          to higher costs and significant delays. Land acquisition is one of the key factors behind the slow
          execution of infrastructure projects in Indonesia, and perhaps also behind the reluctance of the
          private sector to invest on a large scale in this sector.

          Land Acquisition Law No. 2/2012 for Public Infrastructure and its associated Presiden-
          tial Regulation bode well for addressing these challenges. Drawing on the lessons from the
          2005 regulation, it is more specific in most areas and can significantly improve the procedures for
          acquiring land for public infrastructure.88 Areas of significant improvement include the process
          for land valuation, the mechanisms for grievances, and the compensation for affected or dis-
          placed individuals.89 For instance, the new regulation provides specifics about the inventory of
          affected people and assets, the consultation process, the compensation, and the dispute settle-
          ment. It also sets a specific timeframe for each of the acquisition stages and sub-stages, including
          the maximum time that a court may take to resolve disputes related to land acquisition. The new
          Land Law and Presidential Regulation are expected to improve the clarity and transparency of
          the land acquisition process, and strengthen public confidence in the Government’s efforts to
          advance the infrastructure agenda.
          Coordination issues
          Coordination across different ministries, levels of government, plans/strategies have
          also been a key bottleneck to infrastructure development. Indonesia has transitioned from
          a system in which infrastructure was planned and implemented at the central level to a system in
          which infrastructure planning and implementation require stronger coordination between central
          and local governments. With decentralization in 2001, subnational governments have acquired
          major responsibilities, and now play a key role in managing provincial and district infrastructure
          networks. For instance, provincial and district roads now account for over 80 percent of Indone-
          sia’s total road network. Thus any project cutting across district lines requires lengthy consulta-
          tions, discussions and coordination. In addition, the various infrastructure development plans at
          the central, provincial and district levels are not mutually consistent.

          The first phase of implementation of the MP3EI aims to integrate different national,
          regional and sectoral (one-dimensional) plans into a single integrated roadmap for ac-
          tion. In particular, to strengthen national connectivity, components from four different gov-
          ernment plans will be integrated: (i) the National Logistics System (Sislognas); (ii) the National
          88 A Presidential Regulation No. 71/2012 sets the institutional arrangements for implementing the law.
          89 In 2012, the GoI issued several pieces of legislation relating to land acquisition to be carried out for projects of public purpose
          (Law No. 2/2012 in January 2012; Presidential Regulation No. 71/2012 in August 2012; and technical guidelines issued by the
          relevant ministries). These replaced previous presidential regulations that had been unable to support accelerated infrastructure
          development in Indonesia while ensuring that people affected by the negative impacts of associated land acquisition were adequately
          protected. Pursuant to Law No. 2/2012, Presidential Regulation No. 36/05 as amended is valid until 31 December 2014. The new
          legislations procedure applies to the acquisition of land under the authority and control of the National Land Agency. If land
          needed is under the authority of other ministries such as Ministry of Forestry, then before such land can be dealt with under the new
          legislations procedure, it must be released from forest zoning pursuant to applicable forestry legislation or other relevant legislation
          like mining, natural gas, etc




                                                                            92
                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IV                                                                                                            Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   Transportation Systems (Sistranas); (iii) the National and Regional Development Plans (RPJMN
   and RTRWN); and (iv) the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) plan. In order to
   ensure effective implementation of the various strategies, the plan calls for a new dedicated com-
   mittee chaired by the President to enhance efficiency in coordination, monitoring, evaluating,
   and strategic decision-making.
   Public-private partnerships (PPP)
   The private sector’s involvement in infrastructure development has significantly declined
   over the past decade. This reflects the uncertainties surrounding land acquisition and inter-gov-
   ernment and inter-agency coordination. It also reflects poor project selection and the inability
   of the bureaucracy to produce a strong pipeline of bankable PPP projects.90 For instance, the
   Government has identified 58 projects spanning 11 different areas including toll roads, maritime
   transportation and water resources, slotted for funding through PPP schemes, for a total value
   of US$51.2 billion in the period 2010-15 (PPP source book 2012). By 2012, however, only three
   projects were considered “ready for offer”, 26 projects were categorized as “priority” and 29 as
   “potential PPP projects”. Toll roads particularly have been targeted for PPP financing: the three
   “ready for offer” projects totaling US$764 million include a toll road project accounting for 83
   percent of the total (US$628 million), while the 26 Priority PPP projects include 13 toll roads
   totaling US$32.5 billion or 85 percent of the total value of the 26 projects.

   To accelerate the execution of viable PPP projects, the institutional architecture support-
   ing PPPs is being strengthened. The legal framework for PPPs has been amended to allow
   the private sector to invest in the development and operation of financially viable infrastructure
   projects without being obliged to enter into a joint-venture with an SOE. Various incentive
   mechanisms have been established. These include the Indonesia Infrastructure Guarantee Fund
   (IGF), Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Fund and SMI, the Viability Gap Financing (VGF)
   program, and more recently, a PPP Unit and Project Development Facility (PDF). The challenge
   now is to make these institutional mechanisms operational and well-coordinated (including devel-
   oping detailed operational procedures to implement the provisions of VGF so that VGF support
   can be channeled to well-prepared PPPs). Such an achievement would send an important signal
   to investors and, combined with efforts to tackle land acquisition and coordination issues, would
   enhance the public and private sector’s confidence in the system.

   3. Policy Options
   Going forward, closing Indonesia’s infrastructure gap entails: (i) mobilizing funding for infra-
   structure development; (ii) improving infrastructure planning and coordination processes; and
   (iii) addressing land acquisition complexities.
   Mobilizing funding for infrastructure development
   Closing Indonesia’s investment gap in quantity and quality requires:
   •	 Continuing to increase budget allocation for infrastructure development. To finance
       this, reducing energy subsidy spending and improved revenue mobilization will be necessary
       in the absence of a significant increase in borrowing.
   90 Potential use of PPP scheme requires a Value for Money (VFM) analysis to decide whether the project is better financed through
   the national budget, or by PPPs. When a project is economically viable but has borderline financial viability, a combination of public
   (Viability Gap Funding, VGF), private and/or donor financing can be appropriate.




                                                                   93
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                              Chapter IV




               o	In recent years, the central government has spent much less on infrastructure (less
                 than 1 percent of GDP) than it has on fuel subsidies (about 2.6 percent of GDP).
                 Total government spending on infrastructure, i.e., spending of the central and subnational
                 government stood at 2.5 percent of GDP, slightly lower than fuel subsidy spending. Thus
                 eliminating energy subsidies while adequately compensating the poor could unlock financ-
                 ing to allow central government spending on infrastructure to more than double.
               o	Increasing revenue collection could further increase the fiscal space for higher
                 infrastructure spending. At 18 percent of GDP (tax revenue 12 percent of GDP and
                 non-tax revenues 6 percent), Indonesia’s total revenue coverage is far below that of emerg-
                 ing economies. According to the IMF, Indonesia’s tax gap is 5 percent of GDP.91 Based on
                 the experience of the past decade, during which Indonesia succeeded in increasing tax rev-
                 enues only modestly, from 10 to 12 percent of GDP, raising revenues significantly would
                 require deep reform of the tax administration.
               o	The Government’s debt-to-GDP ratio stood at 24 percent of GDP in 2012. This low
                 level of debt creates space for additional significant infrastructure financing, while still
                 keeping the debt ratio at low levels by international standards (and predicated on efficient
                 infrastructure investment that would also lift the rate of growth and ultimately support
                 public revenues). The recent infrastructure funds created at the regional and global level
                 offer an opportunity to finance infrastructure on relatively favorable terms, at a time when
                 global borrowing costs appear set to increase. These funds include the ASEAN Infrastruc-
                 ture Fund (AII) of which Indonesia, along with other ASEAN member countries and the
                 Asian Development Bank, is a shareholder. The World Bank is also working on setting up
                 a global infrastructure fund.
          •	    Spending re-allocation would also be helpful for subnational governments’ invest-
                ments in infrastructure. Subnational governments’ average spending on personnel com-
                prises over 40 percent of total expenditure budgets at the expense of operations, main-
                tenance, and capital investments.92 One of the main reasons lies in the inter-government
                fiscal transfer system. Ninety percent of local government budget is constituted of fiscal
                transfers from the central government, the largest component of which (60 percent of total)
                is a block grant that is not tied to performance. The component of the fiscal transfers that
                is most amenable to performance-tying is the Special Allocation Fund (or DAK), which
                accounts for only 6 percent of total transfers. A move towards performance incentives
                designed with a view to explicitly improving infrastructure service outcomes would support
                greater investment in infrastructure by local governments.
          •	    Leverage private sector financing through PPP schemes. Indonesia’s PPP framework
                is being strengthened. The VGF and the IGF, once fully operational, will be important
                vehicles. However, while private investment in public infrastructure is important for Indone-
                sia’s growth, improving Indonesia’s infrastructure endowments will require an increased ef-
                fort by all stakeholders—national and subnational governments, as well as SOEs and private
                investors.


          91 IMF (2013): World Economic Outlook, September 2013, Special Focus.
          92 World Bank (2012): Subnational Public Expenditure Review.




                                                                    94
                                                                              Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IV                                                                                Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   •	    Strong focus on efficiency. The need to ensure fiscal sustainability and competing de-
         mands for public funds also argue for a strong focus on efficiency, including ensuring the
         smooth operation and maintenance of existing infrastructure and, more broadly, on improv-
         ing the quality of public investment management to deliver effectively on the priority public
         infrastructure needs of the economy.
   Coordination/engagement with ASEAN
   Continued coordination/engagement with regional partners within ASEAN is an impor-
   tant lever that can support Indonesia’s connectivity goals. ASEAN members have commit-
   ted to the successful implementation of an ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) Blueprint in
   2015 (single production base). To realize this goal, ASEAN members have committed to step up
   trade facilitation by establishing a Single Window that enhances customs data exchange, increases
   the use of ICT for border agencies, and increases transparency in border clearance processes.
   ASEAN has also introduced an ASEAN Connectivity Master Plan to further support commit-
   ments to establish the AEC. The Master Plan aims to accelerate implementation of coopera-
   tion initiatives and investment projects across ASEAN that can better connect member states
   through: (i) physical connectivity (ICT, infrastructure, and energy); (ii) institutional connectivity
   to facilitate trade and investment; and (iii) people-to-people connectivity.




                                                   95
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




                                 96
Chapter V. Closing the Skills
  Gap in the Labor Force
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                        Chapter V




              Chapter V. Closing the Skills Gap in the Labor
                                  Force

          High and sustained growth as well as greater workers’ earnings hinge crucially in upgrading
          the skills of Indonesia’s large labor force. Developing skills will also be crucial to leverage the
          opportunities created by the opening of ASEAN and increasing middle-class demand. Without
          the right skills among the labor force, the planned freeing of movement of skilled labor across
          ASEAN may help firms through the availability of a larger pool of skilled labor but risk
          crowding out Indonesian graduates in the labor market. Without the right skills sets among
          the young entering the labor force, the demand for higher quality products and services from
          Indonesia’s growing middle-class may be satisfied by importing foreign goods as opposed to
          increasing the value-added of domestic firms. Finally, without ensuring that poorer segments of
          the population have the skills to contribute towards these trends, even if the overall productivity
          gains are realized, the benefits will fail to reach to the poorest and most disadvantaged groups in
          society

          While Indonesia’s strong commitment to support education is paying off in terms of numbers
          of graduates, the next battle is that of quality.93 Indonesia will probably count one of the largest
          numbers of college-goers in the world in the years to come, but will the graduates enter the labor
          market with the right skills? Clearly, the priority should be to gradually shift from ensuring great-
          er access to education to a skills development agenda, targeting both those enrolled in schools
          and those already employed. This chapter briefly fleshes out the main issues and challenges in the
          skills development agenda and outlines some policy options to address them.

          1. Indonesia’s Scorecard to Date

          The labor force is more educated...
          Indonesia’s labor force is rapidly becoming more educated. Most of the expansion of
          the labor force over the past decade has been in senior secondary and tertiary education
          graduates. As a result, while the majority of the population still has at most only completed ba-
          sic education, there are now more than 30 million senior secondary graduates and more than 10
          million tertiary education graduates in Indonesia’s labor force. Over the past five years, the labor
          force with tertiary education has increased by more than 1 million annually and the labor force
          with senior secondary by more than 2 million annually. These numbers are likely to increase
          in the near future, driven by the Government’s policies to provide universal access to senior
          secondary education through a compulsory 12 years of education, and doubling enrollment in
          higher education by 2020. As enrollment rates continue to increase, the rate of growth in the
          educational attainment of the labor force will likely accelerate. Under reasonable assumptions,94
          the number of Indonesians with tertiary education will more than double over the next 10 years.
          93 The importance of human capital in and of itself to economic growth has been much stressed in the endogenous growth theory
          literature, starting with Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988).
          94 Using linear growth in enrollment rates in higher education.




                                                                      98
                                                                                                                                                          Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter V                                                                                                                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




           Figure 5.1: Total labor force and enrollment rates by level of education, 2001-10
                               120                                                              120%
   Labor force by level of education




                               100                                                              100%


                                       80                                                       80%
               (million)




                                       60                                                       60%


                                       40                                                       40%


                                       20                                                       20%


                                       -                                                            0%
                                                                                                               ECED              Primary            Junior       Senior       Tertiary
                                            2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                                                                                                                   Secondary    Secondary
                                            Tertiary   Senior Secondary        Basic or less                   2001                       2002             2004          2005
                                                                                                               2006                       2007             2009          2010
           Source: Sakernas for labor force, 2001-10 (February round); Susenas for enrollment rates (February round).


   At the same time, the demand for skilled workers is high and increasing. When asked in a
   survey conducted by the World Bank in 2008, employers almost universally considered that skill
   requirements will increase, identifying higher-quality standards, a more competitive business envi-
   ronment and export orientation as the main drivers for increased requirements. This is in line
   with Indonesia’s ambitions to become a high-income economy, macroeconomic trends (ASEAN,
   China’s raising wages) and the raising middle class (which will demand higher quality products
   and services).

           Figure 5.2: The demand for skills is increasing
                                                                Yes       No                             100                                                        96                      New
        100                                                                                                                                                                                 technology
                90                                                                                                              82                                       82                 imported from
                                                                                                                                                                                            abroad
                80                                                                                        80                         74
                                                                                                                                                                                            New
                70                                                                                                                                                                          homegrown
                                                                                                                                                                              62
                                                                                                                                                                                   57       technology
                60                                                                                        60                                              55
                                                                                                                                                                                            Change in
                50                                                                                                                            45                                            workplace
                                                                                                                                                               36                           organization
                40                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                      32
                                                                                                                                                                                            Higher-quality
                30                                                                                                         26                        25                                     standards for
                20                                                                                                                                                                          products
                                                                                                          20     15
                10                                                                                                                        7                                                 More
                                                                                                                                                                                            competitive
                         0                                                                                                                                                                  business
                                                Manufacturing             Service (non-education)          0
                                                                                                                                                                                            environment
                                                                                                                      Non-Exporters                        Exporters

           Source: Skills for the Labor Market in Indonesia, World Bank
           (2011).

   …but many graduates enter the labor market without the right skills
   But education is not a synonym of skills. If quality of education is low, attending school
   does not guarantee that students learn. In addition, the skills required in the labor force are not
   necessarily limited to those learned traditionally in schools. Skills demanded in the labor market




                                                                                                     99
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                               Chapter V




          go beyond technical and cognitive skills, and include behavioral / character (i.e. perseverance)
          and social skills (i.e. team work), but these skills are not measured through traditional surveys.95
          In the absence of such mapping of skills demand and supply, there are two main ways to identify
          these skills shortages: i) asking employers (the receivers of these skills) through surveys and ii)
          looking at the labor market performance of graduates.
          a) Employer surveys
          A first sign of skills shortages is that employers report difficulties in filling semi-skilled
          and skilled positions. In a survey of employers carried out by the World Bank in 2008, two-
          thirds of them complained that finding employees for professional and manager positions was
          either ‘difficult’ or ‘very difficult’.96 This was especially the case for exporters and manufactur-
          ing firms (as opposed to services). Almost 70 percent of employers in manufacturing reported
          finding it ‘very difficult’ to fill professional-level positions (engineers and similar). Exporters even
          reported difficulties in finding skilled production workers to meet their higher quality standards.

           Figure 5.3: Share of firms identifying that task of finding workers very or rather hard, by type of
           job

                                                                   78                      directors                                                79
                                                         56
                                                                                       professionals                                     60
                         Service         14
                  (non-education)             25                                                               11
                                                                           administrative workers
                                              23
                                                                                       sales workers                 26

                                                                                production workers                   25

                                                                    84            unskilled workers        4

                                                              69                                       0       20         40        60         80        100
                                         11
                 Manufacturing
                                               29
                                                                                          directors                                                  85
                                               29
                                                                                      professionals                                           70

                                                                          administrative workers                16
                                    0               50              100
                                                                                      sales workers                        36
                        Directors              Sales workers
                                                                              production workers                               39
                        Professionals          Production
                                               workers                            unskilled workers        2
                        Administrative         Unskilled
                        workers                                                                        0       20         40        60         80        100
                                               workers
           Source: Skills for the Labor Market in Indonesia, World Bank (2010).



          95 There are several initiatives to try to understand and define these skills better,95, including World Bank’s Skills Toward
          Employment and Productivity (STEP) Skills Measurement Survey, OECD’s Programme for the International Assessment of Adult
          Competencies (PIACC), UNESCO. However, these tools are not yet available in Indonesia.
          96 Skills for the Labor Market in Indonesia (2011).




                                                                          100
                                                                                                                                                                                            Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter V                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   The reasons for these difficulties vary by sector. Some sectors report insufficient graduates
   as the reason (for example, in textiles), whereas other sectors complain about the skills of exist-
   ing graduates (for example, in rubber and plastics). This suggests two types of mismatches. On
   the one hand, the education system does not seem to be providing enough graduates in certain
   areas (for example, through vocational senior secondary education in the textile sector). On
   the other, even when enough graduates are produced, they may not have the right skills. These
   mismatches have likely increased since 2008. In 2009, about 60 percent of Indonesian firms were
   reporting that skills were a constraint. Almost 20 percent considered them a severe constraint.

         Figure 5.4: Reasons for skills mismatches                                                                                          Figure 5.5: Reasons for skills mismatches,
         according to employers, 2008                                                                                                       comparing Indonesia with regional peers
         (% return)
                                                                                                                                            70%                             Major or Very severe Obstacle
    % of respondents considering important or




                                                                                                                                                                            Moderate, Major, or Very severe Obstacle
    very important reason for skill shortages




                                                70                                     Too few students
                                                                                                                                            60%
                                                60                                     Low quality of training                                      Share of firms reporting worker skills
                                                                                                                                            50%     as an obstacle to business
                                                50
                                                40                                                                                          40%

                                                30                                                                                          30%
                                                20                                                                                          20%
                                                10                                                                                          10%
                                                0
                                                                                                                                            0%
                                                                                                                        services
                                                                                                                       Financial
                                                                                                     coal &
                                                                                                 petroleum




                                                                                                                                   estate
                                                                                                                                    Real
                                                     Machinery




                                                                             Textile




                                                                                                              Rubber




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vietnam
                                                                 Furniture




                                                                                       Garment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    China
                                                                                                                                                          Cambodia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                             Philippines

                                                                                                                                                                                           Malaysia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mongolia
                                                                                                                                                                     Laos




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thailand
                                                                                                                                                  Korea




         Source: Investment climate surveys, latest year (2009 for Indonesia)

   b) Labor market performance of graduates

   While employers struggle to find the right skills, unemployment rates for educated youth
   are higher than for non-educated youth. The unemployment rate for 20-29 year olds is almost
   twice as high for senior secondary and tertiary graduates than for basic education graduates. The
   rate went up for tertiary graduates between 2001 and 2005 and has remained stubbornly high
   since then. The rate has come down significantly for senior secondary graduates, however. But
   the fact that graduates find jobs does not mean they are equipped with the right skills. Unem-
   ployment in the hopes of finding a job may be considered a luxury for most, which may lead to
   graduates accepting lower quality jobs because of need.




                                                                                                                                      101
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                                                              Chapter V




           Figure 5.6: A framework of accountability of higher education institutions
                                       30%                                      2001                      2002                      2003        2004        2005
                                                                                2006                      2007                      2008        2009        2010
                                       25%

                                       20%

                                       15%

                                       10%

                                         5%

                                         0%
                                                        Primary or less                                     Basic                            Senior Secondary      Tertiary


          In fact, more than half of senior secondary graduates are employed in unskilled oc-
          cupations (blue-collar, laborers in agriculture) and half of young tertiary graduates are
          employed in occupations below their level of education (Figure 5.7). According to the
          Employer Skills Survey, 25 percent of senior secondary graduates do not meet the expectations
          of the employers.97 Approximately a quarter of employees with senior secondary education are
          considered of poor quality. Further, only 7 percent of them are considered to be “very good”
          and most of them are considered “fair”. There are no significant differences between the quality
          of graduates from the general track and from the vocational track.

           Figure 5.7: Type of occupation for senior                                                                                       That a large number of tertiary educated
           secondary graduates, 2001-2010                                                                                                  individuals work in low-skill occupations
                                     Unskilled                      Semi-skilled                    skilled
                                                                                                                                           is a good indicator that despite holding
           100%                                                                                                                            the degree needed for higher level occu-
            90%
            80%                                                                                                                            pations, they lack the right skills. These
            70%                                                                                                                            percentages have gone down since 2001,
            60%
            50%                                                                                                                            which may indicate that the quality of gradu-
            40%
            30%                                                                                                                            ates has improved. Still, a significant share
            20%
            10%                                                                                                                            of recent graduates has entered the labor
             0%                                                                                                                            market without the necessary skills to suc-
                                       Basic




                                                                                                  Basic
                                                                     Tertiary




                                                                                                                                           ceed, which has pushed them into unskilled
                                                 Senior Secondary




                                                                                                            Senior Secondary
                   Primary or less




                                                                                Primary or less




                                                                                                                               Tertiary




                                                                                                                                           positions. The country has invested a lot in
                                                                                                                                           these graduates, and even if their skills do not
                                                                                                                                           meet the demands in the labor market, they
                                                                                                                                           have a stronger skill base than school drop-
                                          2001                                                       2010
                                                                                                                                           outs. With some skills upgrading, these young
                                                                                                                                           educated workers are best positioned to drive
           Source: World Bank calculation using Sakernas
                                                                                                                                           the economic transformation Indonesia is
                                                                                                                                           aspiring to.

          97 Skills for the Labor Force in Indonesia, World Bank, 2012




                                                                                                                                      102
                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter V                                                                                                         Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   These mismatches are partly behind the recent decline in the returns to education for
   young graduates. The returns to senior secondary show a slight decline since 2006, though they
   are increasing slightly in recent years. However, these are the returns only for those graduates
   employed for wages, which excludes many unskilled positions. The decline in returns to higher
   education is still small, and it is not in all sectors. The sectoral distribution of employment goes a
   long way in explaining the broad indicators of labor market performance of graduates, which is
   a sign of these mismatches.

    Figure 5.8: Trends in returns to education, all labor force and younger than 35, 2001-10
                            All labor force                                                     Younger than 35
    1.4                                                                 1.4


    1.2                                                                 1.2
                                           Tertiary

      1                                                                   1       Tertiary

    0.8                                                                 0.8
                        Senior Secondary
    0.6                                                                 0.6         Senior Secondary


    0.4                                                                 0.4
                        Basic
                                                                                             Basic

    0.2                                                                 0.2


      0                                                                   0
            2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010                 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

    Source: Authors’ calculations using Sakernas, employed for wages.


   Comparing the labor market outcomes of graduates of two senior secondary tracks
   (general and vocational) indicates that unemployment rate upon graduation are similar
   between general and vocational graduates. While this comparison does not account for the
   different characteristics of general and vocational students, other research have shown that these
   differences are consistent even controlling for these factors. Chen (2009) finds that there are no
   significant differences in terms of unemployment. Comparing vocational and general graduates
   who do not go to college, vocational graduates seem to have a better chance of obtaining a job
   upon graduation. However, this simple comparison does not take into consideration the fact
   that a significantly larger proportion of general graduates go to college. Newhouse et al (2009)
   showed that there is no significant earnings difference for fresh graduates, but the earnings of
   vocational graduates depreciates much faster after 7-8 years. Looking at the average wage of
   graduates for both streams who did not continue on to higher education, the positive wage dif-
   ferential for vocational graduates has been reduced in recent years.




                                                                 103
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                             Chapter V




           Figure 5.9: Unemployment Rate for SMA and SMK Graduates, Age 20-24
                                30%                 20-24 year olds                                      30%                 All labor force

                                25%                                                                      25%
            unemployment rate




                                                                      SMK




                                                                                     unemployment rate
                                                                                                                                  Basic
                                20%                                                                      20%
                                                               SMA

                                15%                                                                      15%                         SMA
                                                       Basic
                                                                                                                            SMK
                                10%                                                                      10%

                                5%                                                                       5%

                                0%                                                                       0%
                                      2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010                             2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
           Source: Sakernas (various years).


          Comparing the returns to education for each track confirms their similarity. Taking only
          those with senior secondary as their highest degree, vocational graduates have traditionally
          enjoyed a small premium in the labor market over general graduates, but this premium has de-
          creased in recent years. While the difference increased slightly again in 2010, the differences are
          not large. Considering unemployment rates and returns to education, the two tracks do not seem
          fundamentally different in their capacity to equip graduates with skills for the labor market.98

          In tertiary education, there is a clear disconnect between the types of study and the
          sectors demanding graduates. While some sectors struggle to find skilled professionals, most
          tertiary education graduates enter the services sector, especially public services (mainly educa-
          tion, health and government administration). Teacher training colleges in particular account
          for almost one-third of all tertiary education graduates entering the labor force. Perhaps driven
          by higher expected wages promised by the recent Teacher Law, more students are choosing the
          teaching profession. However, because all these graduates cannot be absorbed into civil servant
          positions, they end up working under poor conditions as contract teachers, where the pay is one-
          third of the starting salary of regular teachers. This has resulted in rapid declines in the average
          salaries of graduates from teacher training colleges. Nonetheless, in perhaps the best example of
          the disconnect between the system and the labor market, the demand for places in teacher train-
          ing colleges continues to increase and reached an all-time high in 2013.

          Skills shortages are related to the quality and relevance of education

          The origins of the skills shortage start with the quality of basic education. In order to be
          prepared for the labor market, graduates need first and foremost, a strong base of basic skills.
          When asked in 2008, employers cite basic skills as the most important. Thinking skills and be-
          havioral skills follow. An important role for both general and vocational tracks of senior second-
          ary is thus to provide students with a strong basic skills, to prepare them for the labor market
          and for further education. Hanushek and Wossmann (2008) highlight the importance of the
          cognitive skills of the population, rather than mere school attainment.
          98 See Cerdan-Infantes and Mileiva (forthcoming), World Bank, for an analysis of the relevance of higher education using labor
          market outcomes of graduates.




                                                                                 104
                                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter V                                                                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Figure 5.10: Types of skills identified by                                            Hanushek and Wossmann (2008) measures
    employers are very important                                                          cognitive skills of different countries by com-
       60
                           Identifies as “very important”                                 parable international tests of mathematics,
       50                  Identifies as “skill gap in staff”                             science, and reading. They find that cognitive
                                                                                          skills are highly related to individual earnings,
       40                                                                                 the distribution of income, and to economic
                                                                                          growth.
       30

       20                                                              Indonesia continues to perform poorly in
                                                                       learning assessments, comparing unfavor-
      10
                                                                       ably with other middle income economies
       0                                                               and East Asian neighbors. PISA tests 15
             Basic    Thinking Behavioral Computer English             year olds who should still be enrolled in junior
             skills      skills      skills     skills      skills
                                                                       secondary, so these results are not a reflection
    Source: World Bank, Skills for the Labor Market in Indonesia, 2011
                                                                       of senior secondary education quality.
   However, they do reflect the skills that senior secondary students come with. For example, 15
   year-old students in Indonesia register learning levels well below their counterparts in VietNam
   even though per-capita income is higher.

    Figure 5.11: Average score in math science and reading, 2012
                       Mathematics                                              Reading                                              Science

   Shanghai-China                                       Shanghai-China                                         Shanghai-China
       Singapore                                                Korea                                              Singapore
    Chinese Taipei                                           Singapore                                                 Japan
           Korea                                               Finland                                                Finland
          Finland                                               Japan                                                   Korea
           Japan                                              Australia                                             Viet Nam
         Australia                                       Chinese Taipei                                         Chinese Taipei
         Viet Nam                                             Viet Nam                                               Australia
            OECD                                                OECD                                                   OECD
      Slovak Rep.                                          Slovak Rep.                                            Slovak Rep.
          Turkey                                               Turkey                                                 Turkey
         Thailand                                             Thailand                                               Thailand
          Mexico                                               Mexico                                                Malaysia
         Malaysia                                                Brazil                                               Mexico
        Argentina                                              Jordan                                                 Jordan
          Jordan                                              Malaysia                                               Argentina
            Brazil                                           Indonesia                                                  Brazil
        Indonesia                                              Tunisia                                                Tunisia
          Tunisia                                            Argentina                                                  Qatar
             Peru                                                Peru                                               Indonesia
            Qatar                                               Qatar                                                    Peru
                 0   100 200 300 400 500 600      700                0    100    200 300 400 500         600                 0   100 200 300 400 500 600      700
                         Average country score                                   Average country score                                Average country score

    Source: OECD Pisa 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do: Student performance in reading, mathematics and science.
    Notes: 15 year old students in Indonesia are expected to be in the last grade of junior secondary school and have completed 9 years
    of formal basic education.


   Despite large increases in public and private investment over the last decade the quality
   of education has not improved as much as expected. In reading, gains have been relatively
   rapid compared with other countries. For example, Indonesia was ranked in the top tercile when
   annualized improvements in reading achievement were compared. In mathematics, Indonesia
   ranks relatively poorly in terms of the magnitude of improvements. While improvements have
   been seen over the long term, more recent changes in learning achievement paint a more worry-
   ing picture. Since 2006, mathematics achievement has declined and there has been no statistically
   significant change in reading and science scores.




                                                                                105
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Chapter V




           Figure 5.12: Improvements in learning over recent times have been small
                                               420                                                                                                  420                                                                                                                                 420
                                                        Mathematics                                                                                                 Reading                                                                                                                        Science
                                               400                                                                                                  400                                                                                                                                 400
            average country score




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                average country score
                                                                                                                            average country score
                                               380                                                                                                  380                                                                                                                                 380

                                               360                                                                                                  360                                                                                                                                 360

                                               340                                                                                                  340                                                                                                                                 340

                                               320                                                                                                  320                                                                                                                                 320

                                               300                                                                                                  300                                                                                                                                 300
                                                       2000               2003       2006          2009      2012                                            2000             2003            2006                               2009              2012                                            2000       2003   2006           2009              2012

           Source: OECD PISA
           Notes: One standard deviation is equivalent to 100 test score points. Changes between 2003 and 2012 are statistically significant
           for mathematics and changes between 2000 and 2012 are statistically significant for reading. Changes in science scores are not
           statistically significant.

          Average levels of learning hide significant differences in mathematics and reading pro-
          ficiency levels. In Indonesia, the majority of 15 year-olds fall below level 2 proficiency.
          In some countries this low skill level is associated with student difficulties in continuing into
          higher education and making a successful transition into the labor market. Moreover, in 2012
          three-quarters of Indonesian students were at level 1 or below. In mathematics students scoring
          at this level are only able to do ‘very direct and straightforward mathematical tasks, such as read-
          ing a single value from a well-labeled chart or table’. Trends also suggest limited improvement in
          proficiency levels between 2006 and 2012.

           Figure 5.13: The proportion of Indonesian students leaving basic education without a good skills
           base is very high
                                               100                                                                                                                                      100                            100                                                                                                                                                   100

                                               80                                                                                                                                       80                                      80                                                                                                                                           80
               % ge of 15 years old students




                                                                                                                                                                                                % ge of 15 years old students




                                               60                                                                                                                                       60                                      60                                                                                                                                           60
                                               40                                                                                                                                       40                                      40                                                                                                                                           40
                                               20                                                                                                                                       20                                      20                                                                                                                                           20
                                                 0                                                                                                                                      0                                       0                                                                                                                                            0
                                               20                                                                                                                                       20                                      20                                                                                                                                           20

                                               40                                                                                                   level 5 and above                   40                                      40                                                                                                       level 5 and above                   40
                                               60                                                                                                   level 2-4                           60                                      60                                                                                                       level 2-4                           60
                                               80                                                                                                   below level 2                       80                                      80                                                                                                       below level 2                       80
                                           100                                                                                                                                          100                            100                                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                                                        Shanghai 2006
                                                                                                                                                                           China 2012
                                                     2006
                                                            2012
                                                                   2006
                                                                          2012
                                                                          2006
                                                                                    2012
                                                                                            2006
                                                                                                   2012
                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                 2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Shanghai 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                China 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                                                  Singapore


                                                                                                                                                            Korea
                                                                                             Turkey




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Malaysia
                                                       Indonesia


                                                                     Malaysia




                                                                                                                 Viet Nam
                                                                                 Thailand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Thailand
                                                                                                          OECD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Singapore


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Viet Nam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Indonesia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OECD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Turkey




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Korea




           Source: OECD



          2. Policy Options

          Ensuring that the workforce has the right skills to support high and sustained growth
          requires a three-pronged strategy. First, there is a clear need to improve the quality of basic
          education, starting with early childhood education. Skills beget skills, and a strong base of cogni-
          tive skills is needed to acquire the higher-level skills that will be needed by the workforce if it is



                                                                                                                                                                                   106
                                                                             Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter V                                                                                Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   to realize such a large-scale economic transformation. However, raising the level of skills of the
   general population through basic education will necessarily take time. Even if the educational
   system could be perfected instantly, the first graduates would only join the workforce in about
   20 years’ time. It is therefore essential to find short- and medium-term solutions for the current
   skills constraints: the second and third prongs of the strategy are thus improving the relevance
   of feeders into the labor market (technical and vocational education, and tertiary education) and
   upgrading the skills of the existing labor force.
   Focus on quality and skills, not only expansion

   Continuing to increase access to education will not bring about the expected benefits if
   the expansion is done at the expense of quality. After achieving near universal access to 9
   years of education, the GoI is focused on expanding access to 12 years of education (including
   senior secondary). The goal of senior secondary education is to prepare students for transition-
   ing to either the labor market or for tertiary education. Regardless of their destination, graduates
   need to be equipped with a solid foundation of basic skills. These skills have been shown to be
   demanded by employers and they also set the base for further study, be it in university or in more
   vocational oriented courses (diplomas, community colleges). In expanding access to senior sec-
   ondary education, it is thus important to ensure that both tracks general (SMA) and vocational
   (SMK) provide these graduates with basic skills (i.e. math, language) by strengthening the quality
   assurance system and balancing the content of both tracks.

   Establishing hard targets on the division of the general and vocational tracks is not
   necessary if both tracks are of good quality and if both offer paths for continuing educa-
   tion. The performance of graduates from both tracks in the labor market suggests that neither
   track is significantly better than the other without further study. Vocational secondary school
   might provide a fast route for training mid-level skilled workers for the immediate needs of the
   labor market, but it may not provide graduates with a sufficient foundation of general skills
   that makes them malleable for the future. On the other hand, graduates from the general track
   who do not enter tertiary education likely lack sufficient job-relevant skills. There is a need to
   offer opportunities of obtaining necessary labor market skills through practical experience and
   vocational courses, especially of community colleges and non-university tertiary degrees. Success
   lies in finding the right skill mix in both tracks, the permeability between tracks and opening up
   paths for continuing skills acquisition for vocational graduates.
   Improve relevance of feeders into the labor market: vocational education and tertiary
   education

   Making vocational education and tertiary responsive to employer needs is a priority.
   In the absence of the right policies, education institutions tend to be isolated from the labor
   market.99 They naturally to their ‘clients’, comprising potential and current students, as well as
   their owners or regulators. As a result, if students’ demands are not in line with the labor market
   (because of lack of information, for example) or the regulatory framework prevents educational
   institutions from responding to the demands of their ‘clients’ (rigidity, for example), then these
   institutions will not respond to the demands in the labor market.
   99 Putting Higher Education to Work, World Bank, 2013




                                                           107
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                    Chapter V




          The key aspects of the tertiary education system are information and incentives, both
          of which are problematic in Indonesia. Without information about labor-market trends (for
          students, employers and educational institutions) and about the quality of institutions (quality
          assurance), the choices of potential students will not be aligned with those of the labor market,
          and educational institutions will not have the incentives to align their offerings to the demands
          of employers. If employers cannot properly distinguish between good and bad educational
          institutions, then the rewards for their graduates will not be clear either. But information is not
          enough. Even if the right information is in place, it is still important to provide the right incen-
          tives. This requires autonomy and accountability, incentives for performance (especially in public
          institutions) and opportunities for direct links between institutions and employers (for example
          apprenticeships, staff exchanges, research collaboration). Advanced tertiary education systems go
          beyond these basic elements and attempt to address further disconnects: between higher educa-
          tional institutions themselves, between higher educational and training institutions, and between
          senior secondary and tertiary education (in addition to the role of tertiary educational institu-
          tions as catalyzers of innovation). Both information and incentives are problematic in Indone-
          sia.100
           Figure 5.14: A framework of accountability of higher education institutions
                                                          Owner and/or regulator

                         Main clients for                       Government                              Recipient of the
                        tertiary education                                                            graduates, but rarely
                            institutions                                                                  direct clients

                               Potential                                                               Future employers
                               Students
                                                               Higher Education
                                                              Institutions (Public/
                                                                     Private)




           Source: World Bank staff elaboration.

          Upgrading skills of existing labor force

          There is a need to address the skills shortages of those already in the labor market – and
          the institutional set-up to develop a professional certification system and competency-
          based training is largely established. However, the training system should be expanded, better
          coordinated and have strong employer participation. Coverage of the training system is very
          low, with only about 5 percent of the labor force reporting having received any formal training.
          On-the-job training is rare, with firms in Indonesia much less likely to report offering opportuni-
          ties for training to their employees than in other countries in the region (even large Indonesian
          firms). Supply is limited and most existing training-providers are concentrated in low-value-add-
          ed areas (such as beauty salon and spa skills and basic computer skills).
          100 See Relevance of Higher Education for the Labor Market in Indonesia, Cerdan-Infantes and Mileiva (forthcoming).




                                                                      108
                                                                                                   Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter V                                                                                                          Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Figure 5.15: Share of firms providing training opportunities to employees, 2009

                         Large (100+)

                      Medium (20-99)                                                              Indonesia

                          Small (5-19)                                                            EAP
                                                                                                  World

                         Non-exporter
                          Exporters
                      (>10% of sales)


                              Foreign
                     (more than 10%)
                            Domestic
                                         0                20                40               60               80
                                                  Share of firms providing formal training
    Source: World Bank, Enterprise Survey 2009.

   More resources are needed for training, but they should not all come from the public
   sector. Skills upgrading is not the responsibility of the public sector, since firms and individuals
   also benefit from the upgrading. Resources should come from both public and private sources,
   by using public funding strategically to incentivize private spending from employers. For ex-
   ample, many countries have implemented training funds from both public and private sources to
   incentivize training by partially subsidizing it

   Improve quality of training and the use of training based on competencies by incentiv-
   izing quality improvements from training providers. Accreditation is largely voluntary at the
   moment and there are no consequences of not going through the accreditation system. Com-
   petency based methodologies are rarely used in training. The increase in public funding should
   go to incentivizing these changes. Again, training funds are a possible tool to incentivize these
   changes in training providers, if these are used as conditions to access funds.

   Accelerate expansion of supply of quality training institutions that deliver relevant train-
   ing in higher value-added skills in strategic sectors. The current supply of training provid-
   ers is concentrated on low skilled occupations, while there is an undersupply of training provid-
   ers in strategic sectors of the economy that require larger fixed investments to be established
   (food products, manufacturing). Expanding this supply will be critical to ensure skills upgrading
   happens in the right sectors.

   Incentivize training for specific group through demand side subsides. Small and medium
   size enterprises tend to underinvest in their workers because of logistical constraints, since the
   cost of sending one worker to training means stopping production. Hard to employ populations
   most in need of retraining may face financial constraints to access training, even if that training
   is relevant and of good quality. Strategic industries may also face short time constraints in devel-
   oping training providers. Public investment are thus best be used to target these populations on
   equity and productivity grounds.




                                                                 109
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




                                 110
Chapter VI. Improving the
 Functioning of Markets
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                               Chapter VI




                      Chapter VI. Improving the Functioning
                                    of Markets

          Well-functioning product, labor, financial and land markets are critical drivers of productivity
          growth and are central the overall efficiency and competitiveness of any economy. These markets
          act as a lubricant allowing the expansion of individual sectors and the movement of resources
          across sectors. They determine whether resources (workers, talents and capital) can move flexibly
          across sectors or remain bottled up in low-productivity uses.

          In Indonesia, regulations governing entry, investment and business conduct in many sectors have
          become complex and uncertain, often sending mixed signals to investors. In addition, difficult
          access to factor markets such as capital and land puts productivity levels and economic growth
          below their potential. At the same time, some provisions of the labor law (e.g. severance pay) im-
          pedes labor mobility and in practice neither protect workers nor facilitate formal employment—a
          loose-loose equilibrium. The minimum wage setting mechanism has become cumbersome and
          unpredictable, increasing uncertainty.

          Although reforms of product and factor markets (in particular labor market) are difficult and
          politically sensitive, then yield high payoffs for the economy and ordinary citizens. This chapter
          reviews the key issues in Indonesia’s investment climate and key factor markets.


          1. Improving the functioning of product markets

          Key relevant product market/ investment climate issues
          Changing external conditions will force investors and financial intermediaries to pay
          more attention to investment climate issues than over the past decade. As shown in Chap-
          ter 1, over the past decade, high commodity prices and low global interest rates have supported a
          robust recovery of private investment in Indonesia. After falling dramatically after the 1997/98
          crisis, Indonesia’s investment-to-GDP ratio has recovered strongly over the past five years, mov-
          ing up to 32 percent in 2012 (compared with ratios of 27 percent in South Korea, 30 percent in
          India and the extremely high 46 percent in China, for example). While much of this increase has
          been due to rising investment prices, real investment growth has averaged an annual 8.4 percent
          over 2008-12 (up from 7.6 percent over 2003-07), and has tracked commodity prices. But as we
          enter a medium-term period of higher interest rates and stagnant or falling commodity prices,
          investment growth is slowing down. As competition for scarcer capital becomes stiffer, investors
          and financial intermediaries will give more weight to investment climate issues that may under-
          mine returns to investments.




                                                         112
                                                                                                   Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VI                                                                                                        Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   Indonesia’s investment climate trails the country’s main regional competitors at the
   aggregate level. The weak business environment is reflected, for example, in the World Bank
   Group’s Doing Business rankings. Indonesia is currently at 120th place (out of 185 economies),
   slightly improved on the rankings it has had over the past few years. This performance is below
   the regional (East Asia and Pacific) average and its peer countries’ performance: the Philippines,
   China, Thailand, and Malaysia ranked 108th, 96th, 18th, and 6th, respectively. Indonesia’s overall
   performance is only slightly better than India and Cambodia. It takes 47 days to start a business
   in Indonesia compared with only 6 and 2.5 days in Malaysia and Singapore, respectively. While
   companies in Thailand can obtain an electricity connection in 35 days, it takes 101 days to obtain
   an electricity connection in Indonesia.

   Although some actions are taken by the government to facilitate investment and busi-
   ness conduct in some sectors, recent business regulation measures have, in fact, sent
   mixed signals to investors and revealed contradictory aspirations. On the one hand, a
   comprehensive action plan to address the regulatory environment for SMEs (actions that are
   likely to be reflected in next year’s Doing Business report) announced on October 25, 2013
   strongly signals a willingness to address some key weaknesses in the business environment. While
   it seemed unlikely in early 2013 that there would be much progress on business environment
   reform, the October policy package and its subsequent, ongoing implementation are an indica-
   tion that the GoI has renewed its efforts to reduce red tape for Indonesian businesses, at least in
   some areas. The announced action plan consists of seventeen actions across eight “Doing Busi-
   ness” areas (aligned to eight of the ten indicators in the World Bank Group’s “Doing Business”
   country rankings).101 On the other hand and in sharp contrast, a large number of sector-specific
   laws and measures announced recently are either inconsistent with previous laws or create confu-
   sion about the direction of investment climate reforms in Indonesia. Box 6.1 summarizes the
   inconsistencies and uncertainties around various laws. The uncertainty created by these recent
   laws and regulations is a recipe for reducing the quantity or quality of much needed investments
   and can significantly reduce the country’s long-term competitiveness.

   The Government’s recent approach in trying to move up the value chain is to legislate
   and regulate first, then negotiate with private actors whose investments are needed to
   realize the government’s objective. This approach contrasts with the one adopted in most
   successful countries, where sound analysis and a strong partnership with the private sector in
   identifying and coordinating the needed investments and other industry-specific needs were used
   as a first step.




   101 To ensure the implementation of this policy package, and in a signal of good coordination towards making progress on these
   reforms, the Government has established a joint monitoring team with different government agencies, including the Presidential
   Working Unit for Control and Supervision on Development (UKP4).




                                                                113
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                        Chapter VI




           Box 6.1: The inconsistencies and uncertainties around various laws
           In 2007, Law No. 25/2007 on Investment was passed to provide much needed clarity, especially for
           foreign investors. The law states that all sectors and subsectors are entirely open to investment, un-
           less otherwise specified in the comprehensive “negative list” issued by the President (DNI, for Daftar
           Negatif Investasi). In 2009, however, a new Postal Law imposed potential limits to investment in postal
           and courier services, contradicting the earlier investment law and DNI list. Because of ongoing contra-
           dictions even before 2007, not only in the law but also in the implementing regulation and the different
           agencies’ interpretation of the regulations, companies in the industry remain uncertain what the precise
           foreign equity limit in the sector is or who could provide authoritative guidance.

           In 2010, a new Horticulture Law explicitly limited foreign investment in agriculture to 30 percent. The
           new law directly contradicted the Investment Law and the DNI list (updated 6 months before passage
           of the Horticulture Law) which allowed for foreign ownership in agriculture up to 95 percent of equity.
           In January 2013, a number of implementing regulations for the Horticulture Law were issued, impos-
           ing a temporary ban on the import of 15 products, including onions and shallots, and import quotas on
           11 more. The products’ prices rose rapidly, contributing to the increase of the inflation rate. Reversing
           course over the unequivocally negative impact of the policies, the regulations were amended to scrap
           some restrictions and simplify import approval for others. After all the back and forth, uncertainty re-
           mains among implementing agencies over the correct interpretation of the revised regulations.

           In the mining sector, the conflicting messages have been particularly noteworthy, as the Government has
           reversed its policy on an announced ban of raw mineral exports. Under the new Mining Law of 2009
           and its implementing regulation issued in 2012, the export of unprocessed minerals was to be banned
           completely. The Government issued conflicting statements about exemptions to this ban, adding to the
           sense of regulatory uncertainty across all sectors. Irrespective of how the law is ultimately being applied,
           it is clear that the repeated reversals have had a negative impact on the business environment.

           At the end of December 2013, the parliament passed a new industry law, which provides the Minister of
           Industry with new, sweeping authority to intervene in the market and even in individual firms’ decisions.
           Much of the law’s impact will depend on implementing regulations, but already now it creates additional
           uncertainty among both foreign and domestic businesses and investors.

           The ongoing protracted attempt to update the DNI is indicative of a broader debate in Indonesia on the
           relative importance of foreign involvement on economic growth. Despite the government’s announce-
           ment, as part of the August policy package, that updating the DNI (i.e. opening more sectors to foreign
           investment) was a policy priority, the DNI has taken several months to develop. As of this writing, it still
           has not yet been issued. There is a sense—expressed by different parties in the media, exerting their in-
           fluence on the political process—that Indonesia’s resources and its economy need to be better protected
           from foreign investment, while some domestic business interests are voicing their support for the pro-
           tection of selected sectors from foreign competition. With a looming national election, it remains to be
           seen how much influence these voices will exert on economic policy formation in the coming months.


          Policy options
          To successfully upgrade the country’s industries, a consistent industrial strategy elaborated in
          partnership with the private sector is needed. Such industrial policy could usefully reflect
          lessons from industrial policy around the world. In particular, a coordinated approach to identi-
          fying and removing binding constraints such as sector-specific infrastructure, skills and institu-
          tional support is needed. To ensure adequate implementation, a key option, a strengthened
          policy formation process is needed. As discussed in section 3 below, the creation of a “center



                                                              114
                                                                                 Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VI                                                                                    Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   of government” i.e., a unique institution that coordinates policy development across sectors and
   to manage competing demands amongst ministries and agencies, can help. Indonesia authorities
   may want to consider how to refine the mandates and functions of the various institutions that
   support the CoG, and to empower one institution, e.g., the President’s Office (or its designate) to
   play a stronger role in managing the policy process. This would be crucial to ensure that (a) mar-
   ket competition-driven innovation is fostered; (b) FDI and frontier technologies keep coming,
   and (b) Indonesia benefits as fully from the FDI as it should. A strengthened policy formation
   should also better address genuine concerns of Indonesians that the public interest be protected,
   and should enable the Government to push back against more narrow business interests and
   requests for protection.

   On the “Doing Business” areas, decentralization offers some proof of what is possible.
   With decentralization, much of the political authority to influence and reform the business envi-
   ronment is held at the subnational (provincial and local/municipal) level. Now, regional varia-
   tion offers proof of what is possible through optimization of procedures within existing legal
   frameworks. According to the Subnational DB study (2012), obtaining a construction permit in
   the city of Bandung, for example, takes on average 44 days, while in the capital Jakarta, less than
   150 km away, the same procedure takes on average 158 days, more than 3 times as long. To start
   a business in the city of Palangka Raya, 27 days are needed for the official procedures, while the
   same steps in Jakarta take almost twice as long, 45 days. These variations indicate that improve-
   ments of the regulatory environment can be achieved independently of reforms (or lack thereof)
   at the national level. For instance, in a welcome move, the new Governor of Jakarta has recently
   indicated that measures to reduce lengthy procedures to start a business will be taken.

   2. Reducing labor market rigidities and uncertainties

   Key relevant labor market issues
     Figure 6. 1: Country Comparisons of Rankings             A few provisions of the labor law impose
     on the Ease of Doing Business 2014                       high costs to firms and impede formal
                      Malaysia    6                           employment and productivity growth. In
                      Thailand      18
                                                              2003, the Government introduced a Labor
                                                              Law that significantly improved workers’
       Regional Average (EAP)                  88
                                                              rights and made hiring more flexible.
                        China                   96
                                                              However, the law made it more costly to
                  Philippines                     108         fire workers. In particular, the provision
                    Indonesia                       120       mandating that severance pay should be at
                         India                        134     least 100 weeks of wages is considered by
                   Cambodia                           137     firms as a de facto tax on employing formal
                               0             100          200
                                                              workers, especially young educated ones, and
                    Ease of doing business ranking            is an example of the unintended distortions
    Source: WBG Doing Business 2014 Report                    in the labor market that can be caused by
                                                              well-intentioned regulation; This provision of
   the labor law puts Indonesia’s labor market legislation among the most rigid in the region
   according to the OECD (Figure 6.2). Singapore and Malaysia for instance are at the level of
   rigidity of Anglo Saxon countries while Indonesia, China, Vietnam and the Philippines clearly
   stand out for having the stricter regulation.




                                                     115
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                               Chapter VI




          The majority of companies adjust to the high severance pay provision by either not
          formally signing a contract for workers or resorting to short-term contracts that by law
          are capped at three years. The fewer formal companies that abide by the labor law incur
          high costs. Hiring formal workers is discouraged, as employers have to deposit in an escrow
          account accrual for severance pay to be able to pay for several payment if they decide to fire
          their workers. At the same time, when a worker decides to voluntarily quit a company, only a part
          of the severance pay is paid. The system creates an incentive for employers to go informal and
          for workers to be fired: a lose-lose equilibrium.

           Figure 6.2: Labor Market Legislation Index in Indonesia and Elsewhere
                    4.0
                                  Specific requirements for collective dismissal
                    3.5
                    3.0           Regulation on temporary forms of employment

                    2.5           Protection of permanent workers against (individual) dismissal

                    2.0
                    1.5
                    1.0
                    0.5
                    0.0
                              United States
                                     Canada
                          United Kingdom




                                   Portugal
                              ***Singapore




                                  Denmark
                           Czech Republic
                                ***Malaysia




                                Switzerland
                              New Zealand




                                                                                                                               ASEAN+
                                    Finland
                                     Ireland




                                      Korea




                                     Turkey
                                   Hungary
                                     Brunei




                              ***Lao PDR
                               Netherlands




                                     France

                              ***Indonesia
                                  Australia


                              ***Mongolia




                                     Greece
                                  ***China
                                   Norway




                                       Spain
                          Slovak Republic




                            ***Philippines




                                    Mexico
                                   Sweden




                                        Italy
                               ***Thailand


                                    Austria




                                                                                                                               OECD-30
                                   Belgium
                                  Germany


                              Luxembourg




                                                                                                                                  ECA
                                      Japan




                             ***Cambodia




                                    Iceland
                                    Poland

                              ***Vietnam




          Source: OECD Employment Protection Legislation Database (2008-2010 values)


          As a result, while unintentionally undermining the hiring of formal workers, the rigidity
          in firing does not protect workers effectively. The percentage of workers to which the
          legislation applies is indeed small. For instance, regarding severance pay, a survey of terminated
          workers suggests that a majority of the latter did not receive any severance payment while the
          majority of those who received payment obtained less than the entitled amount (Figure 6.3).

           Figure 6.3: The large majority of terminated                      Figure 6.4: Minimum Wage, Indonesia versus
           workers report not having received severance                      Neighbors (USD/month)
           pay…
                                                                                               China                Thailand
                                                                             300
                                                                                               Indonesia            Malaysia
                                                                             250               Philippines          Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                             200

                                                                             150

                                                                             100

                                                                               50

                                                                                   0
                                                                                       2007   2008   2009    2010     2011       2012    2013
           Source : Indonesia Jobs Report: Towards Better Jobs and           Source : Indonesia Economic Quarterly, Policies in Focus
           Security for All (World Bank, 2010)                               (World Bank, December 2012)




                                                                         116
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VI                                                                                                           Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   The minimum wage setting process is another critical labor market issue. Indonesia
   followed a prudent minimum wage setting policy for most of the past decade or so but since
   2010, there is a significant departure from the moderate pace in minimum wage increases (as
   seen in chapter 1). In 2013, 25 Provinces increased their minimum wage by an average 30 percent
   and Jakarta increased it by 44 percent. This increase certainly reduced significantly Indonesia’s
   nominal wage advantage vis-à-vis China as China’s average labor productivity is indeed much
   higher than Indonesia’s. Indonesian formal labor-intensive firms in manufacturing and services
   seem however more concerned about the uncertainty around the minimum wage setting process
   and the threat of future high increases.102

   However in practice, the percentage of workers to which the minimum wage legislation
   applies is very small (Figure 6.6). This reflects three inter-related factors: (i) A large number
   of workers are self-employed. In 2011, 61 percent of workers declared being self-employed;
   (ii) about 54 percent of workers operate in the informal sector and over 80 percent of workers
   (including formal) do not have a contract and; (iii) government capacity to enforce compliance
   with minimum wage legislation is quite limited. Compliance enforcement requires coordination
   at the central level, between the Ministry of Manpower and relevant ministries, as well as
   between central and local governments and relevant actors (District Governors and Wage
   Councils).

     Figure 6.5:.…while compliance with minimum Figure 6.6: About 80 percent of workers do not
     wage legislation is limited                have contracts
       60 Percent                                                                  IDR 5,000
                                         Average hourly
       50                                minimum wage (RHS)
                                                                                          4,000
                       compliance rate
                    Non-
       40
                                                                                          3,000
       30
                                                                                          2,000
       20

       10                                                                                 1,000

        0                                                                                 0
             1990
                    1993
                           1995
                                  1997
                                         1999
                                                2001
                                                       2003
                                                              2005
                                                                     2007
                                                                            2009
                                                                                   2011




     Source: Statistics Indonesia (BPS), Sakernas 2008.


   Although the labor legislation provision such as severance pay and minimum wage do
   not affect the majority of workers in Indonesia, they can impede productivity growth and
   structural transformation through various mechanisms. For instance, workers’ movement
   into formal sectors is constrained as (i) workers who want to move are not compensated fully
   for severance by their employers if they leave voluntarily and; (ii) employers in formal sectors
   102 The minimum wage-setting process is complex. Negotiations and final agreements take place at the province and sectoral
   level (and often at the district and sub-sector level), making communication and compliance with new formula-based adjustments
   more difficult. More generally, ensuring the compliance of firms and employers to minimum wage regulations is not easy, and
   requires monitoring and coordination at the central level, between the Ministry of Manpower and relevant ministries for effective
   implementation, as well as between central and local governments and relevant actors (District Governors and Wage Councils).




                                                                                                  117
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                Chapter VI




          account for the high potential cost of dismissal and the uncertainty around minimum wage
          increases when making hiring decision. As result, movement of workers occurs mostly between
          informal and semi-formal companies. This may explain why agriculture still employs 35 percent
          of workers while the contribution of this sector to GDP has declined to 11 percent and why the
          overwhelming majority of workers in services sectors are in low-end, low-productivity, informal
          activities. In addition to undermining movement of workers to formal sectors, uncertainties
          around the trajectory minimum wage is a deterrent to investments in formal sectors, in particular
          in manufacturing.
          Policy options
          For Indonesia’s labor market to support workers’ mobility and structural transformation,
          a revision of the severance pay provision of the labor law will be needed. The labor Law
          enacted in 2003 significantly improved workers’ rights and made hiring more flexible. However,
          the provision of the law mandating that severance pay should be at least 100 weeks of wages is
          an example of a well-intentioned provision that has led to a “lose-lose” outcome. The majority
          of companies adjust to the high severance pay provision by either not formally signing a contract
          for workers or resorting to short-term contracts (80 percent of workers do not have a formal
          contract). The fewer formal companies that abide by the Law have to deposit cash accrual for
          severance pay in an escrow account to be able to pay for the severance if they decide to fire
          their workers. At the same time, when a worker decides to voluntarily quit a company, only a
          part of the severance accrued is paid. In 2011, only 7 percent of dismissed workers received
          full severance pay. Thus, the severance pay neither protects workers nor encourages formal
          employment. As a result, for instance, workers leaving farm or rural non-farm activities are stuck
          into slightly higher but still low-productivity informal sectors. Revising the severance pay provision of
          the labor Law could significantly improve the functioning of the labor market.

          The minimum wage setting process is another critical labor market issue to tackle in
          improving the functioning of the labor market. Since 2011, there is a significant departure
          from the moderate pace in minimum wage increases observed over most of the past decade. In
          2012, 25 Provinces increased their minimum wage by an average 30 percent and Jakarta increased
          it by 44 percent. While workers in Jakarta see these increases as “normal” given the cost of
          living in this metropolitan area, in the absence of commensurate labor productivity increases,
          Indonesia’s competitiveness and firms’ capacity and incentive to create jobs in the formal sectors
          are reduced. Perhaps even more problematic is the uncertainty of the minimum wage setting
          process, which can encourage firms to replace labor by capital when they make their investment/
          expansion decisions.103 To support formal job creation and structural transformation,
          consultations between employers, workers and the Government in view of adopting new minimum
          wage setting formula based on cost of living, inflation and productivity (as mandated by a recent Presidential
          guidance) is crucial.104

          The Government has announced a revision to the minimum wage setting process on
          23 August 2013, as part of a policy package designed to address Indonesia’s external
          imbalances.105 The change to the mechanism for setting provincial minimum wages outlined
          103 See Indonesia Economic Quarterly, October 2013 for more details.
          104 A more thorough diagnostic of Indonesia’s financial sector is warranted in order to identify specific, high priority reform areas.
          105 A significant share of high-wealth savers have actually chosen to intermediate their resources offshore.




                                                                          118
                                                                                                                       Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VI                                                                                                                                     Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   a mechanism for achieving a more certain, simple, and fair minimum wage setting process. The
   aim is to make employers, workers and job seekers better off by promoting a more evidence-
   based and less politicized wage-setting process. This is expected to lead to more predictable
   annual increases, and, by introducing improvements in the governance structure, reduce the
   scope for discretionary decision making.

   3. Deepening Financial Markets
   Key relevant financial market issues
   There is ample evidence that enterprises in Indonesia are credit constrained (IMF 2012).
   Firms, to a large extent, tend to rely more on retained earnings than on bank credit for the ex-
   pansion of their activities, which in turn means that current cash flow becomes the major factor
   in investment decisions. This has significant implications for the types of investments taking
   place in the economy, particularly in innovative firms that usually have negative cash flows in the
   early stages of operation, and need bank or non-bank financing to grow and create high qual-
   ity jobs. The credit constraint faced by firms reflects the lack of depth of Indonesia’s financial
   market. The financial sector is dominated by banks (78 percent of assets) and its claims to the
   private sector stand at only 35 percent compared to close to 100 percent on average for Malaysia,
   Thailand and the Philippines. Capital markets are thin with corporate domestic debt securities
   (outstanding) accounting for less than 5 percent of GDP, similar to Thailand and the Philippines
   but much lower than the 45 percent for Malaysia. Pension fund assets are also relatively low com-
   pared to the size of the economy (5 percent compared to 10-15 percent in the Philippines and
   Thailand and 40 percent in Malaysia).

     Figure 6.7: GDP Key financial market indicators

      Money Supply and Credit                                            Domestic Debt Securities Outstandng-Corporate Issuers 1/
      (in percent of annualised GDP)                                     (in percent of GDP)
     120                                                              50
                                                                      45
     100             M3     Claims on private sector 1/               40
                                                                      35
                                                                      30
      80                                                              25
      60                                                              20
                                                                      15
      40                                                              10
                                                                       5
      20                                                               0
                                                                                                                Czech Rep.
                                                                           Philippines


                                                                                         Indonesia

                                                                                                     Thailand




                                                                                                                                      Mexico

                                                                                                                                                  Korea
                                                                                                                             Africa




                                                                                                                                                          Malaysia
                                                                                                                             South




       0
             Indonesia   Turkey     India      Brazil     ASEAN-3
                                                          Average2/
     Source: CEIC data Co. Ltd; IMF, Integrated Monetary              Source: Bank for International Settlement; IMF, World Economic
     Database; and IMF staff estimates.                               Outlook; IMF staff estimate.
     Note: 1/ Claims on private sector credit at Financial            Note: 1/Includes financial institutions and other corporate
     Corporation Survey Level, 2/ Includes Malaysia, Thailand and     issuers.
     the Philippines.




                                                                    119
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                 Chapter VI




                                              Emerging Market Pension Fund Assets
                                              (in percent of GDP)
                                        80
                                        70
                                        60
                                        50
                                        40
                                        30
                                        20
                                        10
                                         0
                                                Indonesia


                                                            Thailand


                                                                       Philippines




                                                                                                       Korea


                                                                                                               Malaysia


                                                                                                                          Chile
                                                                                              Brazil
                                                                                     Poland
          Source: Economist Intelligence Unit: Investment Company Institute; CEIC Data Co, Ltd.; IMF, World Economist Outlook; and IMF
          staff estimate

          Policy options106
          A part of the shallowness of Indonesia’s financial market will be difficult to overcome
          because it reflects deep risk aversion behavior: following the 1997-98 financial crisis, both
          savers and investors moved into the shorter end of the maturity spectrum. Insurance, investment
          funds, and corporate bonds issuance, for example, have grown in recent years but still do not
          contribute significantly to the pool of domestic long-term savings and investments.107

          Public policy can however nudge the system toward greater financial depth. For instance,
          the development of the corporate bond market appears particularly constrained by strict invest-
          ment requirements, high underwriting costs and weaknesses in the execution regime. Interna-
          tional experience emphasizes the role of building a credible legal system that allows for the effec-
          tive enforcement of contracts and property rights and provides investor protection. Financial
          contracts are defined and made more or less effective by legal rights and enforcement mecha-
          nisms. From this perspective, improving Indonesia’s legal system would facilitate the operations
          of markets and intermediaries. This relates to improving the quality of the business environment
          more broadly, as financial sector actors, just as investors themselves, need a minimum level of
          certainty when making long-term financing decisions.

          The recent reforms of the social security regime further present an opportunity to
          deepen financial markets. The newly created Social Security Organizing Body (BPJS), which
          replaces JAMSOSTEK, will be expected to cover ten times the number of workers it does now
          (from 12 to 110 million, at least), which will multiply by a significant factor the amount of assets
          under management and would require a re-assessment of BPJS’s investment strategy. By regula-
          tion, JAMSOSTEK was not allowed to invest in instruments rated less than A-, with most funds
          invested in government bonds and bank deposits. Given that BPJS is set to become the largest
          institutional investor the market, this presents an opportunity to widen the choice of eligible
          investments, including corporate obligations that are not A rated. In this connection, moving
          into an investment strategy of higher risk (and presumably higher reward) would of course need
          to be accompanied by tighter transparency and accountability requirements. In addition, private

          106 A more thorough diagnostic of Indonesia’s financial sector is warranted in order to identify specific, high priority reform areas.
          107 A significant share of high-wealth savers have actually chosen to intermediate their resources offshore.




                                                                                      120
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VI                                                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   sector institutional investors, such as insurance companies and private pension and mutual funds,
   should be allowed to similarly widen its spectrum of investment opportunities, including in the
   infrastructure bonds market. Finally, in order to enhance market depth and liquidity, regulations
   should be put in place to regulate the creation of special investment vehicles and to allow the
   conduct of repurchase agreements with private corporate obligations.

   4. Land markets
   A lack of clarity in regulations governing land acquisition and the compensation to land-
   owners has caused delays to infrastructure projects, particularly toll roads. The rules and
   procedures in the regulation of a 2005 Presidential Regulation on Land Acquisition for Infra-
   structure Development are indeed vague in the face of a complex problem. Indeed, as in many
   developing countries, it is not unusual that many individuals claim the rights to the same piece of
   land. Legitimate or illegitimate landowners also frequently hold onto their land to benefit from
   an appreciation in value or enhance their negotiating power. Thus investors in infrastructure,
   whether public or private, have to overcome this hurdle before shovels hit the ground, leading
   to higher costs and significant delays. Land acquisition is one of the key factors behind the slow
   execution of infrastructure projects (especially roads and electricity) in Indonesia, and perhaps
   also behind the reluctance of the private sector to invest on a large scale in this sector.

   A new Land Law is, however, expected to improve the clarity and transparency of the
   land acquisition process, and strengthen public confidence in the Government’s efforts
   to advance the infrastructure agenda. Drawing on the lessons from the 2005 regulation, the
   new land Law is more specific in most areas and can significantly improve the procedures for ac-
   quiring land for public infrastructure.108 Areas of significant improvement include the process for
   land valuation, the mechanisms for grievances, and the compensation for affected or displaced
   individuals.109 For instance, the new regulation provides specifics about the inventory of affected
   people and assets, the consultation process, the compensation, and the dispute settlement. It
   also sets a specific timeframe for each of the acquisition stages and sub-stages, including the
   maximum time that a court may take to resolve disputes related to land acquisition. Barring any
   unforeseen implementation hurdle, the new Law should help.




   108 A Presidential Regulation No. 71/2012 sets the institutional arrangements for implementing the law.
   109 In 2012, the GoI issued several pieces of legislation relating to land acquisition to be carried out for projects of public purpose
   (Law No. 2/2012 in January 2012; Presidential Regulation No. 71/2012 in August 2012; and technical guidelines issued by the
   relevant ministries). These replaced previous presidential regulations that had been unable to support accelerated infrastructure
   development in Indonesia while ensuring that people affected by the negative impacts of associated land acquisition were adequately
   protected. Pursuant to Law No. 2/2012, Presidential Regulation No. 36/05 as amended is valid until 31 December 2014. The new
   legislations procedure applies to the acquisition of land under the authority and control of the National Land Agency. If land
   needed is under the authority of other ministries such as Ministry of Forestry, then before such land can be dealt with under the new
   legislations procedure, it must be released from forest zoning pursuant to applicable forestry legislation or other relevant legislation
   like mining, natural gas, etc.




                                                                   121
         Part 3
 Indonesia in the Next
   Decade: Sharing
Prosperity More Widely
 Chapter VII. Improving
Access to Quality Services
          for All
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                 Chapter VII




                               Chapter VII. Improving Access to
                                   Quality services for All
          While generating prosperity, which involves growth in average incomes and job creation, i.e.,
          an increase in the “size of the pie”, is central to enhancing people’s well-being, it is not enough.
          Improving living standards is not only an income story. Greater access to good quality essential
          services, which only partially depends on incomes, is necessary. In Indonesia, a large number of
          households classified as non-poor are poor in many dimensions including poor access to decent
          housing, transportation, water, sanitation, health and education. For households residing in urban
          as well as rural areas, especially the poor, vulnerable and some in the middle-class, greater income
          and prosperity will not translate fully into enhanced living standards as long as access to key
          services is not improved.

          The past decade has seen overall progress in the population’s access to key services such as edu-
          cation, health, water and sanitation and electricity. However, the progress has been uneven and
          unequal, leading to wide disparities across geographic and income levels, and undermining in-
          clusive growth. For all basic services, access is disproportionately lower for the rural population,
          even if in some areas the progress has been remarkable in rural areas as well. Yet, even in urban
          areas, access to high quality services such as inner-city transportation, transport links to markets
          and other cities, water and sanitation, and affordable housing remain poor relative to Indonesia’s
          wealth and level of income. Going forward, as income poverty further declines, the extent of
          non-income poverty will come to the fore and will need to be tackled more aggressively to foster
          a more inclusive society.

          The high hopes placed on decentralization reforms to improve public services for all are yet to
          fully materialize. Thirteen years after the beginning of Indonesia’s decentralization, formal sub-
          national state institutions of governance have become more active from the district to the village
          level. Where good leaders have emerged from the democratic process, the constraints imposed
          by the system (e.g., flaws in the inter-government fiscal transfers, see below) have not prevented
          remarkable progress. But in most cases, the constraints imposed by the decentralization frame-
          work combined with weak governance have led to inadequate service delivery. Providing good
          quality services for all rests a multi-dimensional set of policies to improve public finance man-
          agement and strengthen demand-driven community programs.

          1. Poverty and Institutional Context
          Trends in urban and rural poverty110
          At 8.4 percent in 2013, urban consumption-poverty rate is much lower than in rural areas
          (14.3 percent) and has steadily declined over the past decade (it was 14.5 percent in 2002).
          As discussed in Chapter 2, the sharp decline in urban poverty is largely a job creation story. Mas-
          110 The definition of “urban” and “rural” follows the Statistics Agency (BPS) Regulation. Urban/Rural is determined by
          considering a village-level administrative area and assessing the extent to which it meets a large number of criteria including
          population density, percentage of agricultural households, percentage of household with access to land-line telephone and electricity,
          availability of school facilities, hospital and market. Based on this definition, a village (desa) can either be categorized as urban or
          rural. The 2011 Village Census (PODES, 2011) shows that around 10 percent of Indonesia’s 69,700 villages are classified as urban
          areas.




                                                                           124
                                                                                                                          Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VII                                                                                                                                         Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    sive jobs were created in urban areas, as rapid urbanization and strong GDP growth supported
    the expansion of firms, especially in the services sectors. Rural poverty has enjoyed a similar rate
    of reduction as in urban areas over the past decade. However, it remains nearly twice as high,
    at 14.3 percent in 2013, compared with an 8.4 percent urban rate (Figure 7.1). As with poverty
    nationally, rural poverty rates are highest in eastern Indonesia (nearing 40 percent in Papua), but
    almost half of all rural poor live in Java (Figure 7.2), highlighting the policy need to focus on all
    regions of the country when addressing rural poverty.

    The decline in rural poverty reflects a number of factors, including an outmigration of
    low productivity workers to urban areas, which increased the contribution of productiv-
    ity to growth in agriculture. Although agriculture contributed only 10 percent to aggregate
    growth on average in that period (see Chapter 1), total factor productivity (TFP) explained 60
    percent of that growth (OECD, 2012). This increase in TFP was supported by a diversification
    away from food staples into palm oil, rubber, coffee and tea production, all of which have seen
    rapid increases in world prices.111 Rural dwellers have also indirectly benefited from growth and
    the sharp recovery in urban job markets since the mid-2000s (remittances and linkages with
    growing proximate urban markets).

     Figure 7.1: Urban and rural poverty, 2002-13                        Figure 7.2: Rural poverty by region, 2013
                             25                                                   50
                                                                                                               Percent of All Rural Poor
                                                                                  40
                             20                   Rural
     Percent of Population




                                                                        Percent




                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                         Poverty Rate
                             15                                                   20
                                                                                  10
                             10
                                          Urban                                    0




                                                                                                                                                         Maluku
                                                                                                                 Kalimantan




                                                                                                                                                                  Papua
                                                                                       Sumatra


                                                                                                 Java + Bali




                              5
                                                                                                                              Sulawesi


                                                                                                                                         Nusa Tenggara
                              0



     Source: BPS.                                                        Source: Susenas and World Bank calculations.

    Changes in the institutional context: decentralization

    Indonesia underwent a swift transition to democracy in 1998 followed by “big-bang”
    decentralization in 2001. In 2005, subnational governments (provinces, regencies (kabupaten)
    and municipalities (kota)) held their first direct elections.112 At the same time, significant respon-
    sibilities were devolved to districts and municipalities. Clearly, the empowerment of subnational
    governments over the past decade has made them increasingly critical in achieving Indonesia’s
    development goals.

    Consistent with the increased responsibilities, local governments were given extensive
    expenditure responsibilities while the tax system remains mostly centralized.113 The as-
    signment of new functions to the subnational level was accompanied by a massive reallocation
    111 OECD Agriculture Policy Review Report, 2012, p.5-6.
    112 Regencies and municipalities form what is often referred to as “districts”.
    113 Some transfer of tax responsibility has occurred since property and transfer of property taxes have now become local taxes.




                                                                  125
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                             Chapter VII




          of funding—subnational expenditure grew from 2.7 percent of GDP in 2000 to 7.2 percent of
          GDP in 2011. Subnational-governments now manage about half of total core public spending
          (i.e., excluding central government subsidies and interest payments). The vision and expectation
          behind this increase in subnational governments’ responsibilities and financial capacity were to
          enhance service delivery.

           Figure 7.3: Per capita spending on infrastructure   With decentralization most of the respon-
           varies by metropolitan size                         sibilities for providing public services, in-
                                                               cluding infrastructure, fall on subnational
              1,400
                           2001    2008                        governments (SNG). However, the largest
            Thousands




              1,200                                            expenditure item for most SNGs in Indo-
              1,000                                            nesia is salaries, which leaves little room for
                800                                            capital investment in infrastructure. On aver-
                600                                            age from 1997 to 2009, SNGs’ investment in
                400                                            capital infrastructure was only 0.72 percent
                200
                                                               of total GDRP. Meanwhile, per capita infra-
                                                               structure spending varies depending on city
                  0
                     +10M 5-10M 1-5M 0.5-1M 0.1-0.5M <0.1M     size (Figure 7.3). Metropolitan areas with
                                Population size                populations of over 10 million and popula-
                                                               tions of 5 to 10 million spent similar
          amounts on infrastructure, while metropolitan areas with populations of 1 to 5 million spent
          comparable sums as cities with populations of 0.5 to 1 million. However, the metropolitan areas
          with populations of 1 to 5 million have lower GRDP per capita compared with other cities/
          metropolitan areas, while cities with populations of 0.5 to 1 million have the highest GRDP per
          capita in the country. This shows that investment efficiency also differs depending on city/metro
          size, as higher spending on infrastructure does not always result in higher economic returns.

          2. Access to High Quality Services in Urban Areas
          For Indonesia, closing the gaps in access to high quality basic services access would
          greatly enhance living standards and the quality of urbanization for all. Shaping urbaniza-
          tion to enhance living standards for urban populations entails, at different degrees depending on
          the region, improving access to a few key infrastructure services (where the gaps are highest),
          affordable higher quality housing, as well as better connectivity to markets and other cities.

          Access to basic infrastructure in Indonesia’s urban areas is better than in rural areas
          and has improved overtime, but the quality of urbanization could greatly improve with
          higher quality water, sanitation and transport services. In 2012, 77 percent of Indonesia’s
          urban population had access to safe water (versus only 51 percent in rural areas) while76 percent
          had access to sanitation (versus 59 percent in rural areas). These averages hide large variations
          across provinces. For instance for access to safe water, the lowest rates in Bengkulu and Goron-
          talo (40 and 50 percent, respectively) contrast sharply with the high rates in Jakarta and Bali (91
          and 84 percent, respectively). For sanitation, the low rates in most provinces in Sulawesi contrast
          with the high rates in Riau and Kepulauan Kalimantan. These differences notwithstanding, the
          quality of sanitation services is generally low. For instance, sewerage coverage exists in only 11
          cities, while only 2 percent of the urban population had access to centralized sanitation systems
          in 2009.



                                                         126
                                                                               Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VII                                                                                Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Low rates of sewerage and sanitation coverage and weak solid waste management
    collection and management system cause widespread contamination of surface and
    groundwater. About 85 percent of small cities and more than 50 percent of medium cities
    dispose of their waste in open dumps. As a result, Indonesia has experienced repeated local
    epidemics of gastrointestinal infections and has the highest incidence of typhoid in Asia. Fur-
    thermore, the relatively poor performance of local water utilities has contributed to excessive
    reliance on private wells, and excessive groundwater extraction and subsidence in parts of urban
    Indonesia. Government Regulation No. 81/2012 provides a basis for action in improving the
    management of solid waste. The Ministry of Public Works is supporting subnational govern-
    ments to improve the infrastructure facilities to manage municipal solid waste, including landfills.
    Enforcement of regulations and implement however need improvement.

    Transportation services are another key issue for urban dwellers as data from Susenas
    reveal that 26 percent of urban residents have poor access to transport services. Lewis
    (2014) finds that many cities in Indonesia fail to invest enough in infrastructure to keep pace
    with the increasing demands of rapidly growing cities. This causes increasing congestion, as the
    existing infrastructure becomes inadequate in serving the growing population and expanding
    economic activities. Chapter 4 highlights the large investment gaps and needs in basic infra-
    structure, including transport, safe water, sanitation and drainage at the national level. Chapter 6
    highlights the challenges and opportunities for developing local transportation services in urban
    areas.

    In addition to transport, water and sanitation, the other key factor in urbanization quality
    in Indonesia is affordable, higher quality housing. Indonesia is rapidly urbanizing with a
    young population that will demand housing. So far, the majority of housing needs in Indonesia
    (around 80 percent) have been met by incremental and self-built housing. However, access to ur-
    ban land is declining and prices are rising (nationwide residential property price growth was 10.7
    percent year-on-year in Q2 2013) while financing is now tightening and is likely to remain tight
    in the years to come. In brief, the affordability of housing is declining, especially for low-income
    groups. While estimates of Indonesia’s housing deficit vary, all indicate a significant backlog in
    supply. One analysis for the 2001-07 period estimates a deficit of 1.7 million units, and suggests
    that in order to meet future needs between 600,000 and 900,000 housing units should be built
    per year. This number increases as urbanization continues. For the period 2014-21, it is estimated
    that 700,000 to 1 million units of housing per year will be needed.

    3. Access to Improved Essential Services in Rural Areas

    Despite progress over the past decade, in general access to quality services is significantly lower
    for rural households, with the notable exception of primary education, where remarkable prog-
    ress was made in access equity. The gap in access between urban and rural areas is largest for
    water and sanitation but is prevalent for all essential services.

    Most rural children now have access to education facilities nearby. Almost all children
    have a primary school (SD) in their village or neighborhood. Less than 10 percent of rural
    children do not have a junior secondary school within 6km (Figure 7.4), although this increases
    to around 35 percent when considering schools within 1km. Nonetheless, access still favors




                                                    127
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                          Chapter VII




          children of wealthier households; rural children in the poorest consumption decile have twice
          the chance of lacking access than children in the richest decile. The same pattern holds for early
          childhood development centers (ECED), where 14 percent of children in the poorest decile
          lack an ECED center within 6km (increasing to 21 percent within 1km), compared with just 5
          percent in the richest decile (10 percent within 1km).

          Access of rural children to health care is considerably lower than for education (Figure
          7.4). Over one quarter do not have easy access to a hospital, with the lack of access for those in
          the poorest decile nearly twice that of the richest. A midwife in the village is more common, but
          still favors richer households. Delivery challenges are particularly acute with enormous supply-
          side constraints outside of Java/Bali, Sumatra and Sulawesi. At the national level, there is a sharp
          shortage of doctors. The ratio of doctors in Indonesia is 0.2 per 1,000, one of the lowest in the
          region. The availability of hospital beds is also low relative to demand. In terms of inpatient
          capacity, Indonesia faces an estimated shortage of 13,875 beds. This shortage in doctors and
          hospital beds leads to rationing. Rural and remote areas are disadvantaged in that they not only
          have fewer health facilities but also face the difficulties associated with the retention of health
          personnel. Access to high quality care is also constrained by the lack of basic amenities and
          medical equipment in Puskesmas (community health centers) and other health facilities especially
          for key services such as antenatal care, basic obstetric care, and non-communicable diseases.

            Figure 7.4: Child 0-15 access to education                     Figure 7.5: Child 0-15 access to health by rural
            by rural household per capita consumption                      household per capita consumption decile, 2011
            decile, 2011
                     40               No ECED     No SMP                            40          No Hospital    No Midwife
                     35                                                             35
                     30                                                             30
           Percent




                                                                          Percent




                     25                                                             25
                     20                                                             20
                     15                                                             15
                     10                                                             10
                      5                                                              5
                      0                                                              0
                          1   2     3   4     5   6    7    8    9   10                  1   2 3     4    5   6    7      8      9    10
                                  Household Consumption Decile                               Household Consumption Decile
            Source: Susenas and World Bank calculations.                   Source: Susenas and World Bank calculations.
            Note: No ECED or SMP within 6km. Deciles are for per           Note: No easy access to hospital. No midwife in village.
            capita household consumption.                                  Deciles are for per capita household consumption.


          Indonesia’s high maternal mortality ratio (220 per 100,000 live births) is mostly driven
          by rural areas and is at odds with universal maternal health coverage since 2011. Askes
          (formal public sector social insurance), Jamsostek (formal private sector social insurance), and
          Jamkesmas (social health insurance program for the poor and near-poor) include maternal health
          benefit entitlements. Since 2011, those not covered by existing health insurance programs have
          coverage through Jampersal, a central government-financed program that provides a comprehen-
          sive maternal health benefit package. Jamkesmas and Jampersal promote institutional delivery in
          public and private facilities to reduce the risk of maternal deaths associated with home deliveries.
          The Government has also invested in improving basic and comprehensive obstetric and neonatal
          emergency care to strengthen referral and management of maternal and neonatal complications.


                                                                      128
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VII                                                                                                            Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Rural dwellers are behind on all indicators of access to basic services such as safe water,
    sanitation, and electricity and housing conditions. The gap in access between urban and
    rural areas is largest for water and sanitation but is prevalent for all essential services (Figures 7.6
    to 7.9).

     Figure 7.6: Access to safe water (2012)                            Figure 7.7: Access to proper sanitation (2012)
     (% of total households)– see note below                            (% of total households)– see note below
                               Rural    Urban                                                        Rural    Urban

     100                                                                   100
      90                                                                    90
      80                                                                    80
      70                                                                    70
      60                                                                    60
      50                                                                    50
      40                                                                    40
      30                                                                    30
      20                                                                    20
      10                                                                    10
       0                                                                     0




     Source: Susenas and World Bank calculations.                       Source: Susenas and World Bank calculations.
     Note: No ECED or SMP within 6km. Deciles are for per               Note: No easy access to hospital. No midwife in village. Deciles are
     capita household consumption.                                      for per capita household consumption.


     Figure 7.8: Access to electricity (2012)                           Figure 7.9: Access to quality housing (2012)
     (% of total households) – see note below                           (% of total households) – see note below
                           Rural       Urban                                                        Rural      Urban
    100                                                                  100
     90                                                                   90
     80                                                                   80
     70                                                                   70
     60                                                                   60
     50                                                                   50
     40                                                                   40
     30                                                                   30
     20                                                                   20
     10                                                                   10
      0                                                                    0




     Source: All data is generated from Susenas, 2012
     Notes:
     Safe water: All households that uses packaged water/refill water (“air isiulang”)/tap water/pump/protected well at least 10 m away
     from a septic tank/protected spring at least 10 m away from a septic tank as drinking/washing source.
     Sanitation: All households that own personal (not public or shared) sanitation facility.
     Electricity: All Households that has electricity installed (both using the State Electricity Company, PLN or from other sources). These
     numbers reported directly by households differ from PLN’s numbers that do not include illegal connections and other unreliable
     connections (e.g. connection for just a few hours a day).
     Quality housing: All housing with the widest type of floor made of marble, granite, ceramic, tiles or concrete.




                                                                   129
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                            Chapter VII




          Furthermore, it is often the same households that lack everything at the same time. A
          key consideration for equality of opportunity is not just whether particular communities, such as
          rural ones, are lagging on any particular indicator, but in addition whether those households that
          are poor on these indicators are the same ones or not. Urban households that have poor access
          to health services, for example, generally have satisfactory access to education and transporta-
          tion services (Figure 7.10). However, in rural Indonesia it is often the same households that are
          deprived of all of these opportunities (Figure 7.11). Greater investment in rural infrastructure is
          needed to provide the same opportunities to these households as in other parts of Indonesia.114

           Figure 7.10: Urban access to services, 2011                        Figure 7.11: Rural access to services, 2011

                                                                                                         9%                      Poor
                                                                              Poor
                                                                                                                                 Education
                          3%         2%                                       Health                                     5%
                                                3%      Poor                              6%                                     Access 41%
                                                                              Access
           Poor                                         Education             40%
           Health                   1%                  Access 7%
                               2%          2%
           Access                                                                                         20%
           8%                                                                             5%
                                                                                                                         6%



                                    22%                      Poor
                                                             Transportation
                                                             26%                                           18%
                                                                                                                               Poor
                                                                                                                           Transportation
                                                                                                                               50%



           Source: Susenas, Podes, World Bank calculations                    Source: Susenas, Podes, World Bank calculations.


          4. Policy Options for Improving Access to Services for All
          As income poverty declines, improving access to and quality of basic services will have
          a significant impact on living standards. This requires addressing some of the challenges in
          local service delivery (supply-side) by: (i) reallocating more resources to front-line service deliv-
          ery, which requires improving the incentive structure of the fiscal transfer system; (ii) spending
          better, which implies enhancing the efficiency/quality of spending; and (iii) refocusing local and
          central bureaucracies to be accountable for results rather than for compliance to specific rules
          only. At the same time, decentralization has brought with it improved access to information, a vi-
          brant civil society and media, and increased engagement in local political processes that offer an
          opportunity of improving accountability for results and service delivery from the demand side.
          More resources to front-line services and less on personnel & administration
          The incentive framework implicit in the central-to-local government fiscal transfer sys-
          tem has created a basic “Principal-Agent” problem. Essentially, local governments receive
          about 90 percent of their budgets from the central government (fiscal transfers). However, the
          central government has no effective mechanism to significantly influence the composition of
          local governments’ spending. Subnational government spending is excessively dominated by
          114 See Hadiwidjaja, Paladines and Wai-Poi (2013) “The Many Dimensions of Child Poverty in Indonesia”.




                                                                         130
                                                                                                 Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VII                                                                                                     Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    spending on administration over productive sectors and on personnel over maintenance and
    capital spending. Improving the “allocative” efficiency of local government budgets by real-
    locating more resources to front-line service delivery is an important step in improving the rural
    population’s access to basic services.115

    Increasing the proportion of local governments’ budgets tied to specific sectors and
    performance could help improve the alignment of spending with the population’s needs.
    Subnational transfer revenues in Indonesia are dominated by a “block grant” component (DAU)
    relative to transfers tied to special purposes. Block grant transfers are untied, facilitating excessive
    subnational personnel expenditure, leaving little space for transfers that could be tied to front-
    line service provider levels. In 2012, the DAU made up almost 60 percent of central government
    transfers to subnational governments. The specific purpose grant (DAK), allocated to certain
    regions with the aim of funding special activities of the region in accordance with national pri-
    orities, only cover 6 percent of these transfers. Other transfers are revenue-sharing (DBH), the
    special autonomy fund (Dana Otsus) for Aceh, Papua and West Papua provinces and a number
    of adjustment funds (Dana Penyesuaian). Revenue-sharing aims at sharing tax and non-tax natu-
    ral resource revenues with all districts with a larger proportion of revenues going to resource-
    rich districts where the revenues originated. Adjustment Funds include additional allowances for
    teachers, professional benefits for teachers, School Operational Assistance program (Bantuan
    Operasional Sekolah, or BOS), local incentive grants (Dana Insentif Daerah, or DID) and vari-
    ous infrastructure support funds.

     Figure 7.12: The structure of fiscal transfers Going forward, increasing the share of the
     to local governments                           DAK in the total allocation and refocusing the
      Structure of transfers to subnational                     DAK’s targeted sectors to a few critical ones
             governments (%), 2012
                                                                (e.g., water supply, sanitation, education and
                                                                health) could greatly support service delivery.
                                Special
                                 AAF                            While claiming a small share of the total transfer,
                                 16%                            the DAK is overly fragmented, scattered across
                                                                too many sectors and districts, and thus unable
                      DBH                                       to significantly increase the capacity to delivery
                      19%
                                                   DAU
                                                                services. In addition, allowing local governments
                                                   59%          more space for own-source revenue collection
                                                                would also help. International experience shows
                                                                that limited own-source revenues and over-reliance
                      DAK
                      6%                                        on transfersinduce fiscal relaxation and can reduce
     Source: Ministry of Finance                                local spending efficiency and accountability.
    Provide alternative financing options to local governments
    Rather than relying only on local government budgets, Public-Private Partnerships
    (PPPs), municipal bonds, and intermediary financing can be promoted as alternative
    means of financing for infrastructure at municipalities. Subnational governments in Indo-
    nesia rely heavily on intergovernmental transfers as many have limited fiscal capacity and revenue

    115 See for instance, World Bank (2012). Indonesia Subnational Public Expenditure Review: Optimizing Subnational Performance
    for Better Services and Faster Growth.




                                                               131
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                             Chapter VII




          collection. As a result, most infrastructure investments are financed from local government
          budgets (APBD), which are insufficient to satisfy Indonesian cities’ huge infrastructure needs.
          Since 2013, property taxes that were previously managed by the central government have been
          transferred to district and city governments, bringing more revenue to local governments. Table
          7.1 shows alternative means of financing for different types of infrastructures. They include
          Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs), municipal bonds, and intermediary financing.

          Table 7.1: Alternatives for financing different types of urban infrastructure
           PPPs for commercial infrastructure                  Toll roads, airports, ports, markets.
                                                               Bankable investments are limited, unlikely to be
                                                               more than 10-15 percent in most mature PPP
                                                               environments.
           Direct market borrowing from commercial banks       Entity rather than project finance. Undeveloped
           or bond markets for large cities and provinces with market to date in Indonesia.
           strong finances.
           Larger, multi-year structural investments through   Economically rather than financially viable, i.e. no
           financial intermediaries (e.g. water, sanitation,   direct revenue stream. No existing source of reli-
           solid waste management, drainage, urban             able financing, ‘missing middle’. National budget
           transport) in large, medium and small cities.       finite and retail multi-lateral financing unpre-
                                                               dictable and inadequate, retail Subsidiary Loan
                                                               Agreements (SLAs) unsustainable model. Financial
                                                               intermediary can wholesale entity-based financing
                                                               (on-lending to SNGs), and in the medium-term
                                                               access private sources of finance through pooled
                                                               bonds and related instruments.

          Enhancing the quality of spending
          A necessary complement to allocating more resources to the right areas is to improve
          the quality of spending. Quality of spending is measured by whether spending is efficient and
          effective—i.e., how well inputs (spending) is translated into outputs and desirable outcomes—in
          a sustainable manner. Over the past decade, the increased spending by local governments was
          only weakly (or not) associated with an improvement in outcomes (Figures 8.12 and 8.13).116

          Improving the quality of spending requires enhancing intra-sectoral allocative inefficien-
          cies in terms of the allocation of spending across different programs and areas within
          a sector. For instance, the significant increase in education spending over the past decade has
          mostly gone on teacher salaries due to acceleration in teacher hiring (now Indonesia has one of
          the lowest student-teacher ratios in the world) and certification (salaries doubled for certified
          teachers). However, there is evidence that teacher numbers and certification are not linked to
          better educational outcomes, as measured by student performance; Indonesia’s student learning
          outcomes in reading, math and science remain low compared with other countries and have not
          improved in this period.117 In the road sector, subnational road spending has increased but new
          116 This evidence is also found when one focuses on resource-rich districts, that have experienced the highest increases in spending.
          Consistent with the revenue sharing mechanism (DBH), resource-rich subnational governments have seen a sharp rise in their
          budgets. That increased resource revenues are associated with increased spending on infrastructure, education and health. This
          association is further supported by ongoing World Bank on extractive industry and development in Sulawesi, which suggests that
          increases in resource revenues were largely directed towards capital (infrastructure) spending. However, increased share of natural
          resource revenues is only weakly associated with improved social outcomes.
          117 World Bank (2013): Spending More or Spending Better: Improving Education Financing in Indonesia.




                                                                         132
                                                                                                         Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VII                                                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    development has taken priority over road maintenance leaving 40 percent of district roads in
    poor or damaged conditions. However, the evidence is that investing in maintenance of village
    infrastructure brings a higher return than upgrades, which local governments tend to focus on.118
    Reallocation of district governments’ road budgets towards maintenance instead of upgrades
    can clearly enhance the quality of roads and the satisfaction of the population.
    Clarifying missions, refocusing the bureaucracy to be accountable for results
    Service delivery is constrained by a lack of clarity in the assignment of service responsi-
    bilities across levels of government. Internationally, the dearth of clarity regarding functional
    assignments is well known for reducing the efficiency and accountability of local spending. In
    the case of Indonesia, the main issue lies in the functional assignments across the different levels
    of governments concerning health, education, and infrastructure. Central government line agen-
    cies spend their own budgets on local functions through de-concentration (Dekon) and co-ad-
    ministration (TP) fiscal transfer mechanisms. Recent research suggests that central TP expendi-
    ture crowds out capital spending by local governments. Funds that were allocated to be spent on
    capital were either saved or spent on less important activities. Furthermore, unclear assignment
    of responsibilities limits the empowerment of local authorities and the potential involvement of
    civil society.

    Refocusing the bureaucracy to be accountability for results would also support high
    quality service delivery. The bureaucracy (both central and local) is highly geared towards
    input controls, which focus on compliance. An accountability framework focused on compli-
    ance undermines the focus on results and service delivery performance. The central government
    does monitor service delivery and regional growth performance, but provides limited incentives
    to encourage or require subnational spending performance against those outcomes. A culture of
    rewarding subnational governments for achieving good results can enhance competition between
    local governments and encourage improved service delivery. The paradigm shift in resource
    management towards greater focus on results should also happen at the central government
    level, which also heavily focuses on input controls and compliance.

    In turn, focusing on results will force the central government to take into account (e.g.,
    in the intergovernmental finance system) local differences in size and other charac-
    teristics, shifting away from the current one-size-fits-all approach. For instance, some
    districts have significant gaps in access whereas others have simply a quality of service
    problem as access is not a problem. Ideally budget allocations and program focus should be
    tailored to each different situation. In the education sector for instance, some districts need no
    more teachers but do need allocations to enhance curriculum programs. The plan to centralize
    the hiring and distribution of teachers runs counter the need to tailor budget allocations to local
    needs. Also, from a fiscal point of view, there are strong arguments in favor of treating large
    municipalities differently from smaller ones and rural districts.
    Strengthening Community-driven programs and demand-side accountability
    Decentralization has brought with it opportunities in increased engagement by civil
    society, community leaders and private sector leaders in shaping their future. Improved
    access to information, increased public-private sector dialogue and engagement in local politi-
    118 Government of Indonesia (PNPM): 2010: Village Capacity in Maintaining Infrastructure: Evidence from Rural Indonesia.




                                                                    133
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                          Chapter VII




          cal processes are improving local economic governance and development. Although there is no
          clear-cut solution to organizing the demand-side pressure for better service delivery, there exist
          some local success stories where mobilizing the demand-side has helped to improve the service
          delivery of public goods and service delivery. This has taken for instance the form of pressuring
          local leaders into passing new local policies or implementing already existing policies.

          A number of policies are in place to encourage or support community and civil society
          involvement in development initiatives, including local service delivery. The largest of
          these is PNPM-Mandiri Rural, which provides small-scale public infrastructure in local commu-
          nities utilizing a community-based approach in which communities: plan, prioritize and decide
          their own needs; implement the projects; manage and account for funds; and maintain the assets
          built.119 Since a pilot in 1998, the program has grown under the PNPM-Mandiri umbrella to
          nationwide coverage of over 6,000 kecamatan (districts) across Indonesia. The program has
          financed the construction of more than 100,000 km of rural roads; 17,000 small bridges; 40,000
          clean water systems; and the rehabilitation or construction of 43,000 schools and health facilities.
          It has also supported more than 301,000 business activities conducted by women since its incep-
          tion with a total commitment of US$3.6 billion (Rp 33 trillion) over the period 1998-2015.

          Presidential Instruction No. 3/2010 mandates that the participatory, community-driven
          planning process used in PNPM Mandiri, the Government’s flagship community em-
          powerment program, be used as the basis through which to develop integrated medium-
          term village development plans. Presidential Instruction No. 15/2010 identifies the role of
          national and local government agencies in coordinating and overseeing community empower-
          ment and poverty reduction program implementation.

          Box 7.1: The new Village Law and basic service delivery

           After several years of deliberations, a Village Law was approved by the House of Representatives (DRP)
           in December 2013. The law was initiated by the Government as a means to address existing weak gover-
           nance arrangements in villages and empower communities to meet their own development needs, includ-
           ing provision of basic infrastructure and oversee public spending. One of the main notions behind the law
           is to institutionalize PNPM Mandiri (the Bank-supported National Program for Community Empower-
           ment) by enshrining community-driven development principles into the legal framework. As part of that,
           and once the law is fully implemented in 2015, villages will receive significant increased financial transfers.
           These will support the execution of village medium-term development plans that have been developed in
           a participatory manner by community members. This can include territory infrastructure and village-scale
           facilities for job creation. The law also provides for greater accountability of the village government to vil-
           lagers, through a democratically elected Village Council and through annual Village Assemblies that might
           improve the quality of village spending. However, the law does not include provisions that would strength-
           en the accountability of district governments or front line facilities to village governments and communi-
           ties. This needs to be addressed in the on-going revision of Law No. 32/2004 on Regional Governance.


          119 PNPM-Mandiri Rural includes a sub-component called PNPM Mandiri ‘Healthy and Bright Generation’ (PNPM Generasi)
          which incentivizes communities to utilize basic health and education services, provides resources to facilitate community action
          in delivering certain basic services and monitoring service delivery. PNPM Generasi is now being scaled up to reach at least 500
          poor, rural districts by 2014. Government is also planning a second phase of the innovative PNPM Peduli program, which provides
          resources and capacity support to Indonesian civil society organizations that work to empower marginalized groups.




                                                                       134
                                                                                                             Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VII                                                                                                                  Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Going forward, greater empowerment of potential “agents of change” can further help
    service delivery at the village level. First, civil society organizations (CSOs)or non-govern-
    ment institutions may use different strategies to mobilize demand, including constructive engage-
    ment, confrontational and adversarial approach, and technical/research assistance. However,
    CSOs also have their weaknesses. Many CSOs operate in an uncoordinated manner with a gener-
    ally low level of capacity, are concentrated in Java, and may be elitist in their attitude and de-
    tached from everyday citizens’ concerns. Buehrer (2011, 2013) also argues that the influence of
    some CSOs is confined to agenda-setting and the adoption stage of the policy cycle, but rarely
    extends to the implementation stage of the policy cycle because CSO members are not repre-
    sented in government positions.120 Another issue with CSOs is the institutional issue of ‘scaling-
    up’. Very few community agents have the scale and ability to work effectively at the national
    level, i.e., covering a critical mass of communities. The PNPM program and school committees
    in the case of education are notable exceptions.

    The business community. The business community is often an effective advocate for public
    good supply and has at times been an “agent of change”, especially in the area of infrastructure
    provision and a friendly business climate. For example, the business community initiated the dis-
    cussion on logistical issues starting in 2008, which has snowballed into the Government formu-
    lating a national plan to improve domestic logistics. There is, however, no strong and widespread
    evidence of the business community being a strong agent of change at the local level. This may
    relate to some of the constraints faced by the private sector in its relations with the state, includ-
    ing dependence on the Government for contracts, compliance with the tax code and the extent
    to which business associations represent the variety of businesses that they intend to represent.

    Women. Women play an important social role in Indonesia, including on peace and conflict
    resolution. Women mass organizations have been very active in mainstreaming gender issues
    the development process, including advocating for gender-sensitive fiscal management. In part
    thanks to Law No.2/2008 on Political Parties and Law No.10/2008 on General Elections, which
    mandate a 30 percent women’s participation in parliaments, the rate of women’s political partici-
    pation increased from 11 percent in 2004 to 18 percent in 2009. The past decade has also seen
    key achievements in regulatory framework on gender equality in development planning and bud-
    geting. For instance, a gender analysis pathway has been made compulsory in the development
    of the national and subnational annual development and its budget. Although the implementa-
    tion of these frameworks remains unclear, the potential for women to play an important role as
    agents of change remains large.121




    120 Buehler, Michael. 2011. Indonesia’s Law on Public Services No. 25/2009: Changing State-Society Relations or Continuing
    Politics as Usual? Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, Vol. 47, No. 1, 65-86; Buehrer, Michael, Elite Competition and Changing State-
    Society Relations: Shari’a Policymaking in Indonesia, forthcoming.
    121 Puskapol, “Women’s Political Representation in Provincial Parliament (Provincial DPRP): Study in DPRP of Banten, DPRD
    of West Java, and DPRD of DKI Jakarta,” Research result presentation, Centre for Political Studies, Faculty of Social and Political
    Sciences, University Indonesia, Jakarta, May 8, 2013.




                                                                       135
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




                                 136
Chapter VIII. Strengthening
    Social Protection
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                              Chapter VIII




              Chapter VIII. Strengthening Social Protection

          All Indonesians face a variety of risks over their lifetimes. Suffering a shock can drive people
          into poverty, significantly reduce their incomes, or lead them to underinvest in their children’s
          health and education. Greater social protection is needed to enable all Indonesians to weather
          these shocks. This entails making the ongoing social security reforms effective and sustainable
          and, to complement that, strengthening social assistance programs. Indeed, despite Indonesia’s
          success in reducing poverty, the slowing pace of progress in recent years and high vulnerability
          remain a concern. Stronger social assistance programs can address this challenge by protecting
          the vulnerable from shocks that push them into poverty, while helping those beneath the poverty
          line to climb above it.

          This chapter argues that access to comprehensive social insurance for those who can afford it,
          and access to comprehensive social assistance, or safety nets, for those who cannot are needed.
          It discusses the challenges in strengthening Indonesia’s social protection system and the critical
          factors that will determine success in reforming it.

          1. Building an Effective and Sustainable Social Security Framework
          Greater social protection means the upcoming expansion of social insurance needs to
          be designed and implemented effectively and sustainably. Universal social insurance is
          legally mandated for health (by 2014) and employment (by 2015) under the 2004 National Social
          Security Law (Law No. 40/2004, the SJSN Law, (Sistem Jaminan Sosial Nasional) and the 2011
          Social Security Administrators Law (Law No. 24/2011, BPJS Law, Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan
          Sosial). To be effective and sustainable, the system will require appropriate benefit levels, sound
          fiscal risk management, sound institutional development and management, and non-contributory
          coverage of the poor and vulnerable, while at the same time collecting contributions from those
          who can afford to pay.

          Strong leadership is required for implementation due to the large number of stakehold-
          ers with diverging interests, the significant impact of these programs to the social struc-
          ture of the country, and the significant potential impact on the state budget, the labor
          market and the macro economy. It is crucial to develop a roadmap outlining activities, roles
          and responsibilities to ensure smooth, effective transformation, and to monitor the progress of
          the implementation.

          The nationwide SJSN programs will differ in both design and coverage from the exist-
          ing programs and will include a new defined benefit pension program. The complexity of
          defining new benefit designs and setting contribution rates for the SJSN programs will need to
          take into account different characteristics, needs, and ability and willingness to pay contributions
          between formal and informal sector workers.




                                                          138
                                                                               Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VIII                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Transforming PT Jamsostek and PT Askes into BPJS Employment and BPJS Health is a
    major task. Significant changes in legal, governance, organizational structure, job descriptions,
    business processes and IT systems will be needed as these institutions are transformed from
    for-profit state-owned insurance companies managing programs for a particular labor market
    segment to not-for-profit public legal entities administering nationwide programs covering thou-
    sands of employers and millions of informal sector workers. Moreover, implementation of a
    new pension program will require a new set of skills—both technical and operational. Jamsostek
    currently does not offer and manage any defined benefit pension program.

    The BPJS Law improves the legal and financial structure of the social insurance system
    by legally separating the assets of the administrators from the assets of the social secu-
    rity funds that they manage. The separation of assets into different legal entities and the use
    of a custodian to hold fund assets are important safeguards for fund members and are consistent
    with international best practice. However, it will be a significant challenge to ensure that the
    legal structure is properly implemented and the system operates as intended. To ensure assets are
    managed correctly, the Government will need to issue investment and risk management regula-
    tions defining the financial framework and governance structure of the new system. It should
    be noted that different investment policies and fee structures are appropriate for different funds,
    and it will be necessary to ensure the integration of reserves, investment policy and asset-liability
    management for each fund.

    It is important for the Government to formulate and implement policies and procedures
    to ensure the fiscal sustainability of the SJSN social insurance funds and assure that the
    financial risks of the social insurance programs are properly managed. If the contribution
    rates are set too low relative to promised benefits, or if the contributions and/or benefits are
    not periodically adjusted, or if program funds are mismanaged, the social security funds could
    become insolvent. This SJSN implementation creates a potentially large contingent liability for
    the state budget, which is the ultimate guarantor of fund solvency. Consequently, the Govern-
    ment has a strong incentive to ensure that the programs are properly managed. This will require
    the creation of risk management capability within the Government and strong supervision and
    control of BPJS operations to protect the rights of participants, prevent fraud and corruption,
    ensure proper financial management, and control operational expenses.

    Good governance and oversight of the system is critical given the huge amounts of
    money that will flow into the five funds and the critical role that these programs will play
    in the country’s social protection system. These programs are one of the keys to inclusive
    growth and reduced inequality. The law states that the new Financial Services Authority, Otori-
    tas Jasa Keuangan, or OJK, along with DJSN and the State Audit Agency (BPK) are responsible
    for external supervision, but this fails to clarify their respective roles and functions.

    Clearer supervisory roles and responsibilities for OJK and DJSN are needed in the
    implementing regulations and/or decrees. Their respective roles and responsibilities must be
    clearly defined.




                                                    139
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                           Chapter VIII




          The collection of contributions raises another set of concerns. While contribution collec-
          tion mechanisms for formal workers are already available, there is no such mechanism available
          for informal sector workers. Effective collection from informal sector workers is needed to
          ensure high levels of participation from the informal sector, and to avoid the significant anti-
          selection that will occur if only those with high risk choose to join the SJSN programs. The
          Government will need to study a wide range of possible collection mechanisms, examine other
          countries’ experience and pilot test possible options for collecting contributions from informal
          sector workers.

          Above all, integrated systems and operations for the two BPJS are a must. It does not
          make sense for each BPJS to separately issue ID numbers and collect contributions from the
          same participants. Instead, they must work together to ensure that the ID numbers are issued
          and that one system is used for collecting contributions from participants, employers and the
          Government for all five SJSN programs. The collected contribution monies should then be auto-
          matically split and transferred to the correct social security fund.

          The SJSN programs could be usefully supplemented at the sub-national level by increas-
          ing tobacco tax and earmarking the additional revenues to health program funding. The
          case for using tobacco tax to reduce death incidence driven by tobacco use and poverty is indeed
          strong for Indonesia as illustrated in box 8.1.




                                                        140
                                                                                                  Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VIII                                                                                                    Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Box 8.1: The case for using tobacco tax to enhance health and poverty status
     The benefits of lower tobacco product use for Indonesian society and consumers are several
     and significant: better health outcomes; fewer premature deaths; lower health care spending; and more
     money to spend on other goods for the household. Tobacco use is one of the most significant public
     health threats, and main risk factors for a number of chronic diseases, including cancer, lung diseases, and
     cardiovascular diseases.122 At 29 percent, adult daily smoking prevalence is high in Indonesia. Consistently,
     fourteen percent of all deaths in Indonesia are estimated to relate to tobacco consumption according to
     the World Health Organization (WHO).123 Tobacco smoking as a risk factor for daily adjusted life years
     (DALY) lost accounts for 7.3 percent of all DALYs lost, with second hand smoke adding 0.99 percent,
     totaling 8.24 percent.124

     Since poor families spend a larger proportion of their income on tobacco, smoking also increases
     the poverty of individuals and families by diverting household income away from essential hu-
     man needs such as food, shelter, education, and health care. Indeed, tobacco’s addictive nature
     crowds out other more productive household spending.125 Indonesia’s household tobacco expenditures
     are large and have serious welfare implications.126 In 2005, households with smokers spent an average 11.5
     percent of household income on tobacco products (7.3 percent for all households and 11.9 percent for
     the lowest income quintile), compared with 11 percent for fish, meat, eggs and milk combined; 2.3 percent
     for health; and 3.2 percent for education. A 2006 World Bank study found that among poor Indonesians,
     cigarettes ranked second only behind rice as the largest commodity item consumed.127 Shifting household
     expenditures from tobacco to basic human needs would reduce poverty.

     The evidence suggests that cigarette tax in Asian countries is good for public health and public
     finance and is pro-poor in its health benefits. An Asian Development Bank study (ADB 2012) cover-
     ing China, India, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam finds that increasing taxes is likely to result in
     direct and indirect health benefits that outweigh impact on household income of the poor in these coun-
     tries. The poorest in each country would bear only a small proportion of the extra tax burden but would
     reap most of the health benefits. The ratio of health benefits accrued to the poor to the extra taxes borne
     by the poor ranges from 1.4 to 9.5.

     For Indonesia, tobacco tax is the most cost-effective way of reducing the incidence of death from
     tobacco use while reducing poverty. A tax that increases tobacco prices by 10 percent is associated with
     decreasing tobacco consumption by up to 8 percent in low and middle-income countries.128 In Indonesia,
     implementing the maximum legally allowable tobacco tax rates could prevent between 1.7 and 4.0 mil-
     lion tobacco-related deaths among smokers, and increase fiscal space by generating additional revenues
     of US$3.2 to US$6.5 billion. While a doubling of the tobacco tax may negatively impact six economic
     sectors, one research simulation suggests that growth in 60 other sectors would be stimulated.129 The
     Government of Indonesia’s 2004 and 2005 MDG reports discussed the poverty effects of tobacco use,
     and emphasized the high levels of spending for tobacco products among poor households — resources
     that could have been spent on health, education, food, or other necessities. Both reports recommend
     tobacco taxes to increase prices as a means of reducing the negative health and welfare effects of tobacco
     consumption.
    122 World Health Organization (2013). Tobacco Fact Sheet No. 339. July 2013.
    123 World Health Organization (2013). Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic. 2013.
    124 Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2013). Global Burden of Disease Tool. 2010 data
    125 Asian Development Bank (2012). Tobacco Taxes: A Win-Win Measure for Fiscal Space and Health. November 2012.
    126 Barber S, Adioetomo SM, Ahsan A, Setyonaluri D. (2008). Tobacco Economics in Indonesia. Paris: International Union Against
    Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.
    127 World Bank (2006). Making Services Work for the Poor in Indonesia: Focusing on Achieving Results on the Ground.
    Washington, DC.
    128 World Health Organization (2013). Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic. 2013.
    129 Barber S, Adioetomo SM, Ahsan A, Setyonaluri D. (2008). Tobacco Economics in Indonesia. Paris: International Union Against
    Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.




                                                                141
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                              Chapter VIII




          2. Strengthening Indonesia’s Emerging Safety Net for the Poor
          For those unable to cope with shocks themselves or access social insurance, enhanced
          social assistance is also needed. Social assistance, in the form of non-contributory govern-
          ment programs that help to protect the poor from shocks, invest in their human capital, and
          promote them out of poverty is, alongside social insurance, the other essential component of a
          comprehensive social protection framework. Indonesia needs to reform current programs, fill in
          existing gaps, and integrate the programs into a system.
          Safety nets have an immediate impact on reducing extreme poverty
          Despite Indonesia’s success in reducing poverty, the slowing pace of progress and high
          vulnerability remain a concern (see Chapter 2). Social assistance programs can address this
          challenge by protecting the vulnerable from shocks that push them into poverty, while helping
          those beneath the poverty line to climb above it.

          Safety nets enable households to make better investments in their future to help the next
          generation escape from poverty. The existence of social assistance helps households make
          investments that they would likely otherwise not pursue. When a poor household has difficulty
          putting food on the table, they are usually also unable to devote resources to pay for school or
          fees at the local health clinic. Safety net programs like Financial Assistance for Poor Students
          (BSM) and Health Fee Waivers for the Poor (Jamkesmas) can help poor families address these
          costs, and still have money left over to purchase food. In this way, safety net programs help fami-
          lies make investments that can prevent negative outcomes like malnutrition and underinvestment
          in education, and can help enable investments in productive assets. Social assistance also reduces
          inequality by providing the poor and vulnerable with the access to services and resources that are
          needed to climb into the middle-class.

          Safety nets protect people from falling into poverty, reducing their need to rely on bad
          coping behaviors. When poor families face shocks that lead to reductions in their income or
          assets, they are often forced to resort to last-minute strategies to help them cope. These last-
          minute efforts often come at a high cost. For example, when a household’s breadwinner dies, the
          household is sometimes forced to sell their most productive assets, such as cattle or land, to help
          address short-term gaps in income. A good safety net can help poor families reduce the need for
          these types of negative coping strategies (such as pulling children from school into the workforce
          to boost family income) that, in the long run, can hurt more than help poor families.
          Further reforms are needed to strengthen safety nets
          Since the Asian financial crisis in 1997/98, Indonesia has launched a series of safety net pro-
          grams that address a variety of risks that poor families face. These programs can form the foun-
          dation of a strong social safety net system that protects poorer households, while also helping
          them to help themselves.

          Improved targeting underpins the effectiveness of social assistance for the poor. Indo-
          nesia already has already implemented a new targeting system in place to identify the poor and
          ensure that they receive these benefits.130 This national targeting system is built on the founda-
          130 See World Bank (2012a) Targeting Poor and Vulnerable Households in Indonesia.




                                                                           142
                                                                                                      Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VIII                                                                                                         Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    tion of a Unified Data Base (UDB), which is a list of poorest 40 percent of households, which
    includes both poor households and those at the greatest risk of falling into poverty. All major
    programs are now using the UDB for targeting. However, continuous improvements in target-
    ing are required. Household information needs to be appropriately updated and validated, and a
    grievance and complaints system is an important next step.

    Ensure that programs provide benefits that are adequate. In order to adequately address the
    lifecycle risks and shocks that households face, program benefit levels need to adequately address
    the risks they are targeting. There is already evidence that benefit levels for some programs are
    not adequate. For BSM, for instance, benefits typically do not address many important ancillary
    costs (e.g., the cost of transport or books) that are incurred by a household choosing to send
    children to primary or secondary school.131 The Government took positive steps by increasing
    benefits for BSM and PKH (Indonesia’s conditional cash transfer program) in 2013 as part of
    the compensation package tied to the fuel subsidy reform. These benefit levels need to increase
    in the future in line with rising education and health costs.

    Assistance also needs to be received by poor and vulnerable households at the right time.
    Again, consider the BSM program as an example. Although the program gives cash assistance
    to the poor to help them pay for supplemental fees and other costs associated with educating
    children, the cash is sometimes received after the school year has begun. This means that the
    poor still have to find ways to help cover school costs that are incurred before the benefits are
    received. A good way to reform BSM and other programs is to ensure that funds are provided to
    families at times that make sense.

    Fill in coverage gaps by extending good programs to other vulnerable groups that are
    not currently covered, including the elderly and people with disabilities. Programs, such
    as BSM and PKH, cover many vulnerable households, but do not yet adequately cover especially
    vulnerable groups. The elderly population is also at risk, especially at a time when their ability to
    generate income is low. Similarly, people with disabilities often require special support to enable
    them to attend schools, seek appropriate health care, and become an active part of the work-
    force. Building a comprehensive social assistance system will require extending cash assistance
    and in-kind assistance programs to serve these vulnerable groups.

    Proven programs should also be expanded. The PKH program, for instance, was introduced
    to 810,000 households in 2007 and has since been expanded to cover 2.4 million households
    across 33 provinces. Although plans are in place to roll the program out to 3.2 million house-
    holds by 2014, government support will still be needed to ensure these plans are put into action.
    Moreover, even at the planned 2014 coverage level, the program will only cover 5 percent of
    Indonesian households. Conditional cash transfers like PKH have proven effective in reducing
    poverty and inequality in Mexico (Progresa/Oportunidades) and Brazil (Bolsa Familia), but these
    programs cover around a quarter of the population.



    131 See World Bank (2012b) Protecting Poor and Vulnerable Households in Indonesia and World Bank (2012c) Raskin Subsidized Rice
    Delivery.




                                                                  143
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                             Chapter VIII




          Pilot programs, such as early childhood and workfare programs, to monitor and address
          the risks that are not yet covered by current programs. Some risks facing Indonesia’s poor
          are not yet covered, leaving families exposed and vulnerable. Indonesia does not provide ad-
          equate coverage for cognitive, nutrition and psychosocial support for early childhood. An early
          childhood education and development program should be piloted to address this critical gap in
          coverage at the earliest stage of the lifecycle. Also, the Government currently lacks a program to
          protect families from temporary or longer-term unemployment. Workfare programs could pro-
          vide temporary employment opportunities to boost household incomes, especially during crises
          for urban workers and between agricultural seasons for rural workers.

          Indonesia also lacks a formal crisis monitoring and response system with an automatic
          safety net that kicks in automatically to protect households when significant shocks arise. A
          national crisis management protocol is in place to monitor financial sector information between
          multiple government entities, and coordinate a response when needed. However, these systems
          only allow the Government to act in response to crises that confront financial systems and com-
          modity markets. The Government can help households more ably respond to shocks in the same
          way it responds to shocks that affect the financial system. Such a system at the household level
          would greatly help the Government to ramp up its surveillance systems and coordinate responses
          more effectively.

          Allocate more budget to build a comprehensive and integrated social assistance system
          that is appropriate for a middle-income country. Indonesia spends roughly 0.5 percent of
          GDP on social assistance. Other large middle-income countries spend, on average, three times
          as much on these programs. Improving the system will likely require far more resources than are
          currently spent by the Government.

          3. Maintain National Oversight to Ensure that Social Assistance Is Well-
          Coordinated and Integrated

          Central government spending is currently distributed among roughly 12 ministries, 22 programs,
          and 87 activities. In order to ensure services are delivered appropriately, the Government should
          continue its efforts to eliminate fragmentation and duplication across programs.

          Keep oversight and coordination in the executive branch to provide clear leadership and
          ensure the integration of programs across agencies. Keeping oversight within the execu-
          tive branch can help curb inefficiencies. In 2010, the Government elevated oversight of poverty
          strategy to the National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (TNP2K), chaired by
          the Vice-President. The National Team’s work was supported by a Secretariat responsible for
          drafting policies (with a priority on social assistance reform), establishing the National Target-
          ing System through the UDB, and integrating monitoring and evaluation activities across all
          programs. This was an important first step in helping to put in place the types of institutional ar-
          rangements that will help facilitate further integration. Further consolidation and synergy across
          programs are still needed. In other countries, a simplified and consolidated model for delivering
          social assistance has had positive impacts on efficiency and accountability across all programs. In
          Chile, the Bridge Program provided families with a variety of services under one umbrella.




                                                         144
                                                                                Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter VIII                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




    Develop common safeguard mechanisms for socialization, grievances, and M&E across
    all programs. How assistance is implemented and delivered matters. A good safety net program
    will have a system that registers clients, provides benefits, and eventually takes them off the rolls.
    There should be a strong outreach campaign, strong screening mechanisms, mechanisms to han-
    dle grievances, and periodic monitoring of targeting outcomes. An integrated social assistance
    system should ensure these safeguard mechanisms are uniform across programs. Public knowl-
    edge and understanding of how social assistance can be accessed and for whom it applies could
    be more ably disseminated if there were a common voice undertaking socialization. For example,
    80 percent of Jamkesmas health card holders do not know what benefits they are eligible for.
    In the same way, grievance systems should also be uniform, so that people have one easy way
    to connect with the system and ensure their grievances are taken into account. Distribution of
    an integrated social assistance card (KPS) to beneficiaries of the Raskin, Jamkesmas, BSM, and
    PKH programs has been an important step forward in the integration process but distribution
    and registration remain a challenge.

    Strengthen the capacity of agencies to deliver services efficiently and accountably. Ef-
    fective selection and intake of applicants into a safety net program requires adequate administra-
    tive capacity. This includes: clear and well-defined program rules and regulations and business
    processes; sufficient numbers of adequately trained and skilled staff; material conditions (prem-
    ises and equipment), and adequate information and communication systems for data processing
    and record keeping. Indonesia could devote more resources to increase the capacity of agencies
    implementing social programs. Some programs are expanded without increasing the administra-
    tive cost, thus leaving many weaknesses in implementation when agencies are asked to do more
    with the same level of resources.




                                                    145
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




                                 146
Chapter IX. Managing
Disaster Risks, Building
       Resilience
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                  Chapter IX




                        Chapter IX. Managing Disaster Risks,
                                 Building Resilience

          Safeguarding hard-fought poverty reduction in Indonesia calls for continuously enhancing the
          management of disaster risks and further building resilience. Indonesia is indeed situated in one
          of the world’s most active disaster hot spots, where several types of disaster, such as earthquakes,
          tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, floods, landslides, droughts and forest fires, frequently occur.
          According to a global risk analysis by the World Bank132, Indonesia is among the top 35 countries
          that have high mortality risks from multiple hazards. About 40 percent of the population is at
          risk, that is, more than 90 million lives. Going forward, the increase in population and assets
          exposed to natural disasters, combined with the rise in the number and intensity of hydro-
          meteorological events resulting from climate change, may further increase the economic and
          human impact of natural disasters.

          Indonesia’s capital, Jakarta, is particularly exposed, with urbanization-induced land subsidence
          posing a bigger threat to the metropolitan area than climate change associated with rising sea
          levels. In particular, the rapid growth of buildings (for offices and shops) and houses in recent
          years, non-compliance with building codes and zoning regulations, and the occupation of dedi-
          cated drainage “open” spaces, have not only made Indonesian cities more vulnerable to natural
          disasters but also created new hazards such as sea water inundation in low-lying coastal areas and
          flooding. The rapid expansion in the physical assets of cities requires both a credible regulatory
          framework and a healthy market to accompany the economic dynamism with preventive and
          risk-management investments.

          This chapter describes how rapid urbanization is changing Indonesia’s disaster risk profile and
          identifies preventive investments in risk reduction and emergency preparedness that can indeed
          be cost-effective and can greatly reduce the impact of natural hazards.

          1. Urbanization and disaster risk profile and cost
          Indonesia’s cities’ resilience to natural disasters has weakened due to the rapid con-
          struction of physical assets in urban areas and weak enforcement of building codes and
          zoning regulations. Indonesia’s rapid and not always well-planned build-up of physical assets
          (buildings, houses, etc.) in urban areas poses specific challenges to sustainability. Indonesian cities
          have seen a rapid demand for urban housing and commercial space over the past decade. The
          private sector (real estate and construction) has responded rapidly but rapid physical construc-
          tion has often meant that many new buildings have been built with less than ideal consideration
          to building codes. In addition, in densely populated neighborhoods, site plans are typically
          constrained by a lack of available space to maintain the proper functioning of urban ecosystems,
          such as drainage and open public spaces.
          132 See World Bank, Natural Disaster Hotspots, A Global Risk Analysis (Washington, DC: Disaster Risk Management Series, 2005),
          table 1.2. For a comprehensive review of disaster risks in the EAP region and policy options, see Abhas K. Jha and Zuzana Stanton-
          Geddes, Editors (2012): Strong, Safe, and Resilient A Strategic Policy Guide for Disaster Risk Management in East Asia and the Pacific.
          World Bank.




                                                                           148
                                                                                                        Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IX                                                                                                              Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   Data on disaster occurrence and impact on housing show that in the past decade the
   more urbanized provinces of Indonesia have become more vulnerable to natural disas-
   ters such as earthquakes and landslides.133 As the comparison of the upper and lower panes
   of Figure 9.1 shows, the number of heavily disaster-impacted incidence of damage to buildings
   and houses in Java’s cities has increased considerably over the past decade.

     Figure 9.1: Changes of spatial distribution of disaster impacts on housing




     Source: National Agency for Disaster Management (BNPB)


     Figure 9.2: Proportion of reconstruction                         Disaster impact on housing is a useful proxy
     budget spent on urban provinces                                  for the degree of vulnerability.134 In the past
                 Percentage of reconstruction budget for              five years, the Government has spent between
                                provinces, 2011
                        (Total Budget Rp 3.9 trillion)                20 and 50 percent of its reconstruction budget
                                                                      on housing. This indicates not only the rise in
             Non-Urban                                                the proportion of disaster impacts on urban
             provinces          6%
                                          28%
                                                                      assets, but also the actual public investment for
                                                                      repairing assets, ideally with more stringent stan-
                                            Highly
                                            urbanized                 dards. Looking at the proportion of the Gov-
                       66%
                                            provinces                 ernment’s post-disaster spending between more
                                                                      urbanized and non-urban provinces,135 there is
                                                                      also a tendency to spend more on more urban-
                             Moderately
                             urbanized                                ized provinces, as shown in Figure 9.2. This
                             provinces                                is also an indication of the disproportionate
                                                                      impact of disasters on urban versus non-urban
                                                                      assets (i.e., between permanent and non-perma-
                                                                      nent structures).
   133 Data danInformasiBencana Indonesia (DiBI), Data and Information on Disasters in Indonesia, the National Agency for Disaster
   Management (BNPB).
   134 A house is a private piece of property whose construction quality reflects the combined influence of the citizen’s compliance
   with building codes, the effectiveness of the regulatory regime, and market willingness to invest in resilience. In many disasters, the
   Government’s response to the disaster impact on housing indicates the contingent liability of the public funds in the housing sector.
   In other words, the proportion of public spending in this sector compared with others also indicates the recognition of the level of
   responsibility that the Government assumes on the quality of the existing private housing stock.
   135 The classification of urbanized versus non-urban provinces is based on percentage of urban population from BPS data.




                                                                   149
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                                   Chapter IX




          While relatively low compared with the size of the national economy, the average annual
          cost of natural disasters is significant at the subnational level. Over the past 10 years, the
          annual average cost of natural disasters in Indonesia is estimated at 0.3 percent of national GDP
          or US$1.5 billion. The economic impact of the 2004 earthquake in the province of Aceh was
          estimated at US$4.5 billion i.e., 1 percent of national GDP, but that represented 54 percent of
          the Provincial GDP. Likewise, the 2006 earthquake in the province of Yogyakarta caused losses
          estimated at 30 percent of provincial GDP. As Table 9.1 shows, the economic impact of recent
          disasters has been substantial at the provincial level.
          Table 9.1: Impact of selected natural disasters on regional GDP
                    Event                  Province             Estimated losses                                     Estimated Losses
                                                                  (US$ billion)                                      (% regional GDP)
               Tsunami (2004)                Aceh                      4.5                                                 54%
             Earthquake (2006)            Yogyakarta                   3.1                                                 41%
             Earthquake (2009)           West Sumatra                  2.3                                                 30%
          Source: EMDAT CRED and World Bank.


           Figure 9.3: Fiscal Disaster risk profile for                       Preliminary fiscal disaster risk analysis sug-
           Government - Exceedance probability                                gests that the annual fiscal disaster losses are
           curve137                                                           in the range of US$420-500 million and that
                         2,000
                                                                              once every 100 years these losses are close to
                                                                              US$1.5-1.6 billion. Using public spending data
                         1,800
                                                                              of past events, as estimated from the number of
                         1,600
                                                                              buildings destroyed and damaged, to simulate
                         1,400
                                                                              possible future spending needs (or fiscal losses)
           USS million




                         1,200                                                related to natural disasters, it can be estimated that
                         1,000
                                                  Estimation method 1         in an average year the fiscal losses are estimated in
                          800                                                 the range of US$420-US$550. In every 10 years
                                                  Estimation method 2
                          600                                                 they could exceed US$800-950 million, while every
                          400                                                 100 years losses could be in excess of US$1.5-
                          200                                                 1.6 billion. Figure 9.3 below shows the indicative
                            0                                                 fiscal loss exceedance curve, the indicative annual
                                 0   50    100      150      200        250
                                                                              expected loss (AEL), and the selected probable
                                                                              maximum loss (PML) using actuarial techniques.136
                                          Return period (years)
                                                                              These estimates provide indicative sizes of finan-
                                                                              cial liability that the Government may have to face
                                                                              should such events occur.



          136 Actuarial techniques are typically employed by the insurance industry to determine financial liability and insurance premium
          pricing in this case using annual average loss (AEL) and probable maximum loss. The AEL is an estimate of the long-term annual
          average loss, after accounting for historic trends in the historic data. The PML is defined as an estimate of the maximum loss that is
          likely to arise on the occurrence of an event or series of events considered to be within the realms of probability, ignoring remote
          coincidences and possible but unlikely catastrophes.
          137 Two actuarial methods are shown in the Figure, first, historic fiscal loss data over the period 2004-2009 are used to fit a
          parametric distribution (Actuarial Method 1); second, historic fiscal loss data, adjusted over the period 2000-2009 using a linear trend,
          are used to fit a parametric distribution (Actuarial Method 2).




                                                                              150
                                                                                                           Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IX                                                                                                                 Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




     Indicative risk metrics                                          Actuarial Method 1                          Actuarial Method 2
                                                                             US$ million                                 US$ million
     Annual Expected Loss                                                            423                                         554
     Probable Maximum Loss:
     10 year return period                                                                   796                                         945
     50 year return period                                                                 1,320                                       1,299
     100 year return period                                                                1,570                                       1,448
     150 year return period                                                                1,725                                       1,550
     250 year return period                                                                1,947                                       1,647

   2. Urbanization and Vulnerability to New Hazards
   In addition to rendering cities more vulnerable, rapid urbanization has introduced new
   hazards threatening sustainability. The rapid and massive extraction of groundwater in
   Jakarta, for instance, has contributed significantly to land subsidence. A study employing precise
   geodetic positioning suggests that rates of land subsidence in Jakarta range from 1 to 15 cm per
   year, with a few locations reaching up to as much as 20 to 25 cm per year.138 The study also iden-
   tifies four major causes of subsidence, namely groundwater extraction, load of above-ground
   structures, natural consolidation of alluvial soil, and tectonic subsidence.A recent rapid spatial
   analysis carried out by the European Space Agency (ESA) and the World Bank using historical
   satellite data allows the spatial distribution of areas with high subsidence rates139 to be easily
   differentiated. An overlay of the subsidence and land use on one of the areas with the highest
   subsidence rates as shown in the maps in Figure 7.4 shows these zones are occupied by office
   and commercial properties, as well as industry and warehouses (Figure 9.4).
     Figure 9.4: Overlay of areas with high subsidence rates and land use in Jakarta




     Source: the National Agency for Disaster Management (BNPB)
   138 Abidin, et al., 2009. Land Subsidence and Urban Development in Jakarta (Indonesia). 7th FIG Conference, Hanoi, Vietnam,
   19-22 October 2009.
   139 EO Information Services in Support of Analysis of Land Subsidence in the Agglomeration of Jakarta. Presentation prepared by Altamira
   Information, for the European Space Agency and the World Bank, February 2012.




                                                                     151
Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                                             Chapter IX




          This seems to confirm that rapid urbanization not only increases vulnerability, but also
          introduces new hazards with potentially serious long-term consequences, such as sea-
          water inundation in low-lying coastal areas and flooding.140 Assuming that the rate will not
          increase (i.e., no further land-use changes and that groundwater extraction stays at the current
          level), this specific area will be between 60 and 225 cm lower than its current elevation by 2030.
          Compared with around 15 to 18 cm of projected average rises in sea-level for the same period,141
          urbanization-induced land subsidence clearly poses a more serious threat to Jakarta than climate
          change induced by rising sea levels.

           Figure 9.5: Land-use types and subsidence rates in central Jakarta

                      400                                                                   Industrial & Warehousing
                                                                                            Government Complex
                      300
                                                                                            Office and Commercial Properties
                      200                                                                   Housing/Public Building
                                                                                            Horizontal Housing (1-3 floors)
                      100
                                                                                            Vertical Housing (Apartments)
                         0                                                                  Green Space
                               30 to 45       45 to 60    60 to 75      More than 75
                               mm/yr          mm/yr        mm/yr          mm/yr             Vacant Land
                                                Subsidence Rate

           Source: the National Agency for Disaster Management (BNPB)


          Indonesia’s urbanization story is not just about the bad news for disaster risk manage-
          ment. As the population becomes richer and more aware of the risks from disasters, their
          willingness to spend on prevention has also increased. One useful indicator to measure a popula-
          tion’s improved risk-management strategy is the penetration of disaster insurance. The insurance
          industry uses a globally uniform system for accumulation risk control of natural hazards using
          the Catastrophic Risk Evaluation Standardizing Target Accumulation (CRESTA) to determine
          risk zones for insurance premium pricing. Statistics on disaster insurance by CRESTA zoning
          provide a useful indication of insurance penetration in areas where insurance is needed most.

          For Indonesia, the latest statistics for earthquake insurance as of December 2012 pub-
          lished by the national disaster insurance consortium, PT Maipark, indicated a signifi-
          cant increase in premium purchases in the major cities over the past four years.142 Taking
          Jakarta into account the increase was fivefold over the past two years (Figure 9.6A). Such rapid
          growth reflects growing confidence in the insurance market and also signifies awareness on the
          part of the insured of the viability of managing disaster risks through financial means. It is also
          important to note that for seven other major cities, namely Surabaya, Medan, Bandung, Palem-
          bang, Makassar, Yogyakarta and Padang, the total premium increases were also significant (Figure
          140 This threat is universal, as many cities in the world also face recurring problems with flooding that impose enormous economic
          and environmental costs. See “Cities and Flooding: A Guide to Integrated Urban Flood Risk Management in 21st Century”, Jha,
          Abhas, et al. (2012).
          141 Indonesia Climate Change Sectoral Roadmap (ICCSR), Scientific Basis: Analysis and Projection of Sea Level Rise and Extreme
          Weather Event, Republic of Indonesia, March 2010.
          142 LaporanStatistikAsuransiGempaBumi Indonesia per 31 Desember 2012. Statistical Report of Earthquake in Indonesia as at 31
          December 2012. PT Maipark.




                                                                        152
                                                                                                            Development Policy Review 2014
Chapter IX                                                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




   9.6B). For Padang, in particular, a significant jump can be seen in 2010 following a damaging
   earthquake, which occurred in September of 2009. This shows that risk awareness combined
   with a responsive insurance industry can accelerate and deepen insurance penetration.

     Figure 9.6: Insurance premiums by CRESTA zones in major cities of Indonesia
                       7,000
                                        A                                               600
                                                                                                        B




                                                                         IDR Billions
        IDR Billions




                       6,000                                                            500

                       5,000
                                                                                        400
                       4,000
                                                                                        300
                       3,000
                                                                                        200
                       2,000

                       1,000                                                            100

                          -                                                               0
                               2009     2010    2011        2012                              2009      2010     2011        2012
                               Medan                Bandung                                    Medan                    Yogyakarta
                               Padang               Yogyakarta                                 Padang                   Surabaya
                               Palembang            Surabaya                                   Palembang                Makassar
                               DKI Jakarta                                                     Bandung
                                                    Makassar
     Source: the National Agency for Disaster Management (BNPB)



   3. Policy Options

   The rapid expansion in the physical assets of cities requires both a credible regulatory framework
   and a healthy market that can translate this growth potential into preventive and risk-manage-
   ment investments. Several concrete policy options can be considered to enable Indonesia to reap
   the full benefits from urbanization, while leveraging growth to build more resilience.

   •	            A national program on hazardous micro-zoning providing detailed instruments for incorpo-
                 rating resilience into site design and construction standards;
   •	            Financing framework for both urban, housing and property development that incentivizes
                 investment with built-in resilience linked to disaster insurance; and
   •	            A national program on urban upgrading and ecosystem rehabilitation to increase the resil-
                 ience of existing settlement and urban infrastructure as part of the greening of Indonesia’s
                 future growth.




                                                                   153
Development Policy Review 2014                                                                Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                               Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




          Bibliography

          Abhas K, J., & Stanton-Geddes, Z. (Eds.). (2012). Strong, Safe, and Resilient: A Strategic Policy Guide. Washing-
          ton, DC: Disaster Risk Management in East Asia and the Pacific, World Bank.

          Abidin, H. Z., Andreas, H., Gumilar, I., Gamal, M., Fukuda, Y., & Deguchi, T. (2009). Land Subsidence
          and Urban Development in Jakarta (Indonesia). 7th FIG Conference. Hanoi.

          ADB. (2012). Tobacco Taxes: A Win-Win Measure for Fiscal Space and Health. Asian Development Bank.

          ADB, JICA, & World Bank. (2005). Connecting East Asia: A New Framework for Infrastructure. Tokyo.

          Agénor, P. R., & Moreno-Dodson, B. (2006). Public Infrastructure and Growth: New Channels and Policy
          Implications. Policy Research Working Paper Series.

          Altamira Information. (2012). EO Information Services in Support of Analysis of Land Subsidence in the
          Agglomeration of Jakarta. European Space Agency and World Bank.

          Barber, S., Adioetomo, S. M., Ahsan, A., & Setyonaluri, D. (2008). Tobacco Economics in Indonesia. Paris: Inter-
          national Union against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

          Barro, R. J. (1990, Janaury). Human Capital and Growth: Theory and Evidence: A Comment. Carnegie
          Conference Series on Public Policy, 32(1), 287-291.

          Barro, R. J. (2000, March). Inequality and growth in a Panel of Countries. Journal of Economic growth, 5(1),
          5-32.

          Bhattacharyya, S., & Williamson, J. G. (2013, August). Distributional Impact of Commodity Price Shocks:
          Australia over a Century. CEPR Discussion Paper 9582.

          Blöndal, J., Hawkesworth, I., & Choi, H. (2009). Budgeting in Indonesia. OECD Journal on Budgeting, 9(2),
          1-31.

          Buehler, M. (2011). Indonesia’s Law on Public Services: Changing State-Society Relations or Continuing
          Politics as Usual? Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 47(1), 65-86.

          Buehler, M. (2014). Elite Competition and Changing State-Society Relations: Shari’a Policymaking in Indo-
          nesia. In Beyond Oligarchy. Cornell University Press.

          Bulman, D., M. Eden and H. Nguyen (2012). Transitioning from Low-Income Growth to High-Income
          Growth: Is there a Middle Income Trap? Background note for World Bank’s input to G-20 meeting. Draft
          – April 4, 2012

          Cerdan-Infantes, P., & Mileiva, S. (Forthcoming). Analysis of the relevance of Higher Education Using
          Labor Market Outcomes of Graduates.

          Chen, D. (2009, January). Vocational Schooling, Labor Market Outcomes, and College Entry. Policy Research
          Working Paper, East Asia Pacific Region, World Bank.

          Chenery, H. B., & Syrquin, M. (1975). Patterns of Development, 1950-1970. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

          Chenery, H. B., Robinson, S., & Syrquin, M. (1986). Industrialization and Growth: A Comparative Study. New
          York: Oxford University Press.




                                                               155
                                                               154
Development Policy Review 2014                                                                 Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                   Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




          Clarke, G. R. (1995, August). More Evidence on Income Distribution and growth. Journal of Development
          Economics, 47(2), 403-427.

          Data dan Informasi Bencana Indonesia (DiBI). (n.d.). Data and Information on Disasters in Indonesia.
          National Agency for Disaster Management (BNPB).

          de Barros, R. P., Francisco, H. G., Molinas-Vega, J. R., & Saavedra Chanduri, J. (2009, December). Measur-
          ing Inequality of Opportunities in Latin America and the Caribbean. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(4),
          1152-1154.

          Dharmawan, I. (2012, August). The Effect of Air Transport to Economic Development in Indonesia.
          Erasmus University of Rotterdam, Erasmus School of Economics.

          di Gropello, E., Aurelien, K., & Prateek, T. (2011). Skills for the Labor Market in Indoensia: Trends in Demand,
          Gaps, and Supply. World Bank.

          Doing Business Sub-national. (2012). Doing Business in Indonesia 2012: Comparing Regulation for Domestic Firms
          in 20 Cities and with 183 Economies. World Bank and International Financial Corporation.

          Economist Intelligent Unit. (2012). World Investment Service.

          Feridhanusetyawan, T., & Pangestu, M. (2003). Managing Indonesia’s Debt. Asian Economic Papers, 2(3),
          128-154.

          Forbes, K. J. (2000, September). A Reassessment of the relationship between Inequality and Growth.
          American Economic Review, 90(4), 869-887.

          Ghosh, S. R. (2001). Managing Financial Integration, Lessons from East Asia: Indonesia Case Study.

          Ghosh, S. R. (2013). East-Asian Crisis of 1997. In G. Caprio (Ed.), The Evidence and Impact of Financial
          Globalization (Vol. 3, pp. 669-688). Oxford: Elsevier Inc.

          Hadiwidjaja, G., Paladines, C., & Wai-Poi, M. (2013). The Many Dimensions of Child Poverty in Indonesia.

          Hanushek, E., & Woessmann, L. (2008). The Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic Development. Discus-
          sion Papers, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.

          ICCSR. (2012). Scientific Basic: Analysis and Projection of Sea Level Rise and Extreme Weather Event. Indonesia
          Climate change Sectoral Roadmap, Republik Indonesia.

          IMF. (2010). Indonesia Selected Issues: IMF Country Report No.10/285. Washington, DC: International Mon-
          etary Fund.

          IMF. (2011). Indonesia Selected Issues: IMF Country Report No.11/310. Washington, DC: International Mon-
          etary Fund.

          IMF. (2012). Indonesia Selected Issues: IMF Country Report No.12/277. Washington, DC: International Mon-
          etary Fund.

          IMF. (2012). Indonesia Selected Issues: IMF Country Report No.12/278. Washington, DC: International Mon-
          etary Fund.

          IMF. (2013). World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, and Risks. Washington, DC: International Monetary
          Fund.

          IMF. (2013). World Economic Outlook: Special Focus. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.




                                                                156
                                                                155
Development Policy Review 2014                                                                 Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




          Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. (2013). Global Burden of Disease Tool: 2010 Data.

          Jha, A. K., Bloch, R., & Lamond, J. (2012). Cities and Flooding: A Guide to Integrated Urban Flood Risk Manage-
          ment in 21st Century. World Bank.

          Kuznets, S. (1955). Economic growth and Income Inequality. The American Economic review, XLV.

          Lewis, B. D. (2014). Urbanization and Economic Growth in Indonesia: Good News, Bad News and (Pos-
          sible) Local Government Mitigation. Regional Studies, Vol. 41(1), 192-207.

          Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1988). On the Mechanics of Economic Development. Journal of Monetary Economics, 22,
          3-42.

          Lucas, Jr., R. J. (1988). On the Mechanics of Economic Development. Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(1),
          3-42.

          Mansoor, A. M., Takagi, S., Barnes, K., & Cohen, B. H. (2003). The IMF and Recent Capital Account Crises:
          Indonesia, Korea, and Brazil. IMF Independent Evaluation Office Report.

          McKinsey Global Institute. (2012). The Archipelago Economy: Unleashing Indonesia’s Potential. McKinsey &
          Company.

          McMillan, M. S., & Rodrik, D. (2011, June). Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth.
          NBER Working Paper 17143.

          Michael, B. (2011). Indonesia’s Law on Public Service No.25/2009: Changing State-Society Relations or
          Continuing Politics as Usual. Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 47(1), 65-86.

          Michael, B. (2013). Elite Competition and Changing State-Society Relations: Shari’a Policy-making in
          Indonesia.

          Newhouse, D. L., & Suryadarma, D. (2009). The Value of Vocational Education : High School Type and
          Labor Market Outcomes in Indonesia. Policy Research Working Paper Series, World Bank.

          OECD. (2012). OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Indonesia. OECD Publishing.

          PNPM, G. (2010). Village Capacity in Maintaining Infrastructure: Evidence from Rural Indonesia.

          PT. Maipark. (2012). Laporan Statistik Asuransi Gempa Bumi Indonesia per 31 Desember 2012. Statistical Report
          of Earthquake in Indonesia.

          Puskapol. (2013). Women’s Political Representation in Provincial Parliament (Provincial DPRP): Study in
          DPRP of Banten, DPRD of West Java, and DPRD of DKI Jakarta. Research Result Presentation. Centre for
          Political Studies, Faculty of Social and Political Sciences, University of Indonesi.

          RISKESDAS. (2010). Riset Kesehatan Dasar. Badan Penelitian dan Pengembangan Kesehatan, Kemen-
          trian Kesehatan RI.

          Romer, D. (1986, November). A Simple General Equilibrium Version of the Baumol-Tobin Model. 101(4),
          pp. 663-685.

          Romer, P. M. (1986). Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth. Journal of Political Economy, 94, 1002–1037.

          Rumbaugh, T. (Ed.). (2012). Indonesia: Sustaining Growth during Global Volatility. Washington, DC: Interna-
          tional Monetary Fund.




                                                                157
                                                                156
Development Policy Review 2014                                                                   Development Policy Review 2014
Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap                                                                                  Indonesia: Avoiding The Trap




          SIGMA . (2004). Coordination at the Center of Government: the Functions and Organization of the Government Office.
          Paper 35. Paris: OECD.

          Van der Eng, P. (2008). Capital Formation and Capital Stock in Indonesia, 1950-2007. Trade and Develop-
          ment.

          World Bank. (2005). Natural Disaster Hotspots, A Global Risk Analysis. Disaster Risk Management Series.
          Washington, DC: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2006). Equity and Development. World Development Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2006). Making Serives Work for the Poor in Indonesia: Focusing on Achieving results on the Ground.
          Washington, DC: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2009). Investing in a More Sustainable Indonesia. Country Environmental Analysis. Jakarta: World
          Bank.

          World Bank. (2010). Towards Better Jobs and Security for All. Indonesia Jobs Report. Jakarta: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2011). Conflict, Security, and Development. World Development Report. Washington, DC: World
          Bank.

          World Bank. (2012). Investing in Indonesia’s Road: improving Efficiency and Clossing the financing Gap. Road Sector
          Public Expenditure Review. World Bank.

          World Bank. (2012). Optimizing Sub-national Performance for Better Service and Faster Growth. Indonesia Sub-
          national Public Expenditure Review. Jakarta: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2012, December). Policies in Focus. Indonesia Economic Quarterly.

          World Bank. (2012). Protecting Poor and Vulnerable Households in Indonesia. Jakarta: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2012). Putting Higher Education to Work. Skills and Reserach for Growth in East Asia. World
          Bank.

          World Bank. (2012). Raskin Subsidized Rice Delivery. Jakarta: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2012). Targetting Poor and Vulnerable Households in Indonesia. Jakarta: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2013, October). Continuing Adjustment. Indonesia Economic Quarterly.

          World Bank. (2013). Creating More and Better Jobs. Philippines Development Report. World Bank.

          World Bank. (2013, March). Pressure Mounting. Indonesia Economic Quarterly.

          World Bank. (2013). Spending More or Spending Better: Improving Education Financing in Indonesia. East Asia
          Pacific Region Report. Jakarta: World Bank.

          World Bank. (2014, Forthcoming). Towards Indonesian Land Reforms: Challenges and Opportunities. World Bank.

          World Bank. (Forthcoming). Inequality of Income and Consumption in Indonesia.

          World Health Organization. (2013). Report on the global Tobacco Epidemic. World Health Organization.

          World Health Organization. (2013, July). Tobacco Fact Sheet No.339.




                                                                 158
                                                                 157
