Report No: ACS14962




Middle East and North Africa

MENA Conference on Role of Teachers
Unions in Improving Quality of Education


October 7, 2015




GED05

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA




 Document of the World Bank
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:




The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                            2
       Regional Workshop on the Role of Teachers’ Unions in Improving Education Quality

                                            FINAL REPORT


Role of Teachers in Education Quality

Teachers, as the primary education service delivery agents, play a lead role in what, how, and how much
student’s learn, including among disadvantaged populations. Yet, often governments’ education reform
efforts are confronted with strong resistance from teacher unions. This global pattern is even stronger in
MENA where, in many countries, the relationship between unions and Ministries of Education is
characterized by lack of trust and persistent tension, resulting in little to no involvement of teachers’
representatives in the design of key education reforms.

Teacher unions’ resistance to reform is a global pattern. However, traditional unionism in education has
recently begun to reinvent itself and respond to the challenges involved in education quality. There
various experiences around the world showing positive outcomes of constructive collaboration with
teachers’ representative organizations. Very recently, a new movement in unionism is becoming more and
more evident: professional or ‘new’ unionism is based on the idea that unions can contribute to
educational improvement and in this vein there are many examples from around the world pointing to
innovative ways in which these organizations encourage and lead reform.

Teacher Union Workshop

Building on a growing body of evidence from around the world which reveal positive outcomes from
constructive collaboration between unions and governments, the World Bank has initiated a discussion
with the Arab Teacher Unions about new unionism. In collaboration with ALECSO and the Queen Rania
Teacher Academy, partners in the Arab Regional Agenda for Improving Education Quality (ARAIEQ),
the World Bank organized the Regional Workshop on the Role of Teachers Unions in Improving
Education Quality. The workshop was financed by the Governance Accountability Fund (GAC) with
complementary funding from QRTA through the Arab Program for Teacher Policies (APTP) component
of ARAIEQ. The workshop took place in Casablanca, Morocco on January 8-9, 2015 with over 40
participants from 11 Arab countries (See list of participants in Annex II).

The workshop provided a platform for knowledge sharing of good practices for unions’ engagement in
improving the performance of the education sector. The workshop was organized around 3 main
sequences: the current status of Teacher Unions and Associations (TUA) in the Arab Region;
international and regional initiatives of TUA collaboration to improve education quality; and discussion
and brainstorming on the way forward for better engagement in improving education quality.

PART I: Current Status of Teacher Unions in the Region

To kick off the workshop, results from the MENA Regional SABER Teachers Report were shared with
participants. The presentation described the main factors that affect teacher performance in the region and
explained intent versus de facto gap in the actual implementation of teacher policies and pointed to
specific issues, such as teacher absenteeism that affect the quality of education in the region. Prior to the
workshop a brief participant survey was distributed to all participants. The survey included questions on

                                                                                                           3
the current issues faced by TUAs in the region as well as allowed for participants to begin to explore
ways forward. The survey results were shared and helped to frame the discussion around the issues faced
by TUAs specific to the region (See Annex X).

PART II: International and Region Initiatives to Improve Education Quality

The second portion of the workshop included international and regional case studies of successful TUA
contributions to education quality, including through enhanced TUA-government collaboration. Mark
Simon, education policy analyst and long-time teacher union member, presented on the progressive new
union example of teacher evaluation reform in Montgomery County, U.S.A. The Montgomery Country
Public Schools’ experience (MPCS) included the establishment of a teacher Peer Assistance and Review
system (PAR). The main feature of the PAR, which is overseen jointly by management and the union, is a
team of experienced and well qualified teachers (consulting teachers) who are tasked with supporting
teacher improvement as well as teacher evaluation (they may also recommend continuation or termination
of contracts). The PAR system achieved positive results with lower teacher turn-over, improved students
results and narrowed achievement gaps.

Nina Bascia, Professor at the University of Toronto, discussed the importance of teacher unions in the
education world and shared positive examples of proactive teacher unions in England, South Africa and
Canada. She stressed the need for teacher unions to remain proactive in their roles, and led a frank
discussion on the importance of building partnerships and working alongside the government. She
highlighted the experience of the South African Democratic Teachers Union (SADTU) which developed
a framework for teacher professional learning and is currently delivering professional learning activities
across the country. She also spoke about the Alberta Teachers Association (Canada) which launched an
aggressive advocacy program for education quality and eventually won additional funding for the sector.

Promising experiences from the MENA region were also shared. Javier Vaquero from the Spanish
Foundation, ISCOD and Hamid Nahhass of the Moroccan Teacher Union, SNE-FDT, co-presented on an
ongoing joint project between ISCOD and SNE-FDT on improving the quality of education in Morocco
through the prevention of child labor and reduction of school drop outs. They shared the results of the 10-
year project and detailed the two project strategies responsible for creating child labor-free zones
including preventative and curative approaches. Representatives from Kuwait, Egypt and Mauritania
highlighted their achievements including ongoing projects done in collaboration with the government. In
Morocco, the Democratic labor federation’s teacher union teamed up with various international partners
to address school drop-out in poor areas through training and support to teachers, students, parents and
local NGOs. The Kuwaiti Teachers Association has put in place a program for professional development
and teaching support material. In Egypt, the teachers union has an ambitious plan to build teacher training
centers in every governorate.

PART III: Way Forward for Better TUA Engagement in Improving Quality of Education

One of the principal objectives for the workshop was to provide an opportunity for participants to share
and develop strategies for improved TUA-government collaboration in order to improve the quality of
education. Oliver Liang, Sectoral Specialist for Education (ILO), presented on the role of social dialogue
and interest based bargaining in the education world. He introduced mutual gains bargaining as a more
sustainable collaboration strategy between TUAs and governments, whereby both parties are actively

                                                                                                         4
engaged in bargaining on shared interests instead of positions. According to Oliver, the strategy would
allow for all parties to partake in joint exploration of interests, research, sharing of information, and
discussion of options.

The workshop concluded with an activity that allowed for participants to brainstorm on “way forward?
strategies for successful TUA-government collaboration. Participants were allotted time to discuss and
vote on the most essential areas of future collaboration with the government and civil society. The three
priority areas included: establishing criteria for teacher selection and deployment; participation of the
unions in framing educational policies; and establishment of an effective partnership with civil society.

The regional workshop in Casablanca was an eye-opener in more than one way: it showed that teacher
unions in MENA are changing the way they perceive their own role as a key stakeholder in the education
sector. Instead of just confronting government education reforms, teacher unions can choose to be a
partner of reform efforts or even a source of the reforms themselves. A growing commitment to
improving education quality appears to be the common ground for such a paradigm shift in education
unionism. This is reflected in three specific directions for the future: increasing participation in teacher
professional development activities; taking a leadership role in facilitating and disseminating education
innovation among practitioners in schools; and contributing to a richer and better informed public debate
on education.




                                                                                                          5
                             Workshop Supporting Material


ANNEX I: Workshop Agenda
ANNEX II: Speaker Bios
ANNEX III: Participant List
ANNEX IV: Presentation, Kamel Braham, Study on Teacher Policies in MENA Countries
ANNEX V: Presentation, Mark Simon, The Role of Teacher Unions in Education Reform
ANNEX VI: Presentation, Nina Bascia, Teacher Unions and Educational Reform
ANNEX VII: Presentation, Oliver Liang, Social Dialogue and Interest Based Bargaining in Education
ANNEX VIII: Presentation, Hamid Nahhass, SNE/FDT Presentation on Child Labor and Education
ANNEX IX: Presentation, Javier Vaquero, ISCOD: Commitment to Solidarity from the UGT (General
Union of Workers)
ANNEX X: Results from Participant Survey




                                                                                                    6
ANNEX I: Workshop Agenda

Day 1 (Thursday, Jan. 8)
9h00-12h30         Part I: Introduction, Teacher Policies and New Unionism
      9h00-10h30 Opening Session, Teacher Policies (World Bank)
                          Presentation on regional results of SABER Teachers, critical teacher policy
                          issues in the MENA region for improving quality of teaching
     10h30-11h00 Coffee break 1
     11h00-12h30 Nina Bascia, Governmental Relations in the Context of Educational Reform:
                          An International Perspective
                          History of New Unionism and the role it plays today around the globe
     12h30-14h00 Lunch
14h00-17h30      Part II: International and Regional Best Practices on Teacher Union Contribution to
                 Quality Education
       14h-15h30 Mark Simon, Innovative approaches to teacher evaluation – The case of US
                          Successful US model on supporting teachers through the development of highly
                          collaborative teacher evaluation system
     15h30-16h00 Coffee break 2
       16h-16h45 Representative, Morocco Teacher Unions Role in Shaping Education
                             Role of SNE-FDT in teacher capacity building and outreach efforts through
                             government collaboration in improving quality of education
     16h45-17h30 ALESCO, Teachers Charter Draft
                             Presentation by ALECSO representative
                                        End of Day 1
Day 2 (Friday, Jan.9)
9h00-13h30          Part III: Way Forward- Improving the Quality of Education through Successful Teacher
                    Union-Government Collaboration
       9h00-9h45 Oliver Liang (ILO), “Win-Win? Bargaining
                             Mutual Gains Bargaining as a means for successful teacher-employer
                             collaboration; seeking common ground
      9h45-11h00 Mutual Gains Bargaining, Role Playing Exercise (ILO)
                             Exploring the mutual gains bargaining approach
     11h00-11h30 Coffee break 3
     11h30-13h00 Way Forward, Group Exercise
                             Groups brainstorm “way forward? strategies for successful teacher union-
                             government collaboration using SABER Teachers regional results. Groups will
                             vote on best strategies and present on “way forward?
     13h00-13h30 Closing remarks
     13h30-14h30 Lunch
                                        End of Workshop




                                                                                                  7
ANNEX II: Participant List

Egypt
 Mr. Khalaf Zanaty           Temporary Head of the Syndicate                                      ets55@yahoo.com;
                                                                                                  ahmedsheha2002@yahoo.com
  Dr. Aly Fahmy Sharaf       Judicial Guard of Syndicate                                          ets55@yahoo.com;
                                                                                                  ahmedsheha2002@yahoo.com
  Mr. Ibrahim El Shebokshy   Head of the Cairo Branch                                             ebrahim_shebokshy@hotmail.com/
                                                                                                  ets55@yahoo.com;
                                                                                                  ahmedsheha2002@yahoo.com
Jordanie
 Mr. Sharaf Obeidat          President Jordanian Teachers Union                                   jts.jor@gmail.com
 Mr. Nawwaf Mansour          Jordanian Teachers Union                                             jts.jor@gmail.com
 Alakeel
 Mr. Ahmad Shamaein          Jordanian Teachers Union                                             jts.jor@gmail.com
Kuwait
 Mr. Meteb AlOtaibi          Head of Teachers Union                                               mahmo2014@hotmail.com
Mauritanie
Abdellahi Saleh Cherif       Secrétaire Général, Union générale des syndicats professionnels      Ugspm09@yahoo.fr
Mohamed El Hacen             Union générale des syndicats                                         elhadibemba@gmail.com
M. Samba Vall El Hadi        Syndicat National de l’enseignement secondaire                       snesmie@yahoo.com
Hanan Ly                     Syndicat National de l’enseignement secondaire                       hananhamed15@yahoo.com
Lemeima Abd el Hamide        Syndicat National de l’enseignement secondaire                       meyma.abdelhamid@gmail.com
Mohamed Cheikh Vadell        Syndicat National de l’enseignement secondaire                       snesmie@yahoo.fr
Palestine
Nadim Makhalfa               General Union Of Palestinian Teachers                                gupt_palestine@hotmail.com
                             International Relation Secretary
Fehmi Kanan                  General Union of Palestinian Teachers (GUPT)                         Fahmi02009@hotmail.com
Ahed Samhan                  General Union of Palestinian Teachers (GUPT)                         gupt_palestine@hotmail.com
Tunisia
Mouldi Rajhi                 Secrétaire Général Adjoint ; Syndicat General de l’Enseignement de   Abou.zeinab@hotmail.fr
                             Base
Ahmed Mellouli               Secrétaire Général ; Syndicat General des Inspecteurs de             Mellouli.ahmed@yahoo.fr

                                                                                                                               8
                                 l’Enseignement Secondaire
Noureddine Chemangui             Secrétaire Général ; Syndicat General des Inspecteurs de   Nour.poete@yahoo.fr
                                 l’Enseignement Primaire
Mohamed Hlaiem
Mastouri Gammoudi
Hafaiedh Hafaiedh                UGTT                                                       Fonctionpublique2012@gmail.com
Algeria
Chabekh Ferhat                   Secrétaire Général                                         Ugta.fmt@gmail.com
                                 Union Générale des Travailleurs Algériens                  ferhatchatbekh@yahoo.fr
Amamra Dhia                     Union Générale des Travailleurs Algériens                   Ugta.fmt@gmail.com
Djaghloul Salah                 Union Générale des Travailleurs Algériens (UGTA)            salahdk62@@gmail.com

Yemen
Mohamed Hamood A. Handhl         Chairman, General Union for Education Professionals        mmhhhanthal@gmail.com
Foad Dahabah                     Chairman, Yemen Teachers Union                             yst2015@hotmail.com
Morocco
Mr. Khalid Essatte               UNTM                                                       khaledsatte@yahoo.fr
Mr. Mustapha Morchid             UNTM                                                       Morchid.syn@gmail.com
Mme Soumya Riahi                 FDT                                                        riahisoumia@gmail.com
Mr. Hmida Nahhass                FDT                                                        Nahhas02@yahoo.fr

Lebanon
Jamal El Houssami                Syndicats des enseignants au Liban                         jamalhoussani@hotmail.com

Sudan
Mr. Shihabeldeen Osman           National Teachers Union                                    mubark_idris@yahoo.com
Mr. Omer Margani Idries          Khartoum State Teacher Union                               omermargani@gmail.commailto:mubark_i
                                                                                            dris@yahoo.com
Mr. Abass Habiballa              Head of Khartoum Teacher Union                             mubark_idris@yahoo.com
Mr. Isameldin Berar              Professeur                                                 esam698@hotmail.com

Ministère de l’Education nationale et de la Formation Professionnelle


                                                                                                                         9
Mr Chafik Azeba                 Directeur des Ressources Humaines, Ministère de l’Education nationale   Chafik.azeba@men.gov.ma
                                et de la Formation Professionnelle
Mr. Fatmi                       Conseiller au Ministère de l’Education nationale et de la Formation     a.talha@gmail.com
                                Professionnelle

Coopération Espagnole (AECID)
Mme Isabel Fajardo            Chargée de programme                                                      Isabel.fajardo@aecid.ma

USAID
Mme Grace Lang                  Directeur secteur Education                                             glang@usaid.gov
Mme Mariam Britel Swift         Spécialiste de l’Education                                              Mbritel.swift@usaid.gov

Rania Teachers Academy (QRTA)
Mme Mona Taji               Director policy, research and institutional outreach                        monataji@gmail.com
                                                                                                        m.tagji@qrta.edu.jor

Rania Teachers Academy (QRTA)
Mme Mona Taji               Director policy, research and institutional outreach                        monataji@gmail.com
                                                                                                        m.tagji@qrta.edu.jor

ILO
Mr. Oliver Liang                Spécialiste de l’éducation                                              liang@ilo.org

Banque mondiale
Mr. Kamel Braham                Coordonnateur des programmes de développement humain au Maghreb         kbraham@worldbank.org
Mr. Juan Manuel Moreno          Expert en Education                                                     kbraham@worldbank.org
Mr. Mark Simon                  Expert de la Banque mondiale                                            marksimon@aol.com
Mr. Javier Vaquero                                                                                      jvaquez@iscod.org
Mme Nina Bascia                 Professor – University of Toronto                                       nina.bascia@utoronto.ca
Mr. Mahmoud Gamal Eddine        Consultant                                                              Mgamaleldin62@gmail.co m
Mme Ibtissam Alaoui                                                                                     ialaoui@worldbank.org
Mme Monica Chavez               Consultant en Education                                                 mchavez@worldbank.org
Mme Fatiha Bouamoud                                                                                     fbouamoud@worldbank.org



                                                                                                                                   10
ANNEX III: Speaker Bios

Nina Bascia is Professor and Chair of the Department of Theory and Policy Studies in Education at the
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education at the University of Toronto, Canada. Professor Bascia’s
research interests include, among many other areas, TUAs. She is the author of Unions in Teachers’
Professional Lives (1990) and the far-reaching and comprehensive article “Teacher Unions and
Educational Reform? (2005). Her latest article “Teacher Union—Governmental Relations in the Context
of Educational Reform: an International Perspective? (in draft form) offers case studies that reveal the
impact and successes of new unionism in England, the countries of Scandinavia, the province of Alberta
in Canada, and South Africa. Professor Bascia would be able to talk on the History of New Unionism and
also on New Unionism around the World. In addition, she would be able to recommend one or more
speakers from the countries discussed in her case studies. She suggests, for instance, a representative of
the Alberta’s Teachers Association (ATA). Under the oppositional Klein government, the ATA
recognized that their usual approach would no longer work, so they began a Public Education Campaign
that was so successful the government relinquished its hostile stance and began to work with the ATA.

Kamel Braham is the Program Leader for Education, Health and Social Protection for the Maghreb in
the Middle East and North Africa Region of the World Bank. He joined the World Bank in 2006 and
worked on education and capacity building issues in North Africa and the Middle East, Sub-Saharan
Africa and East Asia. He was successively the Administrator of the World Bank Institute Scholarship
Program and the Task Team leader for the World Bank education program in Iraq and in Yemen. Before
joining the Bank, he worked for UNESCO and held several senior positions in the Tunisian Ministry of
Higher Education, and Economic and Social Council.

Oliver Liang is the sectoral specialist for education, culture and media in the Sectoral Policies
Department of the International Labour Organization (ILO) in Geneva, Switzerland. He coordinates the
secretariat of the Joint ILO/UNESCO Committee of Experts on the Status of Teaching Personnel and
promotes standards on education and teachers. Most recently, he served as Executive-Secretary of the
Meeting of Experts which adopted the ILO policy guidelines on the promotion of decent work for early
childhood education personnel. Oliver also works on employment aspects of the media and culture
industries. Oliver previously served as manager of development cooperation policy at ILO, and as
coordinator of the information services on international labour standards. Oliver holds a PhD from the
Johns Hopkins University in the United States and has taught history and language at various educational
institutions.

Mark Simon serves as co-coordinator of the Mooney Institute for Teacher and Union Leadership,
working in the state of Maryland with the George Washington University Graduate School of Education
and Human Development on supporting and cultivating National Board for Professional Teaching
Standards candidates in high need schools. He could present a very interesting discussion on the different
ways two geographically-close school districts (Washington, DC and Montgomery County, Maryland)
chose to support teacher improvement. His excellent article, “A Tale of Two Districts,? describes these
two contrasting approaches which reveal valuable insights into the new ways unions can act.




                                                                                                       11
ANNEX IV: Presentation by Kamel Braham, Study on Teacher Policies in MENA Countries




                                                                                      12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
ANNEX V: Presentation by Mark Simon, The Role of Teacher Unions in Education Reform




                                                                                      22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
ANNEX VI: Presentation by Nina Bascia, Teacher Unions and Educational Reform




                                                                               35
36
37
38
39
ANNEX VII: Presentation by Oliver Liang, Social Dialogue and Interest Based Bargaining in
Education




                                                                                      40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
ANNEX VIII: Presentation by Hamid Nahhass, SNE/FDT Presentation on Child Labor and
Education




                                                                                48
49
50
51
52
53
54
ANNEX IX: Presentation by Javier Vaquero, ISCOD: Commitment to Solidarity from the UGT
(General Union of Workers)




                                                                                   55
56
ANNEX X: Results from Participant Survey

The participant survey results covered 6 main areas. Participants noted the main issues in each area as
well as proposed solutions. Results from the survey are listed below for each area.

  I.   Area 1: Teacher Pre-service Training and Preparation

       Main issues:
       1. Inadequate pre-service preparation programs
       2. Inadequate in-service training programs
       3. There is no law which necessitates obtaining certain certificates or training programs to teach
       4. Lack of qualified trainers
       5. Closing most training institutions
       6. Teaching methods are obsolete

       Main solutions:
       1. Pre-service programs need to be modernized
       2. In-service training programs need to be improved
       3. Teachers must have certain training programs before teaching
       4. Establish a cadre of qualified trainers
       5. Re-open the training institutions
       6. Modernize training methods
       7. Improve the criteria for selecting new teachers

 II.   Area 2: Recruitment and Deployment of Teachers

       Main Issues:
       1. Cancelation of giving graduates of the faculties of education priority to be appointed as
       teachers
       2. Fairness of distributing teachers between urban and rural areas (urban areas get excessive
       numbers while rural areas get less than their need)
       3. Distribution of teachers is done in a random way
       4. There are no criteria for distributing teachers
       5. Politicians interference
       6. Distribution is done basically from the ministry's headquarters centrally
       7. Many schools are located in remote areas in relation to teachers living quarters

       Main solutions:
       1. Giving priority for graduates of faculties of education to be hired as teachers
       2. Provide incentives for teachers in remote areas
       3. Establish reasonable criteria for teacher selection and distribution
       4. Establish decentralization policies
       5. Involve syndicates and associations of teachers in the selection and distribution processes of
       teachers to the different areas

III.   Area 3: Teacher Workloads and Working Conditions at School (No. of classes to be taught
       weekly and other duties)

       Main problems:
       1. Over-crowded classrooms
       2. Two-shift schools

                                                                                                           57
      3. Lack of A.V. aids
      4. Number of classes to be taught, especially for new teachers) is many
      5. Extra-curricular activities is an additional burden
      6. School environment is not a healthy one including the school building
      7. Violence at schools
      8. Waste of scarce resources

      Main solutions:
      1. Building new schools especially in remote areas
      2. Providing modern A.V. aids
      3. Fair distribution of the number of classes to be reasonable
      4. Appointing additional teachers to carry the extra load and the extra-curricular activities
      5. Adding practical activities to the main subjects for better comprehension and learning by
      students
      6. Improving the school environment in general

IV.   Area 4: Teachers Support and Professional Development

      Main problems:
      1. Training is traditional and does not attract most teachers
      2. In adequate training budget and resources
      3. Some central authorities do not really believe in training as a means to improving the teaching-
      learning process
      4. Most teachers are not covered by the available training programs
      5. Absence of a clear policy for teacher training
      6. There is no value for attaining Master and PhD degrees by teachers

      Main solutions:
      1. Make a training guide for teachers
      2. Connect promotion to some important training programs
      3. Provide continuous and relevant training
      4. Provide modern A.V. aids for the training programs
      5. Improve opportunities for teachers who attain Master and PhD degrees

V.    Area 5: Salaries, Benefits and Incentives

      Main Problems:
      1. Low salaries and incentives
      2. Social services are either non-existent or very limited
      3. Because of the low salaries and limited social services, private tutoring comes as a natural
      result.
      4. More work (classes) with no additional incentives
      5. Inappropriate position of the teachers socially
      6. Inappropriate position for the ministry of education in relation to other ministries

      Main solutions:
      1. Improve salaries and incentives for teachers
      2. Improve social services for teachers
      3. Provide additional pay for additional work
      4. Improve the teacher's position socially
      5. Improve the ministry of education position among the different ministries

                                                                                                        58
VI.   Area 6: Leadership and autonomy of schools and Ministry of Education

      Main problems:
      1. Weak leadership at both school and ministry levels
      2. Traditional management which depends mainly on central authorities and hierarchy
      3. There are no criteria for selecting leaders both at school and ministry levels
      4. Absence of the concept that school is not only an education entity but it is also an entity which
      prepares future generations for leading the country
      5. Non-existent of proactive management
      6. Schools do not have autonomy or an independent budget
      7. Mixing the responsibilities between the center, the other administration levels and the schools

      Main solutions:
      1. Make a fundamental restructuring of the administration of the education system nation-wide
      with focusing on decentralization and school autonomy
      2. School-based reform
      3. Establish criteria for selecting leaders
      4. Improve school management
      5. Improve school autonomy and provide schools with an independent budget
      6. Re-establish the school's role to become a place for preparing future leaders




                                                                                                        59
