Debt Management Performance Assessment

               (DeMPA)



            Kyrgyz Republic




              OCTOBER 2015
The DeMPA is a methodology for assessing public debt management performance
through a comprehensive set of indicators spanning the full range of government
debt management functions. It is adapted from the Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) framework. The DeMPA tool presents the 14 debt performance
indicators along with a scoring methodology. The DeMPA tool is complemented by
a guide that provides supplemental information for the use of the indicators.




For additional information on the World Bank's Debt Management Technical
Assistance Program, including more on the DeMPA Tool, please visit our website at:
http://www.worldbank.org/debt
Contents

  Abbreviations ................................................................................................................ ii
  Executive Summary ..................................................................................................... iii
  Background ................................................................................................................... 1
  Government Debt Portfolio.......................................................................................... 2
  Debt Management Performance Assessment ............................................................. 4
  Performance Indicator Assessment ............................................................................. 6
  Governance and Strategy Development ..................................................................... 6
         DPI-1 Legal Framework                                                                                                   6
         DPI-2 Managerial Structure                                                                                              7
         DPI-3 Debt Management Strategy                                                                                          9
         DPI-4 Debt Reporting and Evaluation                                                                                   10
         DPI-5 Audit                                                                                                           12
  Coordination with Macroeconomic Policies ............................................................. 14
         DPI-6 Coordination with Fiscal Policy                                                                                 14
         DPI-7 Coordination with Monetary Policy                                                                               16
  Borrowing and Related Financing Activities ........................................................... 18
         DPI-8 Domestic Borrowing                                                                                              18
         DPI-9 External Borrowing                                                                                              19
         DPI-10 Loan Guarantees, On-lending and Derivatives                                                                    21
  Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management ........................................ 22
         DPI-11 Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management                                                              22
  Debt Recording and Operational Risk Management .............................................. 23
         DPI-12 Data Administration and Data Security                                                                          23
         DPI-13 Segregation of Duties, Staff Capacity, and Business Continuity                                                 27
         DPI-14 Debt and Debt-related Records                                                                                  30
  Annex 1: DeMPA Meeting Schedule .......................................................................... 32
  Annex 2: The List of Participants in the Mission ........................................................ 35
  Annex 3: Laws and Regulations Pertaining to Debt Management .............................. 37
Abbreviations

 ATS       Automated Trading System
 ARD       Accounting and Reporting Department, NBKR
 BMC       Bilateral and Multilateral Cooperation Division
 BPD       Budget Policy Department, MoF
 COA       Chamber of Accounts
 DeM       Debt Management
 DeMPA     Debt Management Performance Assessment
 DMS       Debt Management Strategy
 DPI       Debt Performance Indicator
 DTS       Debt Tracking System
 DVP       Delivery versus Payment
 DSA       Debt Sustainability Analysis
 GDP       Gross Domestic Product
 IMF       International Monetary Fund
 IT        Information Technology
 KGS       Som, the currency of the Kyrgyz Republic
 LS        Legal Support Division
 MoF       Ministry of Finance
 MOD       Monetary Operations Department, NBKR
 MTDS      Medium Term Debt Management Strategy
 NBKR      National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic
 PDD       Public Debt Department of the MoF
 PDM       Public Debt Management Division, PDD
 PDS       Public Debt Statistics Division, PDD
 PEFA      Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
 PFM       Public Finance Management
 PITAD     Public Investment and Technical Assistance Department
 PIP       Public Investment Project Division
 SOE       State Owned Enterprise
 TSA       Treasury Single Account
 WB        World Bank




                                            ii
Executive Summary

During October 15-22, 2015, a World Bank (WB) team composed of Lilia Razlog, Signe Zeikate (WB
GMFDR), Lars Jessen (WB FABDM) and Marie-H. Le Manchec (WB consultant) travelled to
Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic, to undertake an assessment of government’s debt management capacity
and institutions, using the Debt Management Performance Assessment Methodology (DeMPA, 2015).
The mission team was supported by Meerim Sagynbaeva (CMU).

The main objective of the DEMPA mission was to assess, jointly with the Ministry of Finance (MoF)
and other public entities, current debt management performance in the Kyrgyz Republic. The revised
2015 DeMPA methodology, applied for the evaluation, provides a comprehensive set of indicators
spanning the full range of debt management (DeM) functions. During the mission, the team met with
government representatives involved in debt management, including officials from the MoF, the
National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic (NBKR), the Chamber of Accounts (COA), two local
commercial banks, and other partners (see Annexes 1 and 2 for a complete list of meetings and officials
met). The team would like to express its appreciation for an efficient and productive cooperation with
the staff of Public Debt Department (PDD) under the management of its Director Mr. Bakyt Sydykov.

The mission team noted that MoF has been implementing a series of reforms of public finance
management (PFM) supported by the WB, and plans a follow up technical assistance in this area. In
addition, the latest Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment in the Kyrgyz
Republic was completed during 2014.

The DeMPA and PEFA evaluations are expected to help the authorities to take stock of the current
situation across the PFM system, and design a complementary and well-sequenced medium-term
priority reforms in line with identified areas for improvement.

The assessment revealed the following main highlights across the five core debt management
functions:

  STRENGTHS                                                    AREAS FOR IMPROVEMENTS

                                        GOVERNANCE AND STRATEGY
  The legal framework clearly establishes government DeM       There is fragmentation of DeM entities,
  responsibilities through the Debt Law and related decrees    although PDD has been set as main DeM
  and decisions. The authorization to borrow is with the       entity with a front (for domestic debt),
  MoF. The purposes for borrowing are specified.               middle and back office roles.

  Latest debt management strategy (DMS) covering period of     The current debt law does not include clear
  2015-2017 was approved by the Government and published       DeM objectives and requirements to:
  online.                                                      prepare medium term DMS, and submit
                                                               annual reporting of DeM activities to the
  Monthly debt statistics bulletin is prepared and published   Parliament.
  on the MoF website.



                                                      iii
                                                             Basic analysis is carried out to assess
PDD prepares an annual report on government DeM, which       portfolio risks and part of the DMS
is submitted to Parliament as part of budget execution       development, but not included in debt
report.                                                      statistics publications.

COA conducts annual financial and compliance audits of
the government debt management.


                                  COORDINATION WITH MACRO POLICY
There is clear separation between monetary policy and debt   The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) is not
management operations.                                       carried out.

PDD shares debt service forecasts and monthly auction        No sensitivity analysis of debt service
calendars with the NBKR.                                     forecasts is undertaken.

PDD receives macroeconomic forecasts and government          Cash flow forecasts are not formally
borrowing requirements from the Budget Policy                developed and/or shared with the NBKR.
Department (BPD).

The fiscal agency role of the NBKR is formalized in
bilateral agreements with the MoF.

Access to financing from the NBKR is prohibited.

                               BORROWINGS AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
A monthly auction calendar is prepared                There are no documented procedures for
                                                      external and domestic borrowings.
The legal advisers are involved in loan negotiations.
                                                      Analysis of cost-effectiveness of financial
There are documented procedures for government on-    terms of external borrowings is not
lending operations.                                   undertaken.


                  CASH FLOW FORECASTING AND CASH BALANCE MANAGEMENT
There are bi-weekly meetings between MoF and NBKR           The monthly forecasts of weekly aggregate
technical experts to analyse government financial plans and cash balances are not prepared.
progress in budget execution.
                                                            Surplus cash is not invested at market rates.
MoF is using a Treasury Single Account (TSA) at the
NBKR to conduct its financial transactions.

                   DEBT RECORDING AND OPERATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT
There are complete and accurate records of external and There are no documented procedures for
domestic government debt.                               debt servicing, disbursements and reporting

Informal processes for data recording, validation and        There is no comprehensive DeM recording
reporting, storage of loan agreements, and debt service      system in place.
payments are adequate.
                                                             Front and back-office functions are not
                                                             separated sufficiently


                                                    iv
The data are cross-checked internally and with external
creditors regularly.                                            There is no business continuity or disaster
                                                                recovery plan nor a formal operational risk
Detailed job descriptions exist for staff, and there is         management framework.
adequate capacity in DeM units.

There are daily backups of debt data files, which are sent to
a separate location.




                                                          v
Background

The Kyrgyz Republic became a parliamentary democracy in 2010 following political turmoil and
ethnic unrest. Kyrgyz Republic’s economy has been resilient; however, the growth momentum of the
past few years has been declining due to the difficult global economic environment and regional
conflicts’ spillover effects on the country. While the shift provided a drive for critical fiscal reforms,
financial sector reforms turned out to be challenging.

The country successfully completed a three-year arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility in
2014. During the period, macro-economic stability was restored, and growth picked up. Inflation was
kept below 10 per cent throughout the program. However, deepening economic crisis in Russia,
adverse weather and the initial impact of the accession to the Eurasian Economic Union were the key
contributing factors to the worsening outlook in 2015. Weaker demand in Russia and Kazakhstan
adversely affect the exports and re-export sectors. Remittances from workers in Russia and
Kazakhstan, which contribute about 30 percent of the country’s economy, have slowed down, and are
expected to decline by more than 10 percent in 2015.1 Consumption is projected to decline further as
well (Figure 1).

           Figure 1a. Real GDP Growth (In percent)                                  1b. Inflation (In percent)




    Source: International Monetary Fund (IMF) Country Report No. 13/175.




1The IMF Kyrgyz Republic: page 3 “Letter of Intent, Memo randum of economic and Financial Policies and technical Memorandum of
Understanding.”
     Figure 2. Government Revenue and Expenditure
                                                                           The fiscal position has improved slightly from
                (In billions of Som (KGS))
                                                                           2013 due to an increase in revenues (Figure 2).
                                                                           The 2015 fiscal deficit is expected to widen
                                                                           compared to initial estimates driven mainly by the
                                                                           implementation of large foreign-financed
                                                                           investment projects. Implementation of such
                                                                           projects is totaling to 8 per cent of GDP, and
                                                                           represents a 4-percentage point increase compared
                                                                           to 2014.2
    Source: IMF Country Report No 13/175.


Government Debt Portfolio
The Kyrgyz Republic’s nominal public debt has been growing due to the recent currency depreciation
(about 20 per cent against the U.S. dollar over the past 12 months) and the implementation of the large
public investment program. The public debt-to-GDP ratio accounted for 54 percent or US$3.6 billion
in 2014. External debt dominates the public debt portfolio, and reached 94 percent over the last five
years. (Figure 3) The largest external creditors are China (32 percent), followed by the WB (20 percent)
and the Asian Development Bank (17 percent; Figure 4).

The Kyrgyz Republic has made significant investments in infrastructure, including in the energy
sector, by borrowing externally, mainly from China. China’s investments are helping the Kyrgyz
Republic close the infrastructure gap. Another potential boost to the economy is the $1 billion Russia-
Kyrgyz Development Fund, which has been recently set up. Loans from Russia accounted for about 9
percent of external debt portfolio as of end 2014.

                                        Figure 3: Public Debt Structure 2010-2014
                     (In millions of U.S. dollars; and external debt expressed in percent of total debt)




                      Sources: Authorities data; WB staff estimates.




2The IMF Kyrgyz Republic: page 4 “Letter of Intent, Memorandum of economic and Financial Policies and technical Memorandum
of Understanding.”


                                                                       2
Domestic debt has remained stable at around 6                    Figure 4. External Debt Portfolio 2014
percent of total public debt over the past five                               (In percent)
years. It is predominantly composed of
Government securities (Figure 5). Treasury
bonds with maturities between 2 and 5 years
represented 64 percent of total domestic debt,
while treasury bills accounted for about one
quarter. For more discussion on domestic debt
see the debt performance indicator (DPI) 8.

Almost all of the debt (98 per cent) has fixed
interest rates. Average interest rate on external
debt is 1.4 per cent, reflecting its concessional     Sources: Authorities data; WB staff estimates.
nature, while for domestic debt it is 10.4 per
cent. Average time to maturity is 11.2 years for external debt and 1.2 years for domestic debt. This
implies high exposure to refinancing risk on domestic debt. However, the stock of domestic debt
remains low relative to total debt. External debt is predominantly denominated in U.S. dollar (Figure
6).

The debt burden indicators have been deteriorating. Faster-than-anticipated disbursements of public
investment-related loans from China, the depreciation of the som (the currency of the Kyrgyz
Republic) vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and the regional economic slowdown have resulted in a significant
rise in external public debt indicators. This said, the Kyrgyz Republic continues to face moderate
risk—albeit rising—of debt distress.

   Figure 5: Domestic Debt Portfolio as at end 2014           Figure 6. External debt: currency composition
                     (In percent)                                              (In percent)




                                                          Source: Debt Management Reform Plan, 2015.
 Sources: Authorities data; WB staff estimates.           Note: Kyrgyz SOM (KGS), British Pound (BP), United Arab Emirates
                                                          Dirham (AED), Euro (EUR) and Japanese Yen (JPY).




                                                      3
The debt burden indicators are expected to rise further in the near future, but the outlook should remain
manageable. The underlying macroeconomic assumptions included fiscal consolidation over the
medium term and prudent debt management as the basis for sustaining growth. The debt service is
expected to be manageable throughout the DSA period due to the high concessionality of the
outstanding debt. Domestic debt is expected to increase, and play a more important role in financing
the budget deficit in the long term. Under stress tests, the debt remains particularly sensitive to shocks
that reduce real GDP growth or a failure to consolidate the fiscal position.3



Debt Management Performance Assessment
The DeMPA 2015 methodology comprises a set of 14 DPIs, which aim to encompass the complete
spectrum of government DeM operations, as well as the overall environment in which these operations
are conducted. While the DeMPA does not specify recommendations on reforms and/or capacity and
institution building, the performance indicators do stipulate a minimum level that should be met.
Consequently, if the assessment shows that the minimum requirements are not met, this clearly
indicates an area requiring attention and a priority for reform.

The DeMPA focuses on central government DeM activities and closely related-functions, such as the
issuance of loan guarantees, on-lending, cash flow forecasting, and cash balance management. Thus,
the DeMPA does not assess the ability to manage the wider public debt portfolio, including implicit
contingent liabilities (such as liabilities of the pension system) or the debt of state-owned enterprises
(SOEs), if these are not guaranteed by the central government.

Each DPI has one or more dimensions linked to the subject of the DPI, and each dimension is assessed
separately. The scoring methodology assesses each dimension and assigns a score of either “A”, “B”,
“C” or “D” based on the criteria listed. The evaluation starts by checking whether the minimum
requirement for that dimension has been met, corresponding to a score of “C”. Meeting the minimum
requirements is the necessary condition for effective performance under the dimension being assessed.
If the minimum requirements set out in “C” are not met, then a score of “D” is assigned. The “A” score
reflects sound practice for that particular dimension of the indicator. The “B” score is an intermediate
score, falling between the minimum requirements and sound practices. In the cases where a dimension
cannot be assessed (a) due to the dimension is not applicable (for example there are no derivatives),
then a score of “N/A” (not applicable); or (b) due to insufficient information, the dimension is difficult
or impossible to assess, then a score of “N/R” (not rated or assessed) is assigned.



3
  The IMF Country Report No. 15/113, page 38, 42 and 43, “Request for a Three Year Arrangement under the Extended Credit
Facility-Staff Report”; and Press Release.


                                                              4
Summary of Performance Assessment

                                      Performance Indicator                                           Scores
DPI-1    1. Legal Framework                                                                             C
         1. Managerial Structure: Borrowing and Debt-related Transactions                               C
DPI-2
         2. Managerial Structure: Loan Guarantees                                                      N/A
         1. Debt Management Strategy: Quality of Content                                                D
DPI-3
         2. Debt Management Strategy: Decision-Making Process                                           C
         1. Debt Statistical Bulletin: Quality and Timeliness                                           D
DPI-4
         2. Evaluation of Debt Management Operations                                                    C
         1. Audit: Frequency                                                                            C
DPI-5
         1. Audit: Appropriate Response                                                                 B
         1. Fiscal Policy: Provision and Quality of Debt-Service Forecasts                              C
DPI-6
         2. Fiscal Policy: Availability and Quality of Information on Key Macro Variables and DSA       D
         1. Monetary Policy: Clarity of Separation between DeM and Monetary Policy Operations           B
DPI-7    2. Monetary Policy: Regularity of Information Sharing                                          D
         3. Monetary Policy: Limited Access to Central Bank Financing                                   A
         1.Domestic Borrowing: Market-Based Mechanisms and Preparation of a Borrowing Plan              D
DPI-8
         2. Domestic Borrowing: Availability and Quality of Documented Procedures                       D
         1. External Borrowing: Borrowing Plan and Assessment of Costs and Terms                        D
DPI-9    2. External Borrowing: Availability of Documented Procedures                                   D
         3. External Borrowing: Involvement of Legal Advisers                                           B
         1. Loan Guarantees: Availability and Quality of Documented Policies and Procedures            N/A
DPI-10   2. On-lending: Availability and Quality of Documented Policies and Procedures                  C
         3. Derivatives: Availability and Quality of Documented Policies and Procedures                N/A
         1. Effective Cash Flow Forecasting                                                             D
DPI-11
         2. Effective Cash Balance Management                                                           D
         1. Debt Administration: Availability and Quality of Documented Procedures for Debt Service     D
         2. Debt Administration: Availability and Quality of Documented Procedures for Data             D
         Recording and Storage
DPI-12
         3. Data Security: Availability and Quality of Documented Procedures for Data Recording and     D
         System and Access Control
         4. Data Security: Frequency of Back-Ups and Security of Storage                                A
         1. Segregation of Duties                                                                       D
DPI-13   2. Staff Capacity and Human Resource Management                                                C
         3. Operational Risk Management, Business Continuity, and Disaster Recovery Plans               D
         1. Debt Records: Completeness and Timeliness                                                   B
DPI-14
         2. Debt Records: Registry System                                                               A




                                                       5
                                         Performance Indicator Assessment

Governance and Strategy Development
DPI-1 Legal Framework
    Dimension                                                                                         Score
    1. The existence, coverage, and content of the legal framework on authorization to                 C
    borrow, undertake other DeM activities, and issue loan guarantees


According to article 4 of the “Law on Public and Non-Public Debt of the Kyrgyz Republic,” henceforth
“the Debt Law” public borrowing may be undertaken for the following purposes: (i) to finance budget
deficit; (ii) to finance state investments; (iii) to cover expenses related to state debt and debt refinancing;
and (iv) for other purposes stipulated in the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic.

Article 5 of the Debt Law4 specifies that the MoF is a sole agent of the government on public debt
management matters, for contracting external debt and issuing loan guarantees. Furthermore, the
Minister of Finance is authorized to sign domestic, external loans and guarantee agreements.5

In addition, Article 15 of the “Law on Main Principles of Budget Formulation in the Kyrgyz Republic”
provides that the Minister of Finance has a sole power to contract external and domestic loans, provide
credits, and issue loan guarantees.

The total level of external and domestic debt is approved annually by the Parliament in the annual state
budget law.

Although the MoF prepares a monthly debt report and sends it to the Parliament, there are no legal
requirements for mandatory annual reporting to the Parliament on DeM activities and strategy
implementation (see DPI 4).

Relatedly, there is no legal requirement to develop a medium term DMS. Such provision is included in
the functions of PDD of the MoF, but not in the legal framework. Nevertheless, the DMS for FY2015-
2017 was prepared and approved by the Cabinet in June 2015.

The legal framework meets the minimum requirements, score C, for effective debt management, since
the primary legislation includes clear authorization from the legislation to the Minister of Finance to




4
    Article 5 of the Debt Law “On Basic Principles of Public Borrowing and Issuance of Guarantees.”
5   Articles 7; 8; 9, of the Law “On Public and Non-Public Debt of the Kyrgyz Republic.”



                                                                    6
borrow, and issue debt and loan guarantees on behalf of the state. The Debt Law also specifies the
purposes of public borrowing.

For a higher score, the legal framework should also include (i) clear DeM objectives;6 (ii) a requirement
to prepare a DMS; and (iii) a mandatory reporting to the Parliament on DeM activities.



DPI-2 Managerial Structure
    Dimension                                                                                                                  Score
    1. The managerial structure for central government borrowings and debt-related                                                C
    transactions
    2. The managerial structure for preparation and issuance of central government loan                                         N/A
    guarantees


Dimension 1
Debt management activities in the Kyrgyz Republic are divided between the Public Investments and
Technical Assistance Department (PITAD) and PDD of the MoF and the NBKR as an agent of the
government. Therefore, there is no one principal debt management entity. Both departments report to
the Deputy Minister of the MoF for Coordination of External Financial Assistance and Public Debt
Servicing. Several functions related to issuance of state securities are delegated to the NBKR (see Figure
7).

The Public Investment Projects Division (PIP) and the Bilateral and Multilateral Cooperation Division
(BMC) of the PITAD are responsible for mobilizing external financing and conducting external loan
negotiations. They fulfill the front office functions for the external borrowings related to public
investment projects and budget support, respectively. Both Divisions request the PDD’s opinion on the
terms of external loans. In practice, the latter verifies the concessionality level of external loans and that
the overall indebtedness falls within certain debt thresholds. After concluding the loan agreements, a
copy of the loan contract is shared with PDD.

PDD is in charge of front office functions for the borrowing in the domestic market. Some of the
functions have been delegated to the NBKR through the agency agreements. PDD is also responsible



6
  Article 6 of the Debt Law specifies tasks in the area of public DeM, but there is no specific article on DeM objectives. Thus, Article 6
partially refers to DeM objectives. As an example, it requires the MoF to prepare and implement measures to: (i) optimize the public debt
portfolio, including the structure of government securities; (ii) restructure debt; and (iii) manage risks of government debt. Currently, the
DeM objectives are specified in the DMS document, but not by law.




                                                                     7
for the middle and back office functions for domestic and external borrowings as well as for the issuance
of loan guarantees.

                       Figure 7: Organizational Structure for Debt Management




PDD consists of two divisions: (i) the Public Debt Statistics Division (PDS) and (ii) the Public Debt
Management Division (PDM). PDS should be mainly responsible for the back office functions, but in
reality they also contribute to analytical work of the middle office. According to functional description,
PDS is responsible for: (i) implementing the debt management strategy; (ii) recording, monitoring and
servicing public debt of the Kyrgyz Republic; and (iii) fulfilling other functions.

PDM is in charge of middle office functions, e.g. portfolio analysis and monitoring as well as loan
guarantees. The main functions of this Division are (i) preparing and implementing the public debt
policy; (ii) preparing and implementing the public DMS; (iii) preparing government policy for issuance
of loan guarantees; and (iv) fulfilling other functions.

NBKR, as an agent of the government, organizes auctions, holds the registry of the government
securities, and processes government debt service payments. This work is regulated by formal agency
agreements, which are adhered by the Monetary Operations Department (MOD) and Accounting and




                                                    8
Reporting Department (ARD). These two departments are the MoF’s agents for conducting government
securities auctions and keeping registry of government securities.

Although the organizational structure for debt management is not fully consolidated, the minimum
requirements for effective debt management are met due to adequate exchange of information and
coordination of respective activities, score C. These functions are also specified in the MoF Resolutions
and formal agency agreements with NBKR, and they are implemented and followed in practice.

For a higher score, debt management activities should be steered by a formalized medium term DMS,
and undertaken without undue political interference. A DMS for 2015-2017 was approved at end-June
2015, and therefore for the first half of FY2015 the debt management activities where not based on a
formal DMS. In addition, the borrowing decisions have not always been neutral from political
interference.

Dimension 2

The assessment of the managerial structure for the preparation and issuance of loan guarantees—the
second dimension of the DPI 2—is not applicable (N/A) because the authorities have not issued any
loan guarantees since early 2000s. The debt management strategy prohibits the issuance of loan
guarantees although there are no legal restrictions for such activities.



DPI-3 Debt Management Strategy

 Dimension                                                                                      Score
 1. The quality of the debt management strategy document                                           D
 2. The decision making process and publication of the DeM strategy                                C


Dimension 1
According to the Debt Law, MoF is responsible for government borrowing and debt management, under
the legal provisions of the Annual Budget Law and the Parliamentary decisions. There is, however, no
legal mandate or requirement for the MoF to develop a DMS in the existing legal framework (see DPI
1).

A medium term DMS covering 2012-14 was approved by Cabinet, and published in 2012. An updated
strategy covering the period of 2015-17 was approved by Cabinet on June 29, 2015, and was made
subsequently publicly available on the MoF web site. The strategy is a two-page document that specifies
the debt management objectives and scope. For external debt, guidelines are defined for the minimum
concessionality of loans (35 percent), and a maximum exposure of 50 percent of the external debt to one
creditor. On the domestic side, the strategy aims to increase the maturity of the debt, and to increase the


                                                    9
relative share of T-bonds. The strategy includes a statement that neither state guarantees will be issued,
nor will borrowing in the international capital markets be undertaken. In addition, targets for the size of
the debt are specified. While such targets can play an important role in supporting debt sustainability,
they are not good debt management targets, since meeting them is outside the control of the debt
manager.

While there are areas that can be approved and expanded, the fact that a strategy has been developed
and published is commendable.

Since the DMS does not include all the required guidelines for the preferred composition of the
government debt, the score for dimension one is D. For a higher score, a target ranges for indicators of
the interest rate, refinancing, and foreign currency risks have to be defined, as per the required
guidelines.


Dimension 2

The analysis providing the foundation for the 2015-17 DMS was undertaken by PDD using the Medium
Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) Toolkit. Macro data was provided by BPD, and the analysis
of alternative borrowing strategies was shared with entities within the MoF and NBKR for comments.
The debt management strategy was drafted by PDD, approved by Cabinet, and published on the websites
of the Government and MoF.

The strategy development process is not closely coordinated with the budget process, and the debt
management strategy not well integrated in the budget document or the medium term budget framework.
A main reason for that is the stand-alone nature of the debt management strategies so far (the current
strategy followed a strategy covering 2012-14). Going forward, the plan is to update the strategy
annually, and it will be natural to coordinate the update with the budget cycle.

Since the debt management strategy is prepared by PDD and shared with NBKR for comments, and
since the strategy is formally approved by Cabinet and published on the website of the MoF, the score
for dimension two is C. For a higher score, the strategy has to be well integrated with the budget
document and the medium term budget framework.



DPI-4 Debt Reporting and Evaluation

 Dimension                                                                                       Score
 1. Publication of a statistical bulletin on debt, loan guarantees, and debt-related               D
 operations




                                                    10
    2. The presentation and content of an annual report to the parliament or congress on                                  C
    DeM activities, central government debt, evaluation of outcomes against stated
    objectives and general performance


Dimension 1
Despite the lack of a consolidated debt recording and management system, PDS produces monthly
government debt statistics, which are formally submitted to the Parliament, President, Prime Minister,
Statistical Department and State Security Agency. It is also published on the MoF web page, but this
publication is limited to information about the nominal outstanding government debt.

The information included in the monthly publication covers the nominal values of domestic and external
debt, composition of domestic debt by instruments, external debt by creditors, concessional versus non-
concessional external debt, monthly debt service expenditures and external debt disbursements. For the
time being, such monthly bulletin does not include information on the residency classification, but de
facto corresponds to the domestic versus external currencies of debt portfolio. It also does not cover
original and residual maturity, nor does it include any portfolio risk indicators.

In order to prepare monthly statistics, PDD conducts data reconciliation with the NBKR 7 and PITAD,
which provides information on external debt disbursements and domestic debt transactions. As for the
government guarantees, there are no outstanding obligations to be reported by the government (see DPI
10).

Submission of monthly debt statistic usually takes place by the 25th of the following month, but may be
delayed for a week or so.

Despite the fact that the statistical report includes several characteristics of the current government debt
portfolio, and is produced on a monthly basis, this dimension does not meet the minimum requirements;
score D. In order to achieve a higher score, the bulletin should include at least additional information on
residual maturity and interest rates, as well as be available in the public domain on a regular basis.

Dimension 2

There are several types of debt statistics and reports submited to Parliament by the MoF. It includes:
monthly government debt statistics, debt management report annexed to the annual budget execution
report and add-hoc reports as required by the parliamentarians.



7
    The NBKR submits external debt data monthly based on the bilateral agreement with MoF from January 15, 2013, forms 22 and 23.



                                                                 11
The monthly government debt statistics bulletin includes main characteristics of the outstanding
government debt portfolio and debt service costs, as mentioned above.

The latest annual report on government debt management was included as an annex in 2014 Budget
Execution Report. The 2014 report includes detailed information on government debt stock by creditors,
currencies, interest rates, domestic and external borrowings/disbursements during the fiscal year,
evolution of debt service costs, comparison between planned and actual budget provisions, and
description of debt management operations during the budget year. For the time being, the analysis of
the debt management strategy implementation is not part of such annual reporting. The report is publicly
available on the MoF Treasury website.

Given that a comprehensive annual debt management report is annexed to the annual budget execution
report, and is formally submited to the Parliament, as well as available in the public domain, the score
for this dimension is C.

In order to achieve a higher score, the debt management report should include an analysis on
compliance with the DMS.



DPI-5 Audit

  Dimension                                                                                      Score
  1. Frequency of financial audits, compliance audits, and performance audits (of                  C
  effectiveness and efficiency of government DeM operations, including the internal control
  system), as well as publication of external audit reports
  2. Degree of commitment to address the outcomes from audits                                      B


Dimension 1

Chamber of Accounts (COA) is established under the national constitution (Article 107, 109) as a state
entity in charge of independent state audit. Its Head is appointed by the President. The COA presents
annual reports of its activities to the President and Parliament.

According to the article 3 of the Law N° 117 of 13/09/2004 on the Chamber of Accounts, it is an
independent legal entity of the Kyrgyz Republic. Article 4 of the same law determines the main
objectives of the COA, which include the audit of the use of public funds and the efficiency and
effectiveness aspects of the budget execution as well as the audit of use of extra budgetary funds. COA
is also responsible for monitoring of implementation of the audit recommendations. In addition, it has
the right to audit activities of SOEs (article 5).



                                                  12
Chapter IV article 32 of the COA Law describes the different types of external audit related to the
management of government debt and use of credit resources. Thus, COA has authority to:

         Conduct audit of the government debt management and debt service;
         Correct and ensure efficient use of external borrowing, other loans, humanitarian aid and
          government guarantees;
         Ensure efficient on-lending of borrowed funds; and
         Review government lending operations and grants.

COA prepares annual audit reports on budget execution at the republican level, which are approved by
its Council and published on its website. By the first of September of the following fiscal year, a final
report is submitted to the Parliament for examination as well as to the President for information.8

Audit report on government debt management activities is done separately as a stand-alone audit, but
presented to Parliament together with the annual audit report of budget execution. Starting with 2013,
annual audit report includes both financial and compliance audits of government debt management.

In addition, in accordance with the Internal Audit Law from January 26, 2009 N° 25, all central
government ministries have introduced an internal audit function. Internal audit section in the MoF has
been introduced in late 2011, and is reporting directly to the Minister. It includes five staff members.
The unit operates based on a three-year work program (currently covering the 2015-2017 period), which
forms a basis for the annual internal audit plan approved by the Minister. The priorities and frequency
of internal audits are defined based on the risk matrix prepared by the audit section. It is also in charge
of monitoring the implementation of internal and external audit recommendations. The internal audit of
debt management functions was not yet conducted.

Similarly, the NBKR has an Internal Audit Division, which reports directly to the Governor of the Bank.
Is also operates based on a three-year audit plan (2015-2017), which is then operationalized in the annual
plans. Such plans are based on the internal risk matrix of the processes and procedures implemented by
the NBKR. The division conducted audit on external debt statistics in 2012, audit of transactions with
government securities in 2014, and audit of payment services on government accounts in 2015.
Implementation of the internal audit recommendations is monitored on a regular basis.

As there are annual financial and compliance audits on government debt management conducted by the
COA since 2013, also available in the public domain within the six months following its completion,
the minimum requirements for dimension 1 are met. The score is therefore C. For a higher score, a
performance audit of government debt management is required.




8
 In 2015, the presentation of the report to the Parliament was postponed due to the general elections. The audit report will be presented
when new members of Parliament are elected.



                                                                   13
Dimension 2

Final audit report on budget execution includes recommendations for the budget users and indicative
time limits for very specific recommendations, while general recommendations may have no specific
time line. Comments and recommendations for the finding in the area of debt management are part of
this report.

Based on such recommendations, the Government adopts a formal decision with the list of expected
measures for addressing identified mistakes or weaknesses. Specific corrective actions are proposed for
each line ministry based on the auditors’ findings.

In line with such government decision, MoF develops an internal action plan with activities to be
implemented by individual departments and the expected timeline. COA recommendations are
addressed mainly within the agreed time period, but might be delayed from time to time.

PDD and other line departments of the MoF are in charge of fulfilling the audit recommendations as per
the agreed action plan. The internal audit section of the MoF is responsible for monitoring of
implementation of the consolidated action plan, as well as gathering of the information and providing
the feedback to the COA.

The management’s responses to the COA recommendations in a consistent manner as well as the
development of the annual action plans meet the requirements of the score B on the DeMPA for
dimension 2. A higher score requires that all recommendations be implemented within the indicated
timeline.



Coordination with Macroeconomic Policies
DPI-6 Coordination with Fiscal Policy
 Dimension                                                                                   Score
 1. Support of fiscal policy makers through the provision of accurate and timely               C
 forecasts on total central government debt and debt service under different scenarios
 2. Availability of key macro variables, an analysis of debt sustainability, and the           D
 frequency with which it is undertaken


Dimension 1




                                                  14
The MoF Order9 on the medium term budget framework and the annual budget preparation specifies the
budget calendar and responsibilities of MoF departments with respect to state budget preparation
process. As an example, the Macroeconomic Analysis Department10 is required to provide medium-
term macroeconomic forecasts to PDD. They provide information on projected foreign currency
exchange rates; inflation; GDP and exports, among others. PITAD and BPD have to submit information
on expected external loan disbursements and required amounts of domestic financing to be raised
through issuance of government securities, respectively. PDD in return has to provide debt service
forecasts to BPD.

In addition, there is a formally established working group on Macro-Fiscal Issues that includes
representatives from PDD, Macroeconomic Analysis Department, PITAD, BPD, Budget Revenue
Department and Fiscal Policy Department. The Macro-Fiscal working group is another platform to
exchange information and discuss outstanding issues related to budget preparation.

According to BPD, the PDD submits total debt service forecasts on time i.e. in compliance with the
approved budget preparation calendar. As shown in Figure 8, the debt service forecasts for the 2012-
2014 periods were reasonably accurate. The difference between forecasted and actual total debt service
outturn was within 10 percent over the past three years (see Table 1).


                                Figure 8: Debt Service Payment Projections and Outturn
                                                 (In millions of KGS)




         Sources: MoF data; WB staff estimates.




9 MoF Order Nr. 11-17 “On the Medium Term Budget Preparation for FY2016 -2018 and the Budget Preparation for FY2016,” January
29, 2015.
10 Strategic Planning, Macro Analysis and Monitoring of National Programs.




                                                             15
                        Table 1: Actual Versus Forecasted Debt Service Payments
                   Year                                    2012       2013      2014

                   Domestic debt service payments              -5%      -7%    -17%
                   External debt service payments              -11%    -15%       5%
                   Total Debt Service                          -6%     -10%    -10%
                  Sources: staff calculations, MoF data

The minimum requirements for effective coordination of debt management policy with the fiscal policy
are met, and the score is C, because PDD provides timely and reasonably accurate debt service payment
forecasts as part of the annual budget preparation process. For a higher score, debt service payment
forecasts should include sensitivity and scenario analysis, which is not currently practiced.

Dimension 2
MoF provides macroeconomic and debt data to IMF to prepare DSAs, but there is little involvement
from the ministry’s side in the actual DSA preparation. It should be noted that the conduct of DSA is
included in the current functions of PDD. The latter prepares a simplified DSA, mainly estimating
solvency indicators under a baseline macroeconomic framework over the next six years.

The second dimension does not meet the minimum requirement, and scores D, as the macroeconomic
variables are available and shared with PDD and BPD, but there is no full DSA undertaken by the
government over the past three years.



DPI-7 Coordination with Monetary Policy
 Dimension                                                                                  Score
 1. Clarity of separation between monetary policy operations and DeM transactions             B

 2. Coordination through regular information sharing on current and future debt               D
 transactions and the central government’s cash flows with the central bank

 3. Extent of the limit to direct access of resources from the central bank                   A


Dimension 1

As a fiscal agent for the Government, the NBKR issues T-Bills and T-Bonds for financing government
expenditures. While T-bills are auctioned every Thursday, T-bonds are issued on Fridays. NBKR
issues short- term securities for monetary policy purposes with maturity of seven days, and conducts
its auctions on Tuesdays. Therefore, the purpose of issuance is clear, and investors are well informed
about the scope of NBKR securities’ issuance and MoF issuances of government debt instruments.


                                                          16
Also, all the decisions on the volumes and cut-off price for government securities are taken by the
management of the MoF based on the recommendations of PDD. NBKR does not interfere in the
decision making process.

Formally, the fiscal agency role of the NBKR is defined in the bilateral agreements from 28.08.2009
for T-bills and 02.10.2009 for T-bonds (see DPI 8 for more details).

Since the government securities are issued only for budget-financing purposes, there is a clear separation
of monetary and fiscal monetary policy operations, which was confirmed by local investors. Also, the
fiscal agency role of the NBKR is clearly established in the bilateral agreements with the MoF. Thus,
the requirements for the score B are met.

For a higher score, it is required that agency responsibilities of the national bank in government debt
management be publicly disclosed. Such information is partially available on the NBKR website,
however not included in the MoF website.

Dimension 2

The MoF has regular formal and informal information exchanges with NBKR. The monthly domestic
auction calendar is prepared and submitted to the NBKR for coordination and publication purposes. The
quarterly external debt service forecasts are also submitted on a regular basis through a formalized
process.

Also, there are bi-weekly coordination meetings of MoF and NBKR experts, which include
representatives of budget, revenue, treasury and debt management departments of the MoF and
economic and monetary policy operations departments of the NBKR. During the month, one meeting is
conducted at the technical experts’ level, while the second is for managerial level. At such meetings, a
monthly financing plan, prepared by the MoF, is discussed and amended as needed. Also, the team
discusses expected cash flow fluctuations, although formal cash flow forecast is not prepared or shared.
However, the NBKR has all the information on the actual cash flows due to its role of banking agent of
the MoF Treasury and in charge of TSA operations.

In summary, bi-weekly technical committee meetings, sharing of financing plans, debt issuance and debt
service forecasts are effective coordination mechanisms to support monetary policy formulation.
However, due to the fact that cash flow forecasts are not prepared, there is no formal information
exchange on the future cash flows. Thus, the score for the second dimension is D. The higher score
would require development and information exchange of cash flow forecasts.



Dimension 3




                                                   17
Article 24 of the NBKR Law N° 59/1997 states that the Bank is prohibited to grant loans to the
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. This legal provision is complied with.

Thus, the score for this dimension meets the highest requirements, and the score is A.



Borrowing and Related Financing Activities
DPI-8 Domestic Borrowing
 Dimension                                                                                       Score
 1. The extent to which market-based mechanisms are used to issue debt; the                        D
 preparation of an annual plan for aggregate amount of local currency borrowing in the
 domestic market, divided between the wholesale and retail markets; and the
 publication of a borrowing calendar for wholesale securities
 2. The availability and quality of documented procedures for local currency borrowing             D
 in the domestic market and interactions with market participants


Dimension 1
Parliament, through the annual budget, sets limits on domestic borrowing. These annual limits are
typically around 1 to 2 percent of GDP, reflecting perceived relatively high cost of domestic borrowing.
The domestic debt is dominated by T-Bills, with maturities between 3 and 12 months and 2- and 5-year
bonds. In 2013-14, a new 3-year bond was issued, but so far, only in limited amounts.

Since 2012, all government securities have been issued at electronic auctions held by NBKR functioning
as a fiscal agent to the MoF. Cut-off prices are determined by MoF without any interference from NBKR.
Until 2013 a primary dealer system was in place, under which only authorized financial institutions
could participate in auctions. In an effort to increase interest in taking part in the government securities
market, all commercial banks and financial institutions can now participate in the primary auctions.
Currently 22 banks as well as the National Social Fund and the Deposit Insurance Agency are authorized
to participate in auctions. There are no bidding requirements. Individual investors can place bids through
authorized dealers free of any charges.

While no annual borrowing plan is published, PDD is publishing monthly auction calendars that specify
auction dates and targeted amounts, as well as maturities and coupon rates. In general, the borrowing
plans are implemented as announced. The exception was 2015, when limited demand has forced the
MoF to issue less than announced. Auction results are announced on the same day as the auctions. The
monthly borrowing plans are published before the start of the month, but sometimes only the day before
the first auction of the new month.




                                                    18
Meetings with market participants to discuss issuance plans—among other things—are organized by
PDD, but on an irregular basis. NBRK normally participates in these meetings

Since there is no annual borrowing plan, and since the monthly auction calendar is published less than
1 week before the start of the new month, the score for this dimension is D.


Dimension 2

As mentioned above, auctions are held by NBKR, and the auction set-up and decision-making process
is clearly described and working well. Detailed descriptions of the government securities and access to
auctions are available on the website of NBKR (“Market for government securities,” undated). This
public information provides details on the individual securities and calculation of interest, among others.
In addition to T-bills and T-bonds, it describes restructuring bonds and “Rollover Treasury Bills” issued
in favor on NBKR. It also refers to the information about 16 Primary Dealers in the domestic market.

Regulation N° 556 dated of 2008, “On approval of the issuance, placement, circulation and redemption
of government securities”, provides information on government securities similar to the information
available in “Market for government securities.”

Procedures and characteristics (such as the type of securities and access to auctions) are well described
in the “Market for government securities” document, but the references to a primary dealer system that
was abolished in 2013 and to restructuring bonds and variable rate bonds that matured in 2008
demonstrate that the documented procedures are substantially out of date. The same applies to
Regulation N° 556. The score for this dimension is, therefore, D. A higher score would require that
procedures be updated to reflect the current situation.



DPI-9 External Borrowing
 Dimension                                                                                      Score
 1. Documented assessment of the most beneficial or cost-effective borrowing terms                 D
 and conditions (lender or source of funds, currency, interest rate, and maturity) and a
 borrowing plan
 2. Availability and quality of documented procedures for external borrowings                      D
 3. Availability and degree of involvement of legal advisers before signing of the loan            B
 contract


Dimension 1




                                                    19
External borrowing is mainly related to investment projects, and also includes some budget support
loans. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic has not issued bonds in the international capital markets,
and there are no plans to do so in the medium term. Project-related borrowing is undertaken by PIP,
while budget support is handled by BMC, both falling under the PITAD of the MoF. The planned
disbursements in 2015 for project loans and budget support was US$380 million and US$160 million,
respectively. It should be noted that budget support tends to be volatile from year to year.

New external borrowing is, to a large extent, driven by availability of the donor funding. For all loan
proposals, PIP and BMC will provide loan terms to PDD that will check if the minimum level of
concessionality (35 percent) is met as well as the financial terms in general.

An annual borrowing plan is not prepared, but the annual budget includes a loan-by-loan list of all the
external borrowing planned for the year. There is no process in place whereby alternative lending
sources and financial terms are analyzed, and compared in a systematic fashion.

The score for this dimension is D, since no assessments of the most beneficial or cost-effective terms
and conditions.

Dimension 2

The process of negotiating and signing external loans is well established, and is identical for external
borrowing through PIP or BMC. Staff involved is experienced and familiar with all elements of the
process, including the coordination with entities outside of PIP and BMC, respectively.
Once there is agreement in principle on a specific project and/or loan between the donor and government,
a loan negotiation delegation is established through a government decision. For budget support the
delegation will comprise of representatives from MoF (including the Legal Support Division), Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Justice, and Ministry of Economy. For project loans, the line ministry
also participates in the negotiation process.
Loans are entered into the external debt recording application immediately after signing of the loan
(even if the loan falls under the status of international treaty, and therefore needs Parliamentary approval,
delaying the formalization of the loan).
The second dimension is scored D, as adequate internal procedures for external borrowings are not
available.
Dimension 3
The Legal Support Division (LS) in the MoF comprises 9 staff. With regard to external borrowing, LS
is involved in all loan negotiations as a member of the task force (see above), and provides a legal
opinion for all loan agreements. Sometimes LS will join negotiations right from the start of the process,
other times only later. From the point of view of LS, the process is the same whether the loan is project-
related or budget support. In addition to LS, the Ministry of Justice sometimes participates in parts of
the negotiation process.



                                                     20
Legal advisors participate in substantial parts of the negotiation process, and are consulted when needed.
Therefore, the score for this dimension is B. An A score would require that legal advisers are consulted
from the first stage of the negotiating process to the conclusion of the legal agreements related to the
borrowing.



DPI-10 Loan Guarantees, On-lending and Derivatives
 Dimension                                                                                                                   Score
 1. Availability and quality of documented policies and procedures for approval and                                           N/A
 issuance of central government loan guarantees
 2. Availability and quality of documented policies and procedures for on-lending of                                            C
 borrowed funds
 3. Availability of a DeM system with functionalities for handling derivatives, and                                           N/A
 availability and quality of documented procedures for the use of derivatives


Dimension 1

Since early 2000s, the central government has not issued any guarantee. In that context, there are no
documented policies and procedures regulating their approval and issuance, apart from the legal
authorization granted to the Minister of Finance to issue them (see DPI 2).11

The score for this dimension is N/A. There are no outstanding loan guarantees in the public debt
portfolio, and there are no plans to issue any, as indicated in the current DMS (see DPI 3).12

Dimension 2
On-lending has been the preferred choice of the government to provide financing to SOEs, private
companies and individuals. On lending activities are managed by the State Fund for Economic
Development, which falls under the umbrella of the deputy Minister in charge of budget formulation in
the MoF. There are about 1,300 agreements in the current portfolio amounting to KGS 76 billion or 17
percent of GDP.13 All of the outstanding on-lent funds come from external sources. Debt service
payments amount to KGS 3.3 billion in 2015 or 2.6 percent of domestic revenues. On-lending is




11
   Draft policies and procedures exist, but they have not been signed.
12 In addition, the new draft budget code prohibits the issuance of guarantees.
13 Data refer only to the amount of debts being contracted by the central government, and exclude budget financing that was on-lent.




                                                                  21
extensively used for development (notably in the agricultural and infrastructure sectors) and strategic
purposes (energy sector).

Policies and procedures governing on-lending are specified in two government regulations. Regulation
N°114 of 2012 and Regulation N°656 of 2014 regulate the accounting and the on-lending mechanisms,
respectively. The latter stipulates—among other matters—(i) the purpose of the on-lending; (ii) the
issuance of a government resolution signed by the Prime Minister for the allocation of the funding; (ii)
the obligation for the beneficiaries to submit financial information during the life of the on-lent funds;
and (iii) the obligation to monitor the use of the resources in order to ensure that they are directed to the
original financing purposes. No charge is added on the interest rate applied for on-lending; the
government provides to the beneficiary the same financial terms that he had negotiated with its external
creditors. In case of a payment default, the legal steps are defined in the Civil Code. Current practices
follow the policies and procedures.

The second dimension scores C. There are adequate and readily accessible internal documented
procedures for the approval and provision of on-lending, and they are followed.
A higher score (the B score) would require that policies and procedures contain a mandatory requirement
that the credit risks be assessed systematically before a decision is made to provide such funds, as well
as provide the guidelines on how this assessment would be conducted.
Dimension 3
The third dimension is not assessed (N/A), as the government does not use financial derivatives.



Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management
DPI-11 Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management
 Dimension                                                                                        Scores
 1. Effectiveness of forecasting the aggregate level of cash balances in government                 D
 bank accounts
 2. Decision of an appropriate cash balance (liquidity buffer) and effectiveness of                 D
 managing the aggregate cash balance in government bank accounts (including the
 integration with the domestic debt borrowing program, if required)


Dimension 1
The Treasury Department of MoF is responsible for cash forecasting and cash management. The
government will typically start out the year with substantial cash holdings. Often there will be a cash



                                                     22
shortage during the year due to the strong seasonality of the economy. In such cases Treasury is rationing
and delaying expenditures.

No formal system for cash forecasting is in place, and there appears to be substantial challenges with
projections due to strong seasonality and unpredictability in certain inflows and payments. Cash
forecasts are sometimes prepared, and shared at the bi-weekly meetings between MoF and NBKR. These
forecasts are on a weekly basis and one month forward looking. From time to time the forecasts go three
months ahead. The quality of the forecasts was described as “not always good.” Treasury does not
prepare cash forecasts that are shared internally.

Since annual cash forecasts are not prepared, and shared with PDD, the score for this dimension is D.
The requirement for a C-score is reasonably reliable annual cash forecasts on a monthly basis for cash
balances on central government bank accounts, and that these forecasts are updated monthly.

Dimension 2
The issuance of government securities over the year is stable from month to month, including the
issuance of T-bills. No cash forecasts are shared with PDD for the purpose of adjustment of issuance
volumes for short term securities. Therefore, the issuance of government securities is not linked with
the cash needs during the year.

Cash is held at NBKR without remuneration. Treasury have suggested moving cash holdings to
commercial banks, but NBKR have resisted such a move.

As short-term government borrowing is not planned according to cash needs, and as the cash holdings
of the government are not remunerated, the score for second dimension is D.



Debt Recording and Operational Risk Management
DPI-12 Data Administration and Data Security
 Dimension                                                                                     Scores
 1. Availability and quality of documented procedures for the processing of debt                  D
 related payments and receivables
 2. Availability and quality of documented procedures for debt transactions data                  D
 recording and validation as well as storage of agreements and debt administration
 records.
 3. Availability and quality of documented procedures for controlling access to the               D
 central government’s debt data recording system
 4. Frequency and off-site storage of debt recording and management system backups                A



                                                   23
Dimension 1
PDD and NBKR are responsible for servicing external and domestic debt. The debt service payment
process is as follows:
        In regard to external debt, PDD receives payment advices from creditors. PDS incorporates them
         into a monthly budgetary plan after checking the amounts against their records, and converting
         them into local currency. The debt servicing report for the coming month—which also includes
         domestic debt payments—is submitted subsequently to the Treasury department. Two days
         before the payment date, PDS prepares two orders: (i) a budget order; and (ii) a payment order.14
         The head of PDD (or in his absence, the head of PDS) signs both documents. They are submitted
         to the Treasury (Banking Operations Division), which verifies and validates the amounts. While
         the budget order follows both an automated payment process, and is submitted in hard copy, the
         payment order is only submitted in hard copy.15 Subsequently, the Treasury sends the payment
         order to NBKR (Bank Settlement section), which verifies again the information, and proceeds
         with the payment on the day of the due date. It debits the Treasury account for the corresponding
         amount, and submits the banking statement to the Treasury (in local currency using the
         prevailing exchange rate).
        For domestic debt (T-bills and T-bonds), the process is very similar. PDS prepares the budget
         and payment orders two days before the due date. After validation, Treasury sends the payment
         order to the ARD at NBKR. The latter executes the payments, credits the bank accounts of
         securities holders, and debits the Treasury account. It subsequently informs Treasury about the
         payments.
        NBKR sends actual debt service payment report to PDD on a monthly basis, which allows the
         latter to reconcile its data. If any discrepancy arises (which happens on rare occasions), PDD
         issues a reconciliation act after investigating the reasons, and sends it to Treasury for its
         signature. PDD staff can see at any moment the amount of debt service paid on a specific
         loan/security by consulting the Treasury Accounting System.
The practice appears to be adequate, and all debt service payments are made on time. PDD completes
the debt-related payment process relying on its institutional memory, while NBKR holds a procedure
manual for the settlement of domestic debt payments (called the procedures for depository accounting
of government securities).




14 PDD issues budget and payment orders for all external public debt, except for debt service payments related to balance of payment
support, which are serviced directly by NMBK.
15 The implementation of automated payment system for budget orders is a recent development (about one year ago). There are ongoing

discussions to make the payment order process automatic as well.



                                                                24
The dimension 1 scores D. Although the procedures themselves are adequate and well-working, the
absence of documented procedures for the processing of debt service in PDD implies a D score.
Dimension 2

There are no documented procedures for debt data recording and validation or for storage of agreements
and debt administration records. Like the debt-related payment process, organizational memory guides
the practices.
The external debt records are maintained in an Access application called the Debt Tracking System
(DTS). PDS receives copies of loan agreements signed by the central government and related-
disbursement notifications from PITAD. PIP prepares information and data related to project financing,
while BMC prepares information and data on direct budget support (see DPI 2). The Balance of
Payments division of NBKR sends also information and data on balance of payments support so that
PDD can maintain a consolidated external public debt database. Data published on some multilateral
creditors’ websites (e.g., the WB, the Asian Development Bank, and the Islamic Development Bank)
and payment advices are also used to update the DTS. All information or updates are recorded in the
DTS within a day.
The domestic debt records are maintained in two distinct databases. Data on Treasury bonds are recorded
in an Access application, and data on Treasury bills in an Excel file. Following the auction of treasury
securities, the winning bids are entered on the same day into the appropriate application. The registry
system—called the Automated Trading System (ATS) and located at NBKR—is automatically updated
(see DPI 14).
Debt records are systematically checked. The head of PDS checks all external debt data entries, while
staffs in charge of external debt validate the domestic debt transactions’ entries.16 The quality of the
recorded data is further secured through different reconciliation processes. External debt data are
reconciled against creditors’ records annually (unless serious doubts prompt for an earlier verification)
and recent external debt transaction data (signature of new loans and new disbursements) are reconciled
monthly with PITAD. Data on treasury securities are reconciled monthly with the Financing and
Securities Placement Division of NBKR.

PDD stores the copies of all loan documents (including agreements and debt administration records) in
a filing cabinet located in the office of PDS. The documents are stored in good order, and kept in a
secure filing system. Access to the files is restricted to five staffs. Other staffs are requested to ask for
permission to consult the documents, and retrieval is documented. The files are, however, not protected
against fire and flooding. PITAD holds a soft and a hard copy of all the agreements and the soft copies
are saved on MoF data server (see dimension 4 of this indicator). Original external loan documents are
kept at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.


16
     The head of PDD validated external debt data entries until recently as the head of PDS has only joint the department two months ago.



                                                                    25
The dimension 2 scores D. The procedures themselves for the data recording and validation seem
adequate, and PITAD holds soft copies of all external loan agreements. However, the minimum
requirements for this dimension include the availability and quality of written recording and validation
procedures for external and domestic debt, which do not exist, and secure storage of all debt
administration records.


Dimension 3

Regarding controlling access to the debt databases, the head of PDD controls it tightly for the two Access
applications. Access permissions have been granted to five staff members (the head of the department
and the four staff of PDS). Access to the Excel file, which captures data on T-bills, is however not
controlled. The file is not protected with a password.
There is only one instruction manual covering access to the DTS. But it is, however, part of the user
manual of the system.
Each staff member has a password. But it is rarely changed.
The dimension 3 scores D. The T-bill database is not secure, and there are no documented procedures
for controlling access to the debt data applications. The acquisition of a debt management system —as
the authorities envisage it—will strengthen access control, including with the availability of audit trails.

Dimension 4

The Information Technology and Modernization Department of MoF performs backup of all electronic
files twice a day. The data are saved on a server in a data center located across the street from MoF. The
data center is locked and fitted with its own generators and air conditioning, protected from all types of
disasters, including fire and earthquake. There is also a backup data center located 40 kilometers away
from the primary center. There are virtual private network connections between PDD and NBKR.
The Information Technology (IT) system of NBKR, including the registry system, is regulated tightly,
and controlled by the Information Security Division. Data are backed up daily. The backups are stored
in two different geographical locations in Bishkek. The facilities are identical and linked by a fiber
connection, which allows for instant synchronization of files. The servers are located in secure places,
including protected against flood and fire, and placed inside earthquake resistant constructions. Access
to the IT system, including the server, is guided by written procedures, and external audits are conducted
annually on the IT system.

This last dimension scores A. The debt database backups at MoF and NBKR are made, at least once a
day, and the backups are stored in two distinct secure inter-linked locations.




                                                    26
DPI-13 Segregation of Duties, Staff Capacity, and Business Continuity
 Dimension                                                                                                                 Scores
 1. Segregation of duties for some key factors, as well as the presence of a operational                                      D
 risk monitoring and compliance functions
 2. Staff capacity and human resource management                                                                              C
 3. Presence of an operational risk management plan, including business-continuity and                                        D
 disaster-recovery arrangements


Dimension 1
PDS records debt-related transactions—for both domestic and external debt—in the three existing
databases regardless of the nature of the transactions (e.g., from preliminary contract data to settlement).
The current practice can be reiterated as follows:
        Regarding external debt, PITAD negotiates loan agreements, and sends all the information to
         PDD, including disbursement notifications. PDS (either the specialist involved with multilateral
         debt or that with bilateral debt) records the information in the DTS, and arranges external debt
         service payments in coordination with Treasury (see Figure 9 for the organizational structure of
         PDD).
        As for domestic debt, PDS acts as both front and back offices. It is in charge of issuing
         government securities in the domestic market, in cooperation with NBKR; recording information
         in the databases; and carrying out payments (see also DPI 2).
The head of the department and its deputies (the two division chiefs) monitor operational risks and
ensure that staffs comply with rules and policies (clearly stipulated in their functions). There is no staff
member (nor dedicated unit) responsible for risk monitoring and compliance.
All data entries are confirmed, and follow the four eyes principles. The staff responsible for external
debt-related back office activities validates domestic debt data, while the head of PDS confirms external
debt data entries. The staff members entering data and that checking the data entry are thus different.
However, operational risks remain important as the staff members checking the data have also editing
rights to the databases.17 In addition, while the heads of PDD and PDS do not themselves enter data into
the databases in practice, they are both responsible for checking data entries and approving payment
orders (see DPI 12).


17
   The Excel file containing T-bills data is not protected. The two staffs of PDS in charge of confirming domestic debt data entries have
access to it, and can edit the content.



                                                                  27
The first dimension scores D. The same staff members in PDS perform some of the functions of front
office (e.g., preliminary contract data entry) and all the functions of back office (e.g., confirmation and
finalization of contract information and transaction settlement). In addition, the staff members
responsible for checking the accuracy of data entry have also editing access to the databases; and the
staff members responsible for approval of debt service payments have also editing right to the databases.
All these aspects endanger security and control over public borrowing.


                                  Figure 9. Organizational Structure of PDD




                                                                 Public Debt
                                                             Department (PDD)
                                                              -- Head (1 staff)




                                Statistics Division                                             Debt Management
                                 (PDS)-- Head (1                                                 Division--Head (1
                                       staff)                                                           staff)




                                Chief specialist in
          Lead specialist in                          Specialist in charge
                               charge 0f External                                 Chief specialists (2       Lead specialist (1
         charge of domestic                           of external bilateral
                               multilateral debt (1                                     staffs)                    staff)
            debt (1 staff)                                debt (1 staff)
                                      staff)




Dimension 2
Regarding staff adequacy within the three debt management units of MoF, the current situation is as
follows:
      In PDD, there are nine staff members (including the Director). All positions are filled, and the
       Director believes that the number of his staff is adequate relative to the level of activity. In
       general, staff members appear competent, holding university degrees, and well-aware of their
       duties, which are formally described. The staff turnover rate is low (⅔ of the staff present at the
       2011 WB-IMF MTDS mission remains today in the department), and the department enjoys high
       prestige allowing it to attract new staff easily. Staffs appear to work with enthusiasm, and expand
       progressively their analytical knowledge and deepen their analyses (e.g., an example is the DMS,
       see DPI 3).
      Within PITAD, there are six staff members in PIP and five staff members in BMC (including
       the heads of the divisions). There is one vacancy in BMC. All staff members have formal job


                                                            28
          descriptions. Staffs in PIP appear somehow stretched with work, as they are both responsible for
          identifying external financing and acting as the focal point on the monitoring of the
          implementation of projects.18 On average, 18 project loans per year were signed over the past
          three years. The activity in BMC from a debt management angle is further confined with an
          average three budget-support loans signed per year over the same period of time.
With respect to training, civil servants are entitled to a minimum of 72 hours of training every three
years according to a State order issued by the Ministry of civil service. This is coupled with a recent
decision of MoF to provide additional training based on identified needs by heads of departments. This
training will be organized on a regular basis. PDD staffs have already expressed interest in participating
in an Advanced Excel and basic public finance training.19 In addition, PDD and PITAD staffs have
attended several workshops organized by international institutions, including on the conduct of DeMPA,
DSA, and DMS and on the recording of debt statistics over the past years.
Finally, staffs’ performance is assessed on a quarterly-basis, and a rating is assigned (this is a recent
development) in line with the guidelines of the Ministry of Civil Service. Staffs’ duties are listed at the
beginning of each quarter, and their completions are reviewed at the end of it. All appraisals are
submitted to the Human Resources Department of MoF.
There are no code-of-conduct and conflict-of-interest guidelines covering the entire civil service, but
there are no separate guidelines specifically for the staff of the debt management units.
The second dimension scores C. The environment appears conducive for working and learning. There
are sufficient and adequately trained staff members with formal job descriptions reflecting their current
tasks.

A higher rating would warrant the elaboration and implementation of a code-of conduct and conflict-of-
interest guidelines directed towards debt management.



Dimension 3
There is no plan for business-continuity and disaster-recovery at MoF. The IT and Modernization
Department has elaborated an action plan for ensuring uninterrupted work, which is to be adopted by
the Minister of Finance soon. In addition, the recovery of data is guaranteed by the existence of these
two data centers (see DPI 12).




18
   Currently PIP is following 80 projects. The investment plan will include soon 15 additional projects to monitor, for which the financing-
related external loans are in the course of being ratified by Parliament.
19 While the Excel training has already been organized, and sessions have been offered (one staff of PDS was attending the training during

the course of the mission), the public finance training will be organized and delivered as of next year.



                                                                    29
The third dimension scores D. There are no written business continuity and disaster-recovery plans at
the MoF.



DPI-14 Debt and Debt-related Records
 Dimension                                                                                      Scores
 1. Completeness and timeliness of central government debt, loan guarantees, debt-                 B
 related transactions
 2. Complete and up-to-date records of all holders of government securities in a secure           A
 registry system, if applicable


Dimension 1
PDS records all new external loan agreements and related transactions (e.g., disbursement and
repayment) in the DTS within a day upon receiving the information from PITAD or external creditors
(using for instance payment advices and the creditors’ web platform). Information on project-related
disbursements is shared reliably, while the process is not as smooth for the notifications of direct budget
support-related disbursements. PDD needs to remind BMC of the need to share that information. Taking
into consideration that imperfection in the data-sharing mechanism, the recording of disbursements is
subject to a maximum of 55 days delay.

PDS maintains the record of the medium to long-term domestic debt instruments (T-bond) and the short-
term debt instruments (T-bills) in two different databases. All domestic debt-related transactions (e.g.,
issuance-related transaction and settlement) are recorded on the day of the transactions.

In addition, there are several reconciliation mechanisms, which help also maintain the accuracy of the
three databases (see DPI 12).

The first dimension scores B. The central government has complete records of its debt and debt-related
transactions within a two-month lag.

A higher score would require the availability of complete records within a one-month lag.



Dimension 2
The ARD located at NBKR administers the registry system of government securities (ATS). The system
operates on the Delivery versus Payment (DVP) principle in both primary and secondary market
transactions with T+1 and T+2 settlements for T-bonds and T-bills, respectively. The process is
conducted as an automatic debiting process of the winning banks' bank accounts in NBKR (with


                                                    30
authorization from the banks) and crediting process of the Treasury’s bank account. At the same time
the banks' securities accounts in the ATS are credited. All market participants have access to the ATS,
and are in a position to verify their holdings and balances at any moment in time. The ATS is audited
by the internal audit department of the NBKR every year. All operations of NBKR are audited annually
by an external audit, but the registry is not part of the regular audit.

The second and last dimension is rated A. Government securities are dematerialized and kept in a central
registry that has up-to-date and secure records of all holders of government debt. It is subject to an audit
of internal controls and management of operation risk annually. In addition, settlement for government
securities is made on a DVP basis.




                                                    31
Annex 1: DeMPA Meeting Schedule
Thursday, October 15, 2015

9.30 - 11.00                 Meeting with Head of PDD, MoF -           Director, heads of
                             technical introduction meeting            divisions; WB

11.00 – 12.30                Mission Launch Meeting                    MoF staff; Central Bank;
                                                                       Other officials; State Audit
                             (MoF, Head of Treasury, Head of           Office; WB
                             Budget, Head of Internal Audit, Head of
                             Debt; Head of IT, Head of HR)

                             Central Bank (Vice Governor, Head of
                             Financial market Department, Head of
                             Macroeconomics, and Statistics
                             Department)

                             External Audit – State Audit Office

14.00 – 17.30                Legal and organizational framework for    PDD, MoF; WB
                             debt management

                             Structure of Debt Department, staffing,
                             procedures

                             (MoF staff, Debt management unit)

Friday, October 16, 2015
09.00 – 12.30                MoF, PDD, external and domestic debt      PDD/PDS, MoF; WB
                             issues

14.00 – 15.30                MoF officials dealing with budget         MoF Budget; WB
                             preparation
15.30 -17.00                 MoF, Meeting with Debt and IT to          MoF; WB
                             discuss debt recording system

15.30 -17.00                 MoF, officials from Human Resource        MoF, Human Resource
                             Department, Ministry of Finance           Department; WB

Monday, October 19, 2015




                                            32
9.00-10.00                    Meeting at NBKR, Monetary Policy           NBKR; WB
                              issues.

10.0 0- 11.00                 NBKR officials dealing with: government NBKR; WB
                              debt/domestic debt markets, auctions

11.0 0- 12.00                 NBKR officials dealing with debt data      NBKR; WB
                              records and reporting
                              Registry system at the Central Bank
14.00 – 15.00                 Internal control/Audit department of       NBKR; WB
                              NBKR

15.00 - 16.00                 Meeting with PIP                           MoF; WB

16.00 - 17.00                 Meeting with on-lending department         MoF; WB

15.00 - 17.30                 Market participants dealing in
                              government debt

Tuesday, October 20, 2015
9.00-10.00                    MoF officials dealing with economic        MoF; WB
                              affairs – macro projections
10.00 – 11.00                 Team meeting                               Head of PDD; WB

11.00-12.30                   Meeting with Legal department              MoF; WB

14.00 -15.00                  Internal audit department /Control         MoF; WB
                              department

14.00 -15.30                  NBKR – Registry system/ IT                 MoF; WB

15.00-16.00                   MBC                                        MoF; WB

15.30 -17.00                  State Audit Office                         State Audit Office; WB

17.00 – 18.00                 Meeting with officials dealing with cash   MoF treasury department;
                              management                                 WB

Wednesday, October 21, 2015

09.00 – 12.00                 Final technical meeting with the Debt      PDD; WB
                              Management unit




                                             33
14.00- 15.30                 Donor Community and Development        WB CO (Big conference
                             Partners meeting                       room 1st floor)

16.00-17.00                  Meeting with CM, WB                    WB CO (CM’s room)

Thursday, October 22, 2015

09.00 – 12.00                Follow-up meetings, MoF, Ministry of   PDD; WB
                             Justice
14.00-15.30                  Closing high level meeting             Similar to the mission
                                                                    opening: Government; WB
16.00 -18.00                 Follow-up, final meetings              PDD, MoF; WB




                                            34
Annex 2: The List of Participants in the Mission
№    Name                 Organization        Title
1    Baketaev Almaz       MoF                 Deputy Minister -Director of the
                                              Central Treasury
2    Sydykov Bakyt        MoF                 Head, Public debt Department, MoF
3    Isabekova Nazik      MoF                 Head, Public Debt Management
                                              Division, Public debt Department,
                                              MoF
4    Sharsheev Azamat     MoF                 Head, Public Debt Statistics Division,
                                              Public debt Department, MoF
5    Irina Kim            MoF                 Head, Department of Strategic
                                              Planning, Macroeconomic Analysis,
                                              and Monitoring of the National
                                              programs, MoF
6    Parhomenko Nadejda   MoF                 Head, HR Department, MoF
7    Tynybekova Asiya     MoF                 Head, Medium-term fiscal forecasting
                                              Division, Budgetary Policy
                                              Department, MoF
8    Isakov Nurlan        MoF                 Head, Technical Support Division, IT
                                              Department, MoF
9    Jumaev Ulukbek       MoF                 Head, Modernization Sector, IT
                                              Department, MoF
10   Kyljiev Samat        COA                 Chief of Staff, Accountants
                                              Chamber
11   Ibraimova Chinara    COA                 Analyst, Research and Methodology
                                              Division, Accountants     Chamber of
                                              the KR




                                         35
12   Chynhojoev Emil       NBKR                    Lead Economist, BoP and External
                                                   Debt Division, Financial Statistics
                                                   Department, NBKR
13   Omorov Erkin          NBKR                    Head, International Cooperation
                                                   Division, NBKR
14   Alybaev Avtandil      NBKR                    Head, Macroeconomic Analysis and
                                                   Financial Market Analysis Division,
                                                   Economic Department, NBKR
15   Svetlana Alelekova    Japan International Cooperation Agency
16   Talay Asylbekov       European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
17   Larisa Manastirli
18   Dmitriy Engelgardt    EDB
19   Altynai Valikhanova   Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW)
20   John McGregor         Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
21   Nargiza Kasymalieva
22   Tomas Dembski
23   Damir Bisembin        Swiss Embassy
24   Johannes Madsen       European Union
25   Shamsh Kassin Lakha   Aga Khan Development Network




                                            36
             Annex 3: Laws and Regulations Pertaining to Debt Management


1.  “Law on Public and Non-Public Debt of the Kyrgyz Republic” September 21, 2001.
2.  “Law on Main Principles of Budget Formulation in the Kyrgyz Republic” June 11, 1998.
3.  “Law on International Agreements” April 24, 2014.
4.  “Law on the National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic” July 29, 1997.
5.  Resolution of the Cabinet N° 424 “Strategy for Managing the National Debt of the Kyrgyz Republic
    for 2015-2017” June 29, 2015.
6. Resolution of the Cabinet N° 556 “On Issuance, Placement, Circulation and Repayment of State
    Securities of the Kyrgyz Republic” October 2, 2008.
7. Agreement N° D-3-0/0749 “On Placement, Circulation, Recording and Repayment of Government
    Treasury Bills by the National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic” August 28, 2009.
8. Agreement N° 10-1/28 “On Placement, Circulation, Recording and Repayment of Government
    Treasury Bonds by the National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic” October 10, 2009.
9. Resolution of the MoF N° 207 “On Public Debt Department of the Ministry of Finance,” “On Public
    Debt Management Division,” and “On Public Debt Statistics Division” April 26, 2013.
10. Resolution of the MoF “On Public Investments, Technical Assistance Department.”
11. Resolution of the MoF “On Public Investment Projects Division.”
12. Resolution of the MoF “On Bilateral and Multilateral Cooperation Division.”
13. Resolution N°114 “The State Fund of Economy Development at the Ministry of Finance of the Kyrgyz
    Republic” February 20, 2012.
14. Resolution N°656 “Procedures on Allocation, Accounting and Securing the Payment of Government
    Borrowing” November 18, 2014.




                                                 37
