      KNOWLEDGE SHARING AND CAPACITY BUILDING ON THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF INTEGRATED SOCIAL PROTECTION SYSTEMS


                                       Regional Workshop
                          Marseille, France & Brussels, Belgium
                                        March 23-27, 2015


Background
Middle East and North Africa (MENA) countries spend, on average, 6 percent of their gross domestic
product (GDP) on general subsidies: 4.6 and 1.4 percent of their GDP on fuel and food subsidies
respectively. On the other hand, MENA countries spend a mere 0.7% of their GDP on targeted social
safety nets (SSNs), most of which are fragmented, have limited coverage and are poorly targeted. For
example, as a result of targeting inefficiencies, the average targeted SSN program in MENA distributes
only 23 percent of its total benefits to the bottom quintile, while the corresponding figure for the
average comparator programs in Latin America and the Caribbean and in Eastern Europe and Central
Asia is 59 percent. Moreover, inadequate targeting results in significant leakages of SSN benefits to
the non-poor.

In this context, countries in the MENA region are seeking to establish integrated social protection
(SP) systems that protect the poor and vulnerable, all while being fiscally sustainable. SSNs are an
important component of SP systems, as these programs can help to address poverty and equity as well
as to promote human capital accumulation if well designed. As such, many MENA governments are
interested in learning about best practices of SSN programs and, in particular, about the identification,
registration, and targeting of SSN programs’ beneficiaries, including the establishment of national
registries for social programs and related functions & IT infrastructure (targeting, payment systems,
M&E, etc.).




                                                                                                       1
Verification of a beneficiary’s identity is a fundamental process to implement social programs,
particularly when they provide services and/or transfers. Government agencies dealing with
beneficiary constituents, whether for social insurance, social assistance, voter registration or income
tax collection require robust means of identification. However, most low-and middle-income
countries, including countries in the MENA region, have weak national identification (ID) and
registration systems. The weaknesses in these systems can lead to two major issues in the provision of
social services. First, identification problems can result in exclusion from much-needed social service
programs, as eligible people are sometimes not able to register for government programs. Second, the
inability of governments to verify identities can also result in massive leakages, fraud, and misallocation
of benefits. In both cases, weak systems can lead to undesirable outcomes for otherwise well-designed
programs.

A second process for the implementation of social programs is the determination of an individual’s
eligibility to benefit from a program. For example, is an individual eligible to receive a targeted cash
transfer or to buy food at below market rates? In an application based program, where individual
applicants provide information to an agency in order to qualify for benefits, it may be more efficient
to capture the information required by multiple programs at the same time. With this in mind,
Governments in MENA are seeking to establish “social registries,” which refers to databases with
socio-economic information needed to determine the eligibility of individuals for the benefits of
different social programs. Social registries reduce transaction costs and allow for better monitoring of
the overall set of social programs aimed at the poor. However, many challenges remain, especially in
terms of design and implementation (how to best develop the social registry, data access, etc.).

A related challenge is the fact that SSNs in MENA countries have been shown to be poorly targeted.
SSNs that are meant to target the poorest have little success in reaching their target. The share of the
population in the bottom income quintile that is reached varies widely across countries. On average,
this percentage is lower in MENA than in other regions of the world. Probably because of capacity
constraints and lack of statistical data, most MENA countries use categorical and geographical
targeting, which is only adequate when poverty is clearly linked to observable characteristics. When
properly designed, such designs have been effective in reaching larger segments of the targeted
population; they however tend to be fiscally costly, especially when they need to be expanded in time
of crisis.



Background, objectives and target audience of the activity
The World Bank’s MENA Community of Practice (CoP) on Employment and SSNs facilitates
knowledge exchanges related to the design and implementation of employment and SSN programs.
Similarly, the Center for Mediterranean Integration (CMI) Employment and Social Protection
Program, which is being co-managed by the World Bank’s Social Protection and Labor Global Practice
and the French Development Agency (AfD), seeks to promote knowledge sharing and capacity
building in employment and social protection topics of importance for MENA countries. As part of

                                                                                                         2
the activities of the MENA CoP and the CMI program, the World Bank together with AFD organized
a knowledge sharing and capacity building activity on the establishment of integrated SP systems.

The first part of this activity consisted of a two-day technical workshop in Marseille. The purpose of
this workshop was to share emerging knowledge on the building blocks of an integrated SP system,
in order to improve the delivery of social services. In particular, the activity focused on key concepts
and international experiences of robust identification systems, social registries and Management
Information Systems (MIS). The second part of this activity consisted of a two-day study tour to
Brussels, which complemented the workshop in Marseille and sought to bridge theory with practice
by exposing the same participants to an international best practice of identifying target populations of
Government programs (see Annex 1 for the activity’s agenda).

The target audience was composed of high-level technical government officials from Algeria, Egypt,
Djibouti, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia. A total of 18 government officials benefited from this activity
(see Annex 2 for the activity’s participants list).



Technical workshop in Marseille
The two-day technical workshop provided participants an overview of the main objectives and
elements of an integrated SP system. Leveraging international good practices, the workshop covered
topics ranging from ID systems to targeting, as well as the different design/implementation options
for reform available to policymakers. The workshop also allowed participants to share their ongoing
efforts to establish integrated SP systems, including the main challenges encountered and
opportunities moving forward.

The workshop started by highlighting the key features and challenges of SP in MENA. Countries in
the region spend significantly more on universal subsidies than on SSNs, which in turn are small,
fragmented and not well targeted. (See Figure 1 below).

Figure 1. Number of SSN programs by country




                                                                                                      3
Moreover, SSNs have a very low effect on poverty and inequality (see Figures 2 and 3 below).

Figures 2 and 3. Poverty impact of SSNs (left) and Inequality impact of SSNs (right)

                                                                                             0.40                                                   0.67%
                                                                                                                             2.09%         7.71%
                40%                                               2.17%                      0.35      0.49%     0.43%
                35%                                                                          0.30
                30%                                    17.42%




                                                                          Gini coefficient
                                   3.13%                                                     0.25
                        2.55%
                25%
 poverty rate




                                                                                             0.20
                20%                           8.99%
                                                                                             0.15
                15%
                                                                                             0.10
                10%
                 5%                                                                          0.05
                 0%                                                                          0.00
                      Egypt 2009 Iraq 2007   Jordan   West Bank   Yemen                             Egypt 2009 Iraq 2007     Jordan   West Bank    Yemen
                                             2010*     & Gaza      2005                                                      2010*     & Gaza       2005
                                                       2009                                                                            2009
                             Without SSN              With SSN
                                                                                                               Without SSN      With SSN



The workshop then introduced the concept of SP systems as a possible response to addressing some
of these challenges. During the presentation and the ensuing discussion, SP systems were defined as
“portfolios of coherent programs that can communicate with each other, often share administrative
sub-systems and work together to improve resilience, equity and opportunity.” SP systems operates
at three levels: the administration level, the policy level and the program level. At the administrative
level, promoting the development of SP systems requires the development of beneficiary identification
systems, social registries etc. At the program level, SP systems effectively promote the integration
within and across SP programs, by focusing on design and implementation issues ranging from
targeting to M&E. At the policy level, SP systems “ensure policy coherence attuning the entire
portfolio of SP&L programs to act coherently in delivering national goals and social contracts”
(Robalino, Rawlings, and Walker 2012) (See Figure 4)

Figure 4: Social Protection Systems: Three Levels of Operation




                                                                                                                                                            4
With this in mind, the workshop focused on the main concepts and implementation issues of setting
up the main building blocks of an SP system: ID systems, social registries, and MIS. The workshop
also highlighted the importance of developing these building blocks to improve targeting of SP
interventions.

In particular, the workshop included sessions on the following topics:

      Identification: identity is defined as a set of human attributes or characteristics (identifiers) that,
       once specified, narrow down all possible entities to one and no other. There are four main
       ways of establishing uniqueness: though the birth registry, biometrics, administrative
       procedures and social footprints. The biographic regime relies on attestable identifiers (such
       as name, date of birth, address, profession, etc.) while the biometric regime relies on
       characteristics of the human body (patterns) that can be imaged and used as attributes for
       identity.

       An identity registry is a collection of identities (database) that meet certain requirements: that
       the person exists, is unique and present only once in the registry, and whose identity is fixed
       for life and linkable. There are different types of identity registries, including civil registries,
       which contain information on births and deaths; national population registries, which
       constitute a repository of all legal identities recognized in the country; and program specific
       registries, which are identity databases containing information on clients or beneficiaries. A
       special variety of national population registries are household registries, which contain
       additional information that groups individuals into households. In practice, many of these
       household registries constitute social registries, as they contain information not only on
       household composition but also on socio-economic indicators (see Figure 5).

       A unique identity number (UIN) constitutes the “superlink” between databases, as it allows
       programs to have a holistic view of services delivered to each individual.

   Figure 5. Social registries




                                                                                                            5
   Social registries and MIS systems as two core elements of a SP system: a social registry is defined as a
    repository of information about potential beneficiaries for multiple social assistance programs
    that share common population of interest, but not necessarily same eligibility approach. It
    enables SSN programs administrators to identify families (households) or individuals who fit
    their program eligibility criteria. It also helps disseminate information, lowers beneficiary
    transaction costs, and improves efficiency. An MIS is defined as a platform through which
    program information travels across different institutional levels for operational, monitoring
    and accountability purposes. Among these purposes, an MIS supports data management for
    program processes transforming data into useful information; supports management of
    information regarding services provided, and supports coordination and information flows
    across multiple programs and sectors.

   Modernization of SP systems through institutional reforms and MIS projects: once the building blocks of
    an SP system are in place, institutional reforms must take place to operationalize the system,
    and thus improve coordination of policies and promote more efficient institutions, all while
    using better tools and systems and making a better use of data. Institutional reforms require
    considering several issues, including functional responsibilities (horizontal organization),
    regional service delivery (vertical organization), institutional capacity, synergies with other
    agencies, business processes, ICT function (as a distinct area of operation), HR function,
    gaining support of stakeholders (internal & external), as well as defining what type of MIS is
    needed and why. In order to implement an MIS, the aspects that need to be taken into account
    are the reasons for having an MIS, its scope, estimated institutional impact, benefits, internal
    and external resources and expertise that are needed, cost estimate and timeline of its
    development, as well as the cost of on-going systems operation and maintenance.

   Targeting: one of the purposes of building registries and MIS is to improve targeting and thus
    allow for a more efficient use of resources. As such, the workshop presented targeting
    practices and methodologies that help improve cost-effectiveness of interventions by
    channeling resources for a target group, and allow to equalize quality or provide enriched
    quality to demand-constraint households. Targeting is never perfect and it can lead to both
    inclusion and exclusion errors. In order to address these errors, a fine balance between the
    costs of accuracy and errors and the goals of targeting is needed. There are several targeting
    methods, including geographical, categorical, and community-based and (proxy) means-test
    (see Figure 6).




                                                                                                          6
Figure 6. Targeting methods




       When choosing targeting methods, several considerations need to be made. First, while most
       methods are applicable for all programs, no one size fits all and mixed methods provides better
       outcomes. Second, it is important to consider that targeting costs are larger when launching
       but decrease over time and that each method has a different cost (for example, means tests
       and PMT have larger costs than other methods). Experience shows that on average targeting
       cost is 4% of total program costs; but it can range from 25 to 75% of total administrative
       costs, which is often lower than 10% of program costs. Third, transparency and consistency
       need to be promoted, by making a clear and consistent application of centralized criteria and
       avoiding political interference and manipulation by frontline officials and beneficiaries.
       Fourth, targeting must foster a maximum inclusion of the poor with on-going access to the
       registry, as well as a minimum leakage to the non-poor. Regarding implementation of targeting,
       the key issues are outreach, the grievance and appeal mechanism as well as the MIS system.
       The combination of several targeting methods may improve targeting accuracy. No matter
       which combination, implementation is key to attain good results.

       Independent of the chosen targeting method, a registry may be used for different programs
       with different cut-off points (see Figure 7).




                                                                                                    7
Figure 7. Registry used for several programs with different cut-off points




      Country case studies: to conclude, the workshop presented country case studies (see Figure 8)
       with different levels of integration (program, social assistance, SP sector, cross-sector) and
       different purposes and uses of this integration (coordination, oversight and M&E; targeting;
       other operations and services).

Figure 8. Breadth and Depth of Integration




       The case of Kenya shows social assistance sector integration for the purpose of coordination,
       oversight and program monitoring. Indonesia also has sector integration designed with the
       objective of harmonizing targeting the Data Terpadu (BDT) or Unified Data Base (UDB).
       South Africa also has sector integration for the purpose of achieving operational effectiveness.
       Brazil, Chile and Turkey show cross sector integration that allows these countries to achieve
       operational effectiveness and efficiency. Moreover, the case of Brazil evidences consolidated
       targeting efforts, as the country has a single registry called “Cadastro Único”.

      ILO’s approach on implementing social protection floors: ILO representatives presented the concepts
       of social protection floor and single window service. They also provided country case examples



                                                                                                        8
        of countries where these policies have been implemented, including Cambodia, Indonesia and
        Mongolia.



Study tour to Belgium
The study tour complemented the workshop in Marseille and sought to bridge theory with practice
by exposing the same participants to an international best practice of identifying target populations of
Government programs. In particular, the Belgian system of individual identification has a unique ID
for individuals that allows to verify their identity while making it possible for social programs to have
information about the socio-economic status of the individual (through inter-operable interphases
with other datasets, such as those of social security and taxes). The system in Belgium also has an
electronic ID (e-ID) that allows performing transactions electronically (such as registration, ID
verification, and payments). The objective of the two-day study tour to Belgium was to learn about
the Belgium model of identification and how such a model can be adapted by participating
government officials in their respective countries.

In particular, the main aspects that were discussed during the study tour were the following:

       The eID in the context of the Belgian e-government strategy: aligned with the European Commission’s
        E-Government Action Plan 2011-2015, the Belgian e-government strategy seeks the
        empowerment of the Belgian society within the EU context. It focuses on customers (citizens,
        industry and public sector), interoperability through a service-oriented architecture that
        promotes collaboration between different levels of government, enhanced e-skills through
        collaboration with the private sector, the provision of a catalogue of services and an increased
        management efficiency. The eID card has several functionalities which range from access to
        healthcare, filing taxes, registering a birth and obtaining a driver’s license or a student card to
        home banking and e-commerce (see Figure 9).

Figure 9. Applications of the eID card




                                                                                                         9
   eIDs as an opportunity to secure and further boost the electronic society: the eID card allows the physical
    identification of a citizen, data capture, as well as authentication and digital signature. It holds
    two citizen’s cryptographic key pairs in which the underlying principles are those of
    authentication and electronic signature.

   Identity management in Belgium: the population registries have existed since 1846 and were created
    to facilitate the first population census. They are managed at the municipality level and are
    based on civil status records. The identity card has its origins in the German occupation during
    First World War and is considered as a certificate of inscription in the population registries.
    The National Registry was created in 1968 and includes a combination of identification and
    localization information about the persons registered in the population registries as well as the
    Belgians registered in a Belgian consular post or diplomatic mission abroad. Its objectives are
    to facilitate information exchange, enable automatic update of public databases, rationalize the
    municipal management of population registers and simplify administrative procedures for
    citizens. A unique identification number is given to each person at the initial registration. It is
    composed by 11 digits, of which the first six are the person’s date of birth, the following 3 are
    a series number that identifies the person born on the same day and also gives an indication
    of the gender, and the final 2 digits are control number allowing to verify this number. There
    are three main types of identification cards in Belgium: the eID card (for Belgian citizens), the
    kidsID (for children under 12) and the ERP (or electronic residence permit, for non-Belgian
    residents).

   Interoperability in the European context: interoperability aims at developing synergies among
    institutions, unlocking data across sectors, sharing services and solutions as well as optimizing
    and simplifying across ministerial boundaries (see Figure 10).

Figure 10. Interoperability. Main principles and impact on society




                                                                                                            10
       Interoperability has an important economic impact as it can generate high GDP savings (e.g.
       €2.75 billion in Spain). At the EU level, the Interoperability Solutions for European public
       Administrations, businesses and citizens (ISA) program facilitates efficient and effective
       electronic cross-border or cross-sector interaction between European public administrations
       and between them and citizens and businesses. Interoperability also enables access to different
       registries in the context of the European Interoperability Framework, which aims to promote
       and support the delivery of European public services by fostering cross-border and cross-
       sectoral interoperability, guide public administrations in their work to provide European
       public services to businesses and citizens as well as complement and tie together national
       interoperability frameworks at European level.

      The production process of the eID card: the study tour also included a visit to Zetes Cards, the
       company that produces the eID cards, where participants attended a presentation on the e-
       ID/E-passport secure production processes as well as a guided tour of the factory. The
       production process involves coordination and interaction among different actors, which
       include the citizen, the municipality, the card producer, the national registry as well as the
       certification authority (see Figure 11).

   Figure 11. The production process of the eID card




Main messages and conclusions
The main messages and conclusions of the four-day activity, including both the workshop in Marseille
and the study tour in Brussels, are the following:




                                                                                                    11
       SP systems enhance integration, efficiency, and effectiveness of available programs. They also
        involve substantive implementation challenges. In this context, institutional arrangements to
        develop SP systems are fundamental, as they as they help to define roles and responsibilities
        and are thus critical to ensure coordination.
       ID systems are a critical element of SP systems, but their development is part of a larger
        development agenda.
       The Belgian eID system is an example of how a robust identification system can help achieve
        system integration as well as interoperability of different databases.
       The development of social registries is part of a coherent strategy to reach the desired
        population. However, there is not a single approach to develop social registries.
       Social registries are not MIS systems, but they are both core elements of an integrated SP
        system.
       Universality and targeting are not incompatible concepts.
       There is not a single approach to targeting. Targeting practices at the program level need to be
        revised and evaluated periodically.
       Different programs can use a similar registry but use different cut-off points.

Participants’ evaluation
The activity was subject to an evaluation to assess participants’ satisfaction, and included questions on
both quality and relevance of content.

The results of the evaluations show 100% of participants considered both the workshop in Marseille
and the study tour in Brussels useful. Similarly, 100% and 87% of the participants, respectively, rated
the workshop and the study as relevant.




                                     Annex I: Activity’s Agenda

                                                                                                      12
                  Building Integrated Social Protection (SP) Delivery Systems
                                  Marseille, France & Brussels, Belgium
                                            March 23-27, 2015

The first part of this activity consists of a two-day technical workshop in Marseille. The purpose of this
workshop is to share emerging knowledge on the building blocks of an integrated SP system, in order to
improve the delivery of social services. In particular, the activity will focus on key concepts and
international experiences in the establishing of robust identification systems, social registries and
Management Information Systems (MIS). The second part of this activity consists of a two-day study tour
to Brussels, which complements the workshop in Marseille and seeks to bridge theory with practice by
exposing the same participants to an international best practice of identifying target populations of
Government programs.


                                               AGENDA


                                        Monday, March 23, 2015

08h 30 – 09h 00    Registration

09h 00 – 09h 30    Welcoming Remarks & Presentations
                   Mourad Ezzine, Manager, Center for Mediterranean Integration
                   Marie-Pierre Nicollet, Head, Mediterranean Department, French Development
                       Agency
                   Gustavo Demarco, Program Leader, Social Protection & Labor Global Practice, World
                       Bank

09h 30 – 10h 15    SP in MENA: key features and challenges (15 minutes)
                   Gustavo Demarco, Program Leader, Social Protection & Labor Global Practice, World
        Bank

                    Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

10h 15 – 11h 00    SP Delivery Systems: objectives, elements, & trends (15 minutes)
                   Diego Angel-Urdinola, Sr. Economist, World Bank

                    Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

11h 00 – 11h 15     Coffee Break



                                                                                                       13
11h 15 – 12h:15   Group session discussion: Ongoing efforts and challenges to establish integrated
SP systems
                  Participating Delegations

12h 15 – 13h:00   Comprehensive mechanisms to develop, coordinate implementation and deliver
                  social protection floors – an ILO perspective (15 minutes)
                  Valerie Schmitt, Chief, Social Policy, Governance and Standards Branch, Social
                  Protection Department, ILO
                  Thibault van Langenhove, Social Protection Consultant, ILO

                  Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

13h 00 – 14h 30   Lunch

14h 30 – 15h 30   Robust Identification System as a Foundation for the Efficient Administration
of SP
                  Programs (30 minutes)
                  Joseph Atick, International Expert

                  Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

15h 30 – 16h 00   Coffee Break

16h 00 – 17h 00   Social Registry and MIS for SP Delivery Systems: key concepts and country
                  Experiences (30 minutes)
                  Philippe Leite, Sr. Social Protection Economist, World Bank

                  Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

19h 00 – 21h 00   Group Dinner


                                        Tuesday, March 24, 2015


09h 00 – 10h 00   Institutional Reform and Implementation Issues: key concepts and country
                  experiences (30 minutes)
                  Oleksiy A. Sluchynskyy, Sr. Economist, World Bank

                  Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

10h 00 – 11h 00   Targeting (30 minutes)
                  Andrei Tretyak, Head of the Social Protection Unit, Social Protection and
                  Employment Department, Expertise France


                                                                                                  14
                   Philippe Leite, Sr. Social Protection Economist, World Bank

                   Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

11h 00 – 11h 15    Coffee Break

11h15 - 12h 15     Putting it all Together: Country Case (30 minutes)
                   Emil Tesliuc, Senior Economist, World Bank

                    Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

12h 15 - 13h 00    Country case studies on coordinated implementation of social protection floors:
                   Indonesia, Mongolia, and others (15 minutes)
                   Thibault van Langenhove, Social Protection Consultant, ILO
                   Valerie Schmitt, Chief, Social Policy, Governance and Standards Branch, Social
                   Protection Department, ILO

                    Discussion and Q&A (30 minutes)

13h 00 – 14h 30    Lunch

14h 30 – 16h 00    Panel Discussion: What’s next for MENA?
                   Participating Country Delegations
                   Gustavo Demarco, Program Leader, Social Protection & Labor Global Practice,
                   World Bank
                   Pierre Salignon, Project Manager, Health and Social Protection Unit, AfD

                   Moderator: Diego Angel-Urdinola, Sr. Economist, World Bank

16h 00 – 17h 00     Concluding Remarks & Closing Ceremony


                                       Wednesday, March 25, 2015

Trip from Marseille to Brussels


                                        Thursday, March 26, 2015

09h 30 – 12h 30    FEDICT: Presentation of the Federal Public Service organization.
                   Mr. Frank Leyman, Manager International Relations

                       Belgian eGovernment strategy
                       Role of the eID
                       Interoperability approach

                                                                                                 15
                     Link with Europe

12h 30 – 14h 00   Lunch

14h 00 – 16h 00   Ministry of Interior: Presentation of the National Register activities.
                  Mr. Peter Grouwels

16h 00 – 18h 00   European Commission: DG DIGIT
                  Mrs. M. Abecasis

                     Interoperability - enabler of public sector modernization
                     "business case" of interoperability between public administrations
                     the EIF and the situation in the EU Member States
                     Catalogue of Services and linking with semantics
                     Open data
                     Sharing and re-use of solutions and services.

20h 00 – 22h 00   Group Dinner


                                      Friday, March 27, 2015

10h 00 – 13h 00   Zetes Cards: presentation of activities & visit of perso & logistics.
                  Mr Ronny Depoortere or Mr Erwin Vermoesen

                     introduction to ZETES
                     presentation of the e-ID/E-passport secure production processes and guided tour in the
                      factory.

13h 00 – 14h 30   Lunch at Zetes

14h 30 – 15h 30   FEDICT: presentation and demos on Mobile ID + mobile signature
                  Mr. Bart Renard

15h30 – 16h00     Coffee Break

16h00 – 17h00     FEDICT: security aspects around eID: all you need to know about certificates
                  Mr. Olivier Delos

17h00 – 17h30     Closing




                                                                                                     16
                                                       Annex II: List of Participants



Country    Name                                Title
Algeria    M. Abdelaziz Lahlou                 Directeur, Ministère de la Solidarité Nationale, de la Famille et de la Condition de la Femme
Algeria    M. Nourreddine Merkiche             Directeur des Etudes et de la Planification à l'Agence de Développement Social
Algeria    M. Achour Benkerrou                 Directeur des Etudes et des Systèmes d'information, Agence Nationale de Gestion du Microcrédit
Djibouti   Mme. Mouna Ahmed Ragueh             Chef de Service du Programme de Filets Sociaux
Djibouti   M. Abdoulaziz Abdillahi Mohamed     Cadre à la Solidarité Nationale
Egypt      Eng. Mohamed Hammam                 Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation
Egypt      Eng. Medhat Massoud                 General Manager for the Human and community central sector, Social Fund for Development
                                               Family Smart Cards Project General Manager, Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative
Egypt      Dr. Magdy el Hennawy                Development
Jordan     Ms. Hana Abed Muflih Alkharabsheh   National Aid Fund
Jordan     Ms. Zein Ahmad Ibrahim Soufan       Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation
Morocco    Mme. Asmae Ibnattya Andaloussi      Chargé de Mission auprès du Chef du Gouvernement
Morocco    M. Mohamed Mahdad                   Directeur de la Gouvernance, MAGG
                                               Chef de la division des Systèmes d'Information à la Direction des Systèmes d'Information, Ministère de
Morocco    M. Omar El Alami                    l'Intérieur
                                               Ingénieur Général, chargée de mission auprès de M. Le Wali Secrétaire Général, Ministère de
Morocco    Mme Amina Benomar                   l'Intérieur
Morocco    M. Abdelhak Harrak                  Gouverneur Systèmes d'Information et de Communication, Ministère de l'Intérieur
Morocco    M. Hassan Aghmari                   Gouverneur Directeur des Elections, Ministère de l'Intérieur
Tunisia    M. Abdelfattah Abid                 Directeur Général, Direction Générale de la Promotion Sociale, Ministère des Affaires Sociales
Tunisia    M. Anouar Zarrouk                   Sous-directeur à la DG des affaires économiques et sociales à la présidence du gouvernement




                                                                                                                                                    17
