Enhancing competitiveness

              in Sri Lanka




                  June 2016
Foreword
While growth in Sri Lanka has been high over the past few years, is has stemmed from non-tradable
sectors (mainly construction and real estate) and is thus both unsustainable and unequitable. At the
same time economic activities have been mainly focused on domestic demand. While Sri Lanka was one
of the most open Asian economies in the 1970s, restrictive trade policies over the past decades have
created an anti-export bias, which has reduced the incentives of local firms to export. The existing
exports basket has been stale and is highly concentrated in garments and labor-intensive activities.

Shortcomings in the investment climate have limited the growth potential of established firms, while
creating strong incentives for informality - which in turn has stunted private sector growth and poses a
drag on competitiveness of the Sri Lankan economy. At the same time, Sri Lanka has attracted a much
lower volume of FDI (as a proportion of GDP) than peer economies, reducing the ability of the country to
enhance trade and improve production processes. In turn, the disappointing FDI trends stem from a host
of factors, including legal and procedural obstacles for foreign investors, lack of predictability in laws and
regulations, and deficiencies in mechanisms to attract, retain and integrate foreign investment.

In spite of shortcomings in the enabling environment, Sri Lanka has a vibrant, but nascent sector of
highly innovative startups and export-oriented SMEs. Unleashing the potential of these enterprises
requires not only addressing the investment climate obstacles, but also putting in place mechanisms to
support entrepreneurship, technology adoption and better align the R&D system to respond to the
needs of the private sector.

Going forward, as Sri Lanka aspires to become a higher middle income economy driven by higher added
value exports, major reforms will be required in its investment climate; investment, innovation and
trade policies and the efficiency of the institutions governing the activities of domestic and foreign firms.

In order to identify the most important obstacles to competitiveness in the areas mentioned above, the
World Bank Group has conducted various pieces of diagnostic and just-in-time technical assistance
aimed at providing details on specific reforms needed in laws, regulations and institutional
arrangements. This note summarizes the main findings of this work and outlines options for
implementation of reforms needed.
Acknowledgements
The World Bank Group would like to extend its highest appreciation for the productive and engaged
collaboration of the Government of Sri Lanka throughout the work reflected in this report. In particular
we would like to thank the Ministry of Development Strategies, Agency for Development, Board of
Investment and Central Bank of Sri Lanka for tireless efforts and genuine commitment to addressing the
obstacles constraining the competitiveness of Sri Lankan’s businesses and entrepreneurs.

The technical assistance and diagnostic work conducted by the World Bank Group during this work was
made possible by the assistance of the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT)
through a grant through the Investment Policy and Related Areas (SPIRA) program. The diagnostic work
on innovation and entrepreneurship was supported by a grant allocation from infoDev’s Climate
Technology Program.

This document was prepared by a team led by Emanuel Salinas (Program Leader, Growth and
Competitiveness) and Michael Engman (Senior Economist, Trade and Competitiveness). The document
includes contributions as follows: Investment Climate - Sylvia Solf (Global Lead, Investment Climate) and
Karim Belayachi (Senior Private Sector Development Specialist). Trade Policy – Sanjay Kathuria (Lead
Economist), Priya Mathur (Consultant) and Sriyani Hulugalle (Senior Economist). Trade Facilitation –
Ankur Huria (Senior Private Sector Specialist), Hafiz Zainudeen (Operations Officer). Investment Policy –
Roberto Echandi (Global Lead, Investment Policy), Robert Whyte (Senior Investment Policy Specialist),
Priyanka Kher (Private Sector Development Specialist), Persephone Economou (Private Sector
Development Specialist), Hania Kronfol (Investment Policy Officer), Jan Erik von Uexkull (Senior
Economist), Kishan Abeygunawardana (Economist), Ralph van Doorn (Senior Economist). Innovation and
Entrepreneurship – Natasha Kapil (Senior Innovation Specialist). Rathnija Arandara (Operations Officer,
IFC), Shanuki Gunasekara (Analyst, IFC) provided invaluable guidance on the private sector to the team.
Dinesha Samaranayake provided analytical support throughout this task.

Priyanka Coorey (Senior Investment Officer, IFC) and Heba Mahmoud Mokhtar Shamseldin (Lead Private
Sector Development Specialist) peer-reviewed this report.
Table of contents
ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS IN SRI LANKA                                      1

FOREWORD                                                                    2

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                            3

INTRODUCTION. ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS IN SRI LANKA                        5

1. ENHANCING THE INVESTMENT CLIMATE                                         8
THE WAY FORWARD: AN INVESTMENT CLIMATE REFORM AGENDA                       11

2. ESTABLISHING TRADE-ENABLING POLICIES                                    14
OPPORTUNITIES FOR REVITALIZED TRADE                                        15
RETHINKING TRADE POLICY: REFORM PRIORITIES                                 15

3. IMPROVING TRADE FACILITATION                                            19
TOWARDS A LONG-TERM REFORM AGENDA FOR TRADE FACILITATION                   21

4. FACILITATING THE ATTRACTION AND RETENTION OF EFFICIENCY-ENHANCING FDI   23
ARTICULATING AN INVESTMENT POLICY TO GUIDE THE COUNTRY’S EFFORTS           26
STRENGTHENING INVESTMENT PROMOTION                                         27
STREAMLINING INVESTMENT ENTRY PROCESSES                                    29
IMPROVING INVESTMENT RETENTION THROUGH ENHANCING INVESTORS’ CONFIDENCE     31
STRENGTHENING THE EFFICACY OF INVESTMENT INCENTIVES                        32

5. ENHANCING INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP                               35
ENABLING EXPORT ORIENTED SMES                                              36
ENABLING AND SCALING GROWTH ORIENTED START-UPS                             36
UPGRADING AND RATIONALIZING THE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT SECTOR            37
TOWARDS A REFORM IN INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP                        38
Introduction. Enhancing competitiveness in Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka needs to address new challenges if it is to sustain its strong record of economic growth and
poverty reduction. The country has in many respects been a development success story, with average
growth exceeding 6 percent and a threefold decline in poverty using the national poverty line over the
past 10 years1. However, low productivity, high reliance on non-tradable sectors and a stale export
basket highlight the need to enhance private sector competitiveness as a way to create one million new
jobs.

The GoSL has recognized the need to adopt a policy agenda that strengthens the competitiveness of
the country’s private sector in order to achieve inclusive and sustainable growth. Recent government
vision statements2 have identified the need for a revision of trade and investment policies coupled with
reforms that promote innovation, entrepreneurship and skills formation, as needed to propel Sri Lanka
to upper-middle-income status. The Government’s vision recognizes that while the economy has grown
rapidly in the last decade, the dominance of non-tradable sectors as drivers of economic growth is
unlikely to remain adequate for inclusive and sustainable growth in the coming decade. Authorities have
identified the need to strengthen competitiveness not only in traditional sectors such as apparel, natural
resources transformation, and tourism but also to establish the necessary conditions for a thriving
knowledge economy, the integration of productive local companies in global value chains, and the
attainment of higher value addition in the manufacturing sector.

Figure 1: Post-war sources of growth, 2010-15
                                                 16

                                                 14                                                             Other personal
    Contribution to growth 2010-2015 (percent)




                                                                         Transportation &
                                                                                                                   services
                                                                           warehousing
                                                 12                                                Wholesale & retail                            Construction
                                                                                                        trade
                                                 10                                                                                              Financial services
                                                                                                                                 Real estate and
                                                                                                                               ownership of dwelling
                                                  8

                                                  6                                 F& B and tobacco
                                                               Other industry           Other agricultural
                                                  4                                          Other services                     Mining & quarrying
                                                         Health, residential
                                                         care & social work                  Professional servicesAccommodation, food
                                                  2                     Education
                                                       Textiles & leather                                          & beverage services
                                                                                                  Marine fishing
                                                   0                         Rice
                   -10                           Tea (Green
                                                      0     leaves)
                                                                10         20           30          40         50         60           70         80         90
                                                  -2
                                                                                    Growth 2010-2015 (percent)
Note: Size of bubble indicates gross value added of each sector in total gross value added.
Source: DCS, staff calculations


1
 Source: World Bank, Systematic Country Diagnostic
2
 Including the Prime Minister’s vision speech in November 4, 2015 as well as the speech by the Minister of Finance during the
                                                                 th
presentation of the national budget to Parliament on November 20 , 2015.
The new Government has emphasized the need to realize Sri Lanka’s trade potential as a way to
accelerate the transformation of the economy and generate new and more attractive opportunities
for Sri Lanka’s labor force. While many Asian economies benefitted from the opportunities created by
trade, FDI and regional integration, Sri Lanka has largely failed to capitalize on similar opportunities. In
the last few years Sri Lanka experienced significant growth in some export-oriented industries (notably
garments, where the industry has moved from a commodity exports model to higher-value added
production) and there are high growth companies in the nascent service sector (including information
and communication technology, ICT). The dynamism of these sectors demonstrates the potential to
successfully access and compete in foreign markets, but success stories remain few and relatively
isolated. Exports are mainly generated by a handful of industries and there has been little change over
time compared to many other Asian countries (figure 2). Moreover, Sri Lankan exports remain largely
linked to low added-value labor and resource-intensive products. Exploiting the value of Sri Lanka’s
natural resources (both in manufacturing and services) has proved elusive: tea and rubber remain
commodity industries; fisheries suffer from lack of adequate value addition capacity and
mismanagement of stocks; and tourism remains a low-added value sector hampered by lack of skills and
investment. The Government is seeking to shift towards greater outward orientation, particularly
through the creation of an agency to develop a new trade policy (Agency for Development) and
negotiating a deeper trade agreement with India while negotiating a free trade agreement with China.
Figure 2. Product space comparison: Sri Lanka vs Thailand in 1980 and 2009
Product Space in Sri Lanka, 1980                     Product Space in Thailand, 1980




Product Space in Sri Lanka, 2009                        Product Space in Thailand, 2009




Source: Atlas of Complexity


Unleashing the competitiveness potential of Sri Lankan enterprises will require addressing a wide
range of factors. These factors include basic foundations such as macroeconomic sustainability, a well-
functioning financial sector; strong governance and an education system that produces the degrees and
skills that in demand. Beyond those basic foundations, this note focuses on opportunities to improve
areas directly impacting the competitiveness of the private sector, including streamlining the regulations
governing the activities of the private sector to reduce the cost of doing business; strengthening trade
policies to eliminate biases against exports; enhancing trade facilitation to reduce the costs and time it
takes to export; enhancing the ability of the country to attract, retain and integrate FDI; enhancing
innovation and entrepreneurship and strengthening accessibility to financial services.

Figure 3. Factors enabling private sector competitiveness




                                   Sustainable growth
                                Export-oriented economy
                             Creation of more and better jobs

  Enhancing            Development             Improving             Facilitating        Supporting
  investment             of trade-                trade            the attraction        innovation
    climate              enabling              facilitation        and retention
                         policies                                   of efficiency-
                                                                     enhancing
                                                                         FDI
      1. Enhancing the investment climate3
A more conducive investment climate would help to increase the competitiveness of Sri Lanka’s
private sector. At the present time, the investment climate in Sri Lanka compares unfavorably to that of
other economies in the region. While Sri Lanka has implemented some reforms in recent years, the pace
of reform has been slower than among peers and the country lacked a clear vision with regards to
investment climate as well as strategic direction to guide reform priorities.


    Figure 4: Doing Business benchmarks 2016 (higher ranking implies lower comparative performance)



                                       Enforcing Contracts
                                          200
                 Protecting Minority
                                                             Paying Taxes
                      Investors            150
                                           100
            Dealing with                                                                                    Malaysia
                                                                     Registering Property
         Construction Permits               50
                                                                                                            Singapore
                                              0
                                                                                                            Sri Lanka
               Trading Across
                                                                     Starting a Business                    Thailand
                  Borders


                Resolving Insolvency                         Getting Electricity

                                          Getting Credit




Source: World Bank Doing Business 2016

The government of Sri Lanka has recognized these limitations and identified regulatory barriers as key
factors for a floundering private sector. The GoSL recognizes that entrepreneurs constantly highlight
high transaction costs in in compliance of regulations, creating incentive for them to conduct business
informally. This is consistent with the findings of the World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic for Sri
Lanka, which identified governance as a cross cutting challenge noting that the most prominent manner
in which governance acts as a constraint is in how the state carries out regulatory functions for the
economy.4

In Sri Lanka the dense web of business regulations have multidimensional effect on business growth .
High transaction costs involved with regulatory compliance discourage the creation of new firms and
limit the growth of exiting firms. When the entry barriers to the market are extremely high

3
  This section draws from the Doing Business Reform Memorandum (2015) led by Sylvia Solf (Global Lead, Investment Climate)
and Karim Belayachi (Senior Private Sector Development Specialist) and ongoing technical assistance provided by the World
Bank Group.
4
  In particular, the SCD identifies systemic issues in tax and land regulation as the top governance constraints
entrepreneurs are induced to operate informally which leads to unfair competition. Informality further
reduces the ability for firm growth and undermines productivity due, inter alia to limited investment,
limited access to finance and inadequate business processes. On the other hand, the government too
incurs high monitoring costs in its attempt to police market actors. This further leads to irregularities in
the written law and its application as it will enhance government officials and politicians discretionary
power with regards to market related decisions thereby paving the way for waste and corruption.

Regulatory issues created incentives for informality and affected firm productivity. According to firms
surveyed5, this is due to a large extent to difficulties in complying with regulations, fees, transaction
costs and lack of confidence on regulatory agencies. This is consistent with the findings of the World
Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic, which highlighted the fact that regulatory issues have stunted the
growth of Sri Lanka’s formal sector, which have in turn has been a drag on firms’ productivity. Indeed,
informality is a major obstacle in itself for businesses’ growth (for example by reducing informal
businesses’ ability to obtain financing). But it also has a negative impact on the economy as a whole: the
growth of formal businesses is hampered by unfair competition with informal ones. In Sri Lanka, formal
firms surveyed identified informality as the single most important factor constraining their growth.


Figure 5. Informality in South Asia                              Figure 6. Obstacles to formality
    100%                                                   2.5    30.0
     90%
     80%                                                   2      25.0
     70%
     60%                                                   1.5    20.0
     50%
                                                                  15.0
     40%                                                   1
     30%                                                          10.0
     20%                                                   0.5
     10%                                                           5.0
      0%                                                   0
                                                                   0.0
                                                                                                      Pakistan




                                                                                                                                                 Malaysia
                                                                                                                 South Asia


                                                                                                                                         India




                                                                                                                                                                                 Bhutan
                                                                                                                                                                                          Vietnam
                                                                            Afghanistan




                                                                                                                                                            Nepal
                                                                                          Sri Lanka




                                                                                                                                                                    Bangladesh
                                                                                                                              Thailand




            Percent of firms formally registered when
            they started operations in the country (left
            axis)                                                        Percent of firms identifying business licensing
            Number of years firm operated without
            formal registration (right axis)                             and permits as a major constraint


Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys                            Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys




5
  Source: World Bank Business Environment Enterprise Surveys (www.enterprisesurveys.org). The latest countrywide survey
was conducted in 2011. Recent consultations with chambers of commerce and private sector confirm that the findings of the
survey remain relevant.
                                  Figure 7. Major obstacles to growth




Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys

Box 1. New license and closure fees a major step in the wrong direction

The recent introduction of Annual License Fees for private companies together with the introduction
of business closure fees significantly increase the level of difficulty of the investment climate in Sri
Lanka and have the potential to create major negative effects throughout the economy and
significantly enhance incentives for informality.

These new fees are as follows: A) Every company registered with the Registrar of Companies (RoC)
will be subject to an Annual License Fee of Rs. 60,000 for private companies, Rs. 500,000 for Publicly
Quoted Companies and Rs.100,000 for other companies. B) A fee of Rs. 250,000 would be levied by
the RoC for the voluntary cancelation of business registration or liquidation.

The introduction of these charges is a move in the opposite direction of that followed by the countries
with the best investment climate, which have sought to reduce the costs of regulatory compliance.
These fees will likely increase incentives for informality and discourage entrepreneurship in the
country.

Going forward as the country seeks to improve its investment climate it will be necessary to ex ante
the adverse impact to enterprises of further regulatory changes.
The way forward: An investment climate reform agenda

Enhancing the investment climate in Sri Lanka will require addressing a wide range of shortcomings
across all areas of business regulation. A recent diagnostic undertaken by the World Bank6 identified
numerous areas of business regulation that currently represent unnecessary obstacles for new firms to
be established and for existing ones to grow. Annex 1 includes a table summarizing suggested reforms to
improve Sri Lanka’s ease of Doing Business.

Addressing these obstacles will require a well-defined program of reforms with an adequate
sequencing of actions and an institutional framework in place in order to lead reforms going forward .
Beyond the specific recommendations, success in strengthening the business environment in the
country will likely require a number of factors outlined in Figure 8 below and discussed subsequently.

    Figure 8. A framework for Investment Climate reform
                                                    Public - Private Dialogue to
                                                     identify reform priorities




                                                                                    Reform plans with clear
                          Evaluation of impact of
                                                                                   objectives, timeframes and
                                 reforms
                                                                                          accountability




                                      Full and consistent             Institutional arrangements
                                  implementation of reforms           to guide reform and ensure
                                      across the country               interagency collaboration




First, effective investment climate reform in Sri Lanka needs to be a continuous process responds to
the priorities identified by entrepreneurs. While Doing Business rankings provide a useful comparative
overview, it does not cover all areas of the investment climate that are challenging to enterprises. As the
Government of Sri Lanka embarks in strategies aimed at facilitating the economic transformation of the
country, it will be essential to develop Public-Private Dialogue to involve the active participation of the
private sector in identification of the most significant obstacles to their operations as a way to prioritize
reforms.

Second, investment climate reform will require the inception of well-defined plans that clarify the
objectives of the GoSL, timeframe for expected results and accountability. Reforming the investment
climate is a complex task as it involves revaluation of policies and procedures affecting a wide spectrum

6
  In response to GOSL’s renewed interest in investme nt climate reforms the WBG conducted a diagnostic by identifying
obstacles faced by entrepreneurs and provided a detailed set of recommendations for reforms. These recommendations
covered all areas of the Doing Business report. This diagnostic aimed at identifying the major obstacles faced by SMEs.
of governing bodies and require inter coordination among numerous implementing institutions.
Therefore, careful planning is necessary as it has the potential either to create positive synergies among
stakeholders or run the risk of creating silos due to the conflicting nature of interests in some of the
agencies involved. An ideal action plan would provide defined objectives for each identified
recommendation, with specific timelines, milestones and targets7. Time bound objectives create a sense
of urgency while providing adequate time to assess reform improvements. There are many factors in the
external environment as well as in the internal environment that could affect the expected time lines of
reform recommendations. Limitations pertaining to the agent’s capacity such as technology barriers or
limitations in human resources would not be as complex in nature in comparison to political, social or
cultural factors. Therefore, the strategic action plan should aim to identify these issues and challenges in
a timely manner and prepare for contingencies whenever possible. Further, responsible entities for each
reform area should be identified thus creating clear accountability mechanisms. It is also essential to
widely communicate the commitment of authorities towards the action plan as a mean of creating
credibility for defined actions among the stakeholders.

Third, adequate institutional arrangements will be required in order to ensure inter-agency
coordination. There are numerous ways to define institutional arrangements to organize reforms.
However, some common characteristics and functions are evident in most of the successful reforms
programs worldwide (see Box 2). Technical working groups consisting of key focal points from the public
agencies related to each one of the investment climate area together with professional experts from the
private sector will be responsible for developing and implementing detailed action plans by bringing in
expertise where needed. These working groups will operate at a granular level by identifying feasible
timelines and milestones for each reform activity. Appointment of an overall leading agency is also
important who will be in charge of pursuing the reforms and formally accountable for results. This layer
would be responsible for determining overall reform priorities and setting key performance indicators
while having direct link to the prime minister or the president to unblock implantation barriers,
obstacles and delays in a timely manner. Another very crucial element binding these two institutional
arrangements together are the secretariat or delivery units consisting of technical staff of relevant
reform climate areas that would also have direct reporting lines to the Prime Minister. This layer would
liaise among the technical level working groups, steering committee and the Prime Minister and would
ensure the timely delivery of day to day reform activities across all areas by providing quick solutions for
obstacles faced by the technical level working groups and also by escalating other issue to the
responsible parties as and when needed.

Finally, evaluation of results will be necessary in order to assess the implementation quality of the
reforms pursued by the government. After reforms take place in paper, the full and consistent
implementation of reforms across the country is essential in order to ensure equal opportunities for
entrepreneurs in all regions. In this regard, it will be important to assess the impact of reforms in order


7
 Evaluation mechanisms will also be useful to determine the extent to which the reforms intended are on track as per the
objectives laid down by the GoSL by reviewing the progress against milestones in the strategic plan. Early identification of
delays by the decision makers will ensure that corrective actions are taken where necessary to address sources of delays and
ensure that resources are used in the most effective and efficient manner.
to ensure that they have achieved the objective expected. Engagement of the private sector in assessing
the impact of reforms will also be necessary in order to ensure that reforms have the impact intended
and that their benefits are visible to enterprises and entrepreneurs.


Box 2. International experience in investment climate reform

International experience shows that countries that have successfully implemented business
regulatory reform programs across a number of areas have several features in common: strong
leadership, clear accountability mechanisms, an inclusive institutional setup, detailed implementation
plans with measurable goals which are monitored, private sector involvement and effective
communication with relevant stakeholders.

A number of governments have established high-level oversight committees that set the strategic
vision and priorities for reform, maintain reform momentum, and provide the political weight for
reform implementation. Technical working groups then lead implementation at the agency level.
These working groups generally designate a point person and ministry to take responsibility for and
lead coordination of the efforts of each group. The most successful technical committees have
representatives from all key agencies involved in a particular area, as well as knowledgeable members
of the private sector. The table below illustrates such different models and how responsibilities and
accountabilities can be assigned at different levels.


           Role                            Features                               Responsibilities
 Steering committee      -   Often public-private                     -   Determine overall priorities
                         -   Relevant ministries for investment       -   Setting Key Performance
                             climate reform agenda                        Indicators (KPI’s)
                         -   Direct periodic reporting PM or          -   Unblocking implementation
                             President (e.g. monthly, every 3             obstacles/delays together with
                             months)                                      PM / President
 Secretariat/ Delivery   -   Technical staff                          -   Day-to-day oversight of reform
 unit                    -   Direct reporting line to PM                  program across all areas
                         -   Liaise between technical level working   -   Monitoring of reform road-map
                             groups and steering committee or PM          and KPIs/ setting KPIs
                         -   Escalate key issues to steering          -   Ensure agenda setting, minutes,
                             committee or PM for action                   follow-up items, timelines
                                                                      -   Escalating issues
 Technical working       -   Key stakeholders from public agencies    -   Develop and implement detailed
 groups                      (e.g. focal points of relevant line          action plans bringing in expertise
                             ministries)                                  where needed (e.g. legal
                         -   Private sector; professional experts         assessments, proposals for legal
                             (lawyers, IT, accountants, architects,       amendments, IT assessments,
                             etc.)                                        budget proposals)
                         -   Frequent structured meetings (e.g. bi-   -   Develop timelines and
                             monthly)                                     milestones; clarify responsibilities
    2. Establishing trade-enabling policies8

Trade can be an engine of economic growth, job creation, and poverty reduction, particularly for a
small economy like Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka was a pioneer in trade liberalization among South Asian
countries, where export-oriented jobs were strong contributors to poverty reduction and inclusion.

Sri Lanka is less open to trade today than it was for most of the last 30 years. Before 1977, Sri Lanka’s
development strategy, based on import substitution, aimed to create a comprehensive welfare state.
Post-1977, reforms aimed to liberalize the foreign trade regime and Sri Lanka was seen as the first
country in South Asia to significantly open its borders to trade and foreign direct investment. In the
decades that followed, trade of goods and services increased to 89 percent of GDP in 2000, with tea and
high-end apparel exports leading the way. After the beginning of the new millennium, however, trade
steadily declined to 54 percent of GDP in 2013. The decline in openness and stagnating FDI took place
when the rest of the world was integrating more strongly and global trade was accelerating. Sri Lanka’s
world market share has consequently declined to levels last seen in the 1980s.

Overall export performance is mainly in unsophisticated product lines, notwithstanding the success of
some niche companies. Sri Lanka’s exports of manufactured goods per capita are only one-third and less
than half of other regional Middle Income Countries. Only around one-tenth of the exports are for skill-
and capital-intensive production with the rest being low-added value skills and resource intensive
products. IT exports tripled between 2007 and 2014, but still make up less than 4 percent of total
exports. Sri Lanka’s export performance highlights the huge untapped potential in the tradable sector. It
also implies that there are significant barriers holding back private creativity to realize the economic
potential of Sri Lanka’s relatively educated labor force. Additionally, the export product categories have
remained largely the same over two decades.

While there are many factors at play, inadequate trade policies have had a major impact on limiting
Sri Lanka’s trade competitiveness. First, stagnating product diversification and weak export
performance has come on the back of an industrial policy orientation in the past decade that does not
promote competition and aims to protect domestic industry (including promotion of domestic
agriculture through generous subsidies and guaranteed prices; and support for domestic industries with
specific tax breaks and tariff protection). Second, a high increase in para-tariffs has created a major anti-
export bias by significantly increasing nominal protection and prices of imports while; adding to trade
policy complexity (the combined system of the MFN applied tariff rate and the para-tariffs has made the
present import regime one of the most complex and protectionist in the world); leading to prices that
distort production and consumption patterns; creating incentives for producers to focus on domestic
markets rather than exports; and reducing potential for producers to join global value chains. Third, the
government has been interventionist, “tilting the playing field? in many areas through a web of tax and
trade policy incentives for a large number of domestic sectors and actors. Fourth, inadequate policies

8
 This section was prepared by Sanjay Kathuria (Lead Economist, Trade & Competitiveness) and Priya Mathur (Consultant, Trade
& Competitiveness).
have failed to achieve objectives, while having significant negative impact. This is the case of
introduction of high taxes on exports of raw materials (cesses) with the intention to incentivize value
addition (with revenues from cesses supposed to be then invested in R&D for the corresponding
sectors). While positive results of cesses have not been identified, they are largely deemed as having
contributed to stifle exports.

Opportunities for revitalized trade
Sri Lanka is strategically located and can leverage its locational advantage of geographical proximity to
the powerhouses in the world economy, and plug into their growth in order to fully unleash its own
growth potential.

Sri Lanka can leverage new opportunities, as well as address fresh challenges, emerging in global
trade. It is crucial for Sri Lanka to recognize the importance of harnessing regional synergies and
regional value chains toward unleashing its own growth potential. This is particularly important given
the slow-down in world trade and Sri Lanka’s traditional export markets – the US and EU. At the same
time, South Asia is now the fastest-growing region in the world, and presents a vast untapped
opportunity for Sri Lanka, and other countries in the region. The new trade policy framework needs to
address how Sri Lanka can best leverage opportunities provided by regional synergies, and the role that
Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) will play in that process.

Rethinking trade policy: Reform Priorities
Exports and imports are an outcome of cross-cutting policies, including tariffs, logistics, border
clearances, infrastructure and skills among others. Some of the key considerations in successful trade
reform are outlined below.

Tariffs are one of several instruments that affect the trade openness of the economy . Trade policy
reforms are more effective when other trade facilitation reforms - such as regulatory reforms for
reducing restrictiveness of trade-related regulations and minimizing non-tariff barriers to imports,
improving logistics services and reducing port clearance times - are also implemented. Welfare gains will
be maximized when structural transformation (implying growth of some sectors and relative decline of
others) is possible, which also requires mobility of capital and labor.

The objectives of the new trade policy should primarily consist of reducing its anti-export bias and
focusing on a more neutral regime across sectors/products. The introduction of para-tariffs during the
last decade has effectively doubled the protection rates (from an average MFN tariff rate of 13% to
average total nominal protection rate of 28% in 2013), making the present import regime one of the
most complex and protectionist in the world. Additionally, the para-tariffs’ dispersion leads to prices
that distort production and consumption patterns. Higher rates of protection on final products than on
inputs used in their production has created an anti-export bias, since producers have strong incentives
to sell goods domestically. This is particularly worrying for the agricultural sector, where high protection
of import-competing crops along with fertilizer subsidies have created strong disincentives for crop and
export diversification. On the one hand, the protection afforded to agriculture encourages expansion of
production of import-competing crops (rice, maize). Similarly, the introduction of high export taxes
(‘cesses’) on raw materials such as tea, rubber, cinnamon, coconut and spices, with the notion that this
would increase value addition of exports, discourages the production of “exportables?. Trade barriers
also make it difficult for firms to access world-class inputs at competitive prices, thus reducing the ability
of firms to compete and integrate into Global Value Chains (GVCs) and Regional Value Chains (RVCs).

Trade policy reforms can be devised with potential revenue neutrality or even gains if imports (and
exports) increase due to reforms. Sri Lanka’s low and declining tax-to-GDP ratio (10.1% in 2014) and its
heavy reliance on trade taxes (49% share of import-based taxes and 18% share of protective duties in
total tax revenue) complicates trade reform. However, if Sri Lanka’s trade-to-GDP ratio increased back
to what it was in 2000 (89%) or even more to 160% (as in the case of Vietnam), even low tariffs could
yield significant import revenues. Thus, the new trade policy, while being mindful of the impact of tariff
reform on revenue and balance of payments, needs to incorporate a gradual but firm liberalization
schedule, allowing time for adjustment, with a fixed phase-out schedule (sunset). It is clear that para-
tariffs need to be consolidated, reduced in magnitude, and eventually eliminated, as they are non-
transparent in nature and their ad-hoc imposition as an easy “go-to? for revenue generation takes away
predictability, which is critical for production and investment decisions. Similarly, export taxes on
agricultural commodities need to be revisited as the rationale behind them is no longer clear.

Trade policy reform needs to be complemented by improved trade facilitation. Poor trade facilitation
can add significantly to costs of trading (see section 3 below). Efficient trade facilitation, along with low
tariffs, is a crucial enabler to plug into global value chains, which have increasingly become the driver of
global trade.

Linkages between Sri Lanka’s trade competitiveness and the country’s ability to attract and retain
efficiency-seeking FDI must also be identified and exploited. In addition to boosting investment
necessary for growth and providing long-term balance of payments financing, FDI can help to enhance
the sophistication of Sri Lankan products and exports through introduction of new technologies and
production processes. It can also give rise to positive spillovers to the rest of the economy through
diffusion of better skills, technology and management practices. Finally, FDI can enhance access of Sri
Lankan producers to global production networks and facilitate the development of new activities within
existing value chains. Poor FDI performance has reinforced poor trade outcomes given the strong trade-
investment nexus. Enhancing the ability of Sri Lanka to attract and retain FDI will require addressing a
number of obstacles (See section 4 below).

Sri Lanka can use PTAs as an instrument of its trade policy, and pursue them strategically to maximize
benefits to itself. While Sri Lanka is committed to multilateralism and needs to remain engaged in the
WTO to safeguard its interests, it cannot ignore the fact that nearly 50% of global trade now takes place
through regional, plurilateral, and bilateral trade agreements. Given that it will have to increasingly
depend on the growing markets of Asia – China, India, and ASEAN – for export growth, PTAs with Asian
countries like China and India need to be viewed as opportunities rather than threats, while carefully
evaluating the costs and benefits to Sri Lanka from each PTA. Also, in negotiating new PTAs, Sri Lanka
needs to be mindful of the lessons from existing PTAs – viz., non-tariff barriers are as important to
address as tariff barriers, Mutual Recognition Agreements are critical for trade facilitation, widespread
awareness campaigns are vital for information dissemination, and an effective communication strategy
is essential to dispel concerns regarding PTAs.

Sri Lanka’s new trade policy framework will also need to address fresh challenges emerging in global
trade, such as exclusion of Sri Lanka from Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and threat of re-shoring based
on geographic proximity.

Given the above, it will be critical for Sri Lanka to enhance its institutional framework to meet 21 st
century trade challenges. The strategic trade policy framework in itself will enhance predictability of
trade policy by setting the agenda for the medium term, and ensuring that the more detailed policy
guidelines do not deviate from it. Beyond that, capacity building in the Government will be essential to
enable Sri Lanka to effectively meet WTO requirements and negotiate trade agreements to maximize
benefit to the country. A coherent and synergistic approach on trade policy will require effective
leadership and coordination among the different agencies involved in trade.

Finally but not least, it would be important for the government to communicate early on about the
scope, timing and sequencing, and objectives of reforms to inform stakeholders, to manage their
expectations and to avoid unjustified resistance. Like for any policy reforms, the GoSL should recognize
that the trade policy will lead to winners and losers, and should be prepared to listen to potential losers
and to mitigate the negative impact by focusing on the welfare of workers (see box 3 below).


Box 3. A humane approach to reforms

Reforms have a differentiated impact on different segments of the economy. Policy reform will lead to
gains, which are often dispersed over time and space, as well as losses, which can be immediate.
There will be sectors, firms, and workers that will succumb to competition unleashed with the
opening up of the economy and declining protection for domestic industries. However, it is important
to focus on the fact that the costs will be far outweighed by the overall benefits to the Sri Lankan
economy. Firms and exporters will gain access to world class inputs at competitive prices, and thus
be able to breach new markets. Since trade and investment complement each other, trade
liberalization will also bring FDI, which, in turn, will bring skills, technology, and foreign capital as well
as access to GVCs and new markets. Most importantly, Sri Lankan consumers, whose welfare has to
be given due consideration, will gain – they will have access to goods of greater variety, better quality,
and at cheaper prices.

The role of the Government during the reform process will be to ensure that those who are negatively
affected by reforms are not forgotten. Keeping that in view, reforms should be carefully sequenced
and calibrated, but with a finite schedule, to allow time for adjustment. The phasing in period will
also allow the opportunity to address cross-cutting competitiveness issues which hamper firm
productivity. It will also be important to design appropriate retraining programs to facilitate
movement of workers out of the affected firms and sectors. Similarly, it will be important to ensure
there are business support programs that help firms, for instance, to negotiate new markets by
supplying the requisite market information. Through all of this, Sri Lanka will need to be mindful that
its aspiration to become a prosperous and competitive MIC, and its development vision, which entails
creation of one million new and better jobs in the medium term, can be achieved only by looking
outward and harnessing trade as an engine of growth, job creation and poverty reduction. The new
strategic trade policy framework shall be framed with that underlying objective.
    3. Improving trade facilitation9

The competitiveness of Sri Lanka’s firms depends on their ability to get products to foreign markets in
a timely and cost-effective way. Improving access to enabling infrastructure and cutting costly and
burdensome trade-related procedures are essential in this regard. The Government of Sri Lanka has said
that trade facilitation is a priority and that the country has the potential to reduce the gap compared to
best practice countries such as Singapore. Many agencies have undertaken reforms and investment has
been focused on improving infrastructure.

There are significant gaps between trade facilitation practices in Sri Lanka and benchmark countries in
Asia. The comparison of all areas related to trade facilitation (see below) highlights the need for
improvements not only in infrastructure, but also on regulatory processes that cause unnecessary delays
for traders and erode the competitiveness of local producers relative to exporters in neighboring
countries. Elimination of some regulatory and procedural hurdles would be a cost-effective way to
quicken Sri Lankan producers’ access to foreign markets.

     Figure 9: logistics Performance Index (2013)                  Figure 10: high priority areas related to
                                                                    rules/procedures for imports/exports
                           Customs
                         150                                            Reduce clearing times
                                                                                                                             79%

                         100                                                 Reduce Irregular
        Timeliness                         Infrastructure                    payments/bribes                                75%
                          50                                    Improve coordination between
                                                                border management agencies                                 72%
                           0                                   Reduvce number/time requred
                                                               of exp/imp documents                                        69%

      Tracking and                         International       Pre arrival processing of import
                                                               documents                                             59%
         tracing                             shipments
                                                                 Issue & validity of advenaced
                                                                 ruling                                              57%

                           Logistics                             Reduce physical inspection of
                          quality and                            customs                                           48%
                         competence
                                                                          Post clearence audit
                                                                                                             31%
           Singapore           Sri Lanka      Malaysia
           India               Thailand                                                           0%   20%   40%   60%   80% 100%

Source: World Bank Logistics Performance Index.               Source: IPS Survey (2014).


Bureaucratic bottlenecks give rise to high trade transaction costs. Policy induced barriers account for
nearly 70 percent of the total time spent on exporting or importing goods. The preparation of
documents is the most significant component, absorbing more than 50 percent of the time spent on
import or export procedures. Traders and agents face critical delays as round-the-clock processing of
documentation and clearing of goods is yet to be implemented. This results in scheduling conflicts and


9
 This section draws on the report “Sri Lanka–WTO TFA Validation and Reform Map? prepared by the World Bank Group in
September 2015.
costs are exacerbated owing to penalties charged for demurrages and changes to logistics scheduling.
Reform efforts have met with resistance.

Inter-institutional linkages are weak, leading to processing delays. The introduction and upgrade of the
ASCYUDA system at the Sri Lanka Customs Department has been an important though delayed step
towards reducing transaction costs and processing times. The failure to fully integrate the 30
government agencies involved in trade facilitation into a single window facility undermines the reforms
undertaken as delays and manual processing still occur upstream, i.e. before traders and agents submit
the final documentation electronically to the Customs Department.

The regulatory framework governing the trade regime in Sri Lanka is complex and has a significant
anti-export bias. The existence of separate processes for Board of Investment companies and non-
Board of Investment companies, onerous documentation requirements, and the failure to update
customs ordinance, increase the complexity of the regulatory framework governing trade.

There are also significant shortcoming in trade regulation and border management. The proper
management of goods passing through borders is critical for trade facilitation as it eliminates avoidable
delays and enhances predictability in border clearance.10 However, in Sri Lanka there are significant
shortcomings affecting the effectiveness of border management, including lack of sufficient
coordination between government bodies. At the same time, measures put in place at the time of the
armed conflict, requiring review of 100 percent of shipments are still in place, further adding to delays
and costs. The implementation of a risk-based approach to border management would likely result in
significant increase in efficiency.

The lack of automation of border management systems reduces the efficiency of trade facilitation. At
the present time, many of the trade-related processes remain manual and paper-based, with significant
duplication of documentation required by different agencies. Systems automation and the use of IT in
import and export processes can lead to reductions in paperwork and rent seeking opportunities. While
automation has been introduced by Customs through implementation of ASYCUDAWorld11 as its
Customs processing system, all the various agencies that are involved in import and export processes
are not connected to the system. Similarly, establishment of a single window facility and electronic data
interchange (which would reduce the delays associated with the preparation of documentation by
cutting the number of documents required and streamlining interagency transfers)10 has been identified
as a significant need.




10
   World Bank (2014) Logistics Performance Index Report, World Bank.
11
   ASYCUDA is a computerized customs management system which covers most foreign trade procedures. The system handles
manifests and customs declarations, accounting procedures, transit and suspense procedures. The ASYCUDA software is
developed by UNCTAD.
10
   de Mel S etal (March 2011)"What is the Cost of Formality? Experimentally Estimating the Demand for Formalization",
presented at the World Bank Conference on "New Ideas in Business Growth: Financial Literacy, Firm Dynamics and
Entrepreneurial Environment?.
The dissemination of information related to new procedures needs to be improved. The majority of
customs procedures are lodged manually, despite the availability of an electronic system.12 Creating
awareness among traders and agents of the electronic system in place is critical. Training, help desks
and the gradual introduction of new procedures are needed to the smooth the transfer from manual to
digital procedures.


Towards a long-term reform agenda for trade facilitation

The GoSL has recently adopted a commitment towards a long-term agenda for trade facilitation. In
May 2016 the GoSL ratified their commitment to the World Trade Organization Trade Facilitation
Agreement (WTO TFA), a major step in setting up a foundation for trade facilitation reform. The WTO
TFA provides a framework for the implementation of simple, transparent trade procedures that enhance
trade facilitation, and its ratification will signal to domestic and international stakeholders the GoSL’s
strong commitment to the reform and modernization of its trade facilitation regime The TFA sets forth a
series of measures for expeditiously moving goods across borders inspired by the best practices from
around the world. Once implemented12 the TFA is expected to reduce total trade costs by more than 14
per cent for low-income countries and more than 13 per cent for upper middle-income countries by
streamlining the flow of trade across borders13. Inefficiencies in areas such as customs are roadblocks to
developing countries’ integration into the global economy and may severely impair export
competitiveness or inflow of foreign direct investment.


The ratification of the WTO TFA can be an effective platform for a first wave of reforms that target
core bureaucratic bottlenecks. The WBG recently conducted a diagnostic, which identified specific areas
for improvement in trade facilitation in Sri Lanka. The diagnostic analyzed key elements of Sri Lanka’s
trade facilitation environment on the basis of an evaluation of its alignment with the articles of the WTO
TFA. The diagnostic covered a number of areas including institutions; processes, procedures, and
operations; laws and regulations; information technology and automation; capacity building, training,
and human resources; facilities; analytical areas; information dissemination and communication and;
strategy and policy. Within each one of these areas, the diagnostic provides specific recommendations
for reform (see Annex 2 for a summary of reforms).

12
   Weerakoon D and Perera N (2014), “The Role of Sri Lanka in Enhancing Connectivity between South Asia and Southeast Asia?,
ADBI Working Paper Series, ADBI.
12
   The Trade Facilitation Agreement was adopted by the General Council in November 2014 to bring the TFA into the WTO’s
legal framework. The Agreement will enter into force when two-thirds of WTO members ratify the TFA and deposit their
instruments of acceptance with the WTO Secretariat.
13
   The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) estimates that the average customs transaction
involves 20–30 different parties, 40 documents, 200 data elements (30 of which are repeated at least 30 times) and the re-
keying of 60–70 per cent of all data at least once. With the lowering of tariffs across the globe, the cost of complying with
customs formalities has been reported to exceed in many instances the cost of duties to be paid. In the modern business
environment of just-in-time production and delivery, traders need fast and predictable release of goods. A study by Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC) estimated that trade facilitation programs would generate gains to APEC of about 0.26 per cent
of real GDP, almost double the expected gains from tariff reductions, and that the savings in import prices would be between
1–2     per    cent     of    import    prices   for     developing     countries    in    the     region.    Source:     WTO,
https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/20y_e/wto_tradefacilitation_e.pdf
Beyond the specific reform recommendations, a significant improvement in trade facilitation will
require well-defined institutional arrangements to guide reforms. In this regard, the Cabinet also
approval the creation of a National Trade Facilitation Committee (NTFC) is a positive step in the right
direction as it tasks the NTFC with overseeing and coordinating all trade facilitation matters in Sri Lanka
including full and effective implementation of the WTO TFA14. Once fully operational the NTFC is
expected to identify key bottlenecks and inefficiencies, provide key inputs into reform efforts to
modernize trade facilitation policies, processes and reduce trade transaction costs. The NTFC will also
be tasked with significantly enhancing inter-agency coordination on trade facilitation matters as well as
improve dialogue between the government and the private sector.

The success of the NTFC and the overall reform agenda on trade facilitation will depend on a number
of factors. First, a clear vision for trade facilitation needs to be articulated and communicated as a way
to guide reforms. Second, the vision needs to be translated into a clear strategic action plan, with well-
defined targets, milestones and responsibilities. The action plan needs to be drawn in full consultation
with private sector representatives in order to ensure that it addresses the most critical obstacles and
defines priorities accordingly. Third, the NTFC needs to have sufficient mandate to lead the reforms,
which will require substantial coordination across agencies and ministries. Fourth, a monitoring and
evaluation framework will be required in order to verify progress of reforms versus plans and
implement corrective measures as needed.

The ratification of the WTO TFA and the formal establishment of the NTFC can be an effective
platform for a first wave of reforms that target core bureaucratic bottlenecks. Reforms that can be
achieved in the short to medium-term include the following:
        i)      Implementation of a coordinated border management policy and strategy that allows
                for a more coordinated approach to management of the import and export processes
                and related requirements by all involved government agencies.
        ii)     Full implementation of the ASYCUDAWorld system with electronic linkages to all
                relevant regulatory agencies
        iii)    Implementation of a national electronic single window facility for trade
        iv)     Adoption of a systematic and effective risk management system needs to be adopted,
        v)      Creation of a single trade information portal to help meet the informational needs of
                businesses more easily by aggregating all relevant requirements and processes from
                the more than 30 agencies are involved in import and export processes.




14
  As a WTO Member, Sri Lanka will be required to implement the WTO TFA once it comes into force (expected in early 2016).
As per article 23.2 of the Agreement, Members must establish a National Trade Facilitation Committee to oversee and
coordinate implementation of the Agreement. Article 23.2 states that WTO Members “shall establish a committee to establish
and/or maintain a national committee on trade facilitation or designate an existing mechanism to facilitate both domestic
coordination and implementation of the provisions of this Agreement?.
     4. Facilitating the attraction and retention of efficiency-enhancing
        FDI15
FDI into Sri Lanka has been lower than in peer countries despite its location and access to major
markets. FDI inflows have been focused on infrastructure, with only a relatively small proportion
reaching sectors of the economy that are associated with global production networks. Greater FDI into
such sectors would enhance the access of Sri Lanka’s producers to global production networks and
facilitate the development of new activities within existing value chains, thereby increasing added value
in production.

                     Figure 12: composition of FDI                        Figure 13: FDI net inflows in 2013 (percent of
                                                                                             GDP)
         1,600
                                                                      Hong Kong
         1,400
                                                                       Singapore
         1,200                                                          Mongolia
                                                         infrastru      Maldives
         1,000                                           cture
                                                                       Cambodia
     US$ mn




                                                                         Vietnam
              800
                                                                         Lao PDR
              600                                                          China
                                                          services      Malaysia
              400
                                                                         Thailand
                                                         manufact         Bhutan
              200
                                                         uring
                                                                        Indonesia
               0                                                            India
                    2009   2010    2011    2012   2013                  Sri Lanka
               Port Container Terminals                               Philippines
               Power Generation, Fuel, Gas, Petroleum and Other       Bangladesh
               Telephone and Telecommunication Network                Korea, Rep.
               Housing, Property Development and Shop Office             Pakistan
               Other Services
                                                                           Nepal
               IT and BPO
               Hotels and Restaurants                                 Afghanistan
               Manufacturing                                                        0      5      10   15   20   25    30
               Agriculture
                                                                                        Percent


 Source: Board of Investment, World Bank.                            Source: World Bank WDI.

Attracting FDI is a necessary condition for the economic diversification that Sri Lanka aspires to
achieve. FDI can be an important driver of the country’s economic growth and diversification by bringing
in new capital and new technologies, by creating new jobs and shifting the work force from lower into
higher value added jobs; and by imparting skills and knowledge spillovers to the workforce and local
firms. FDI is also an important vehicle for connecting the domestic economy with the international
private sector by fostering a wide range of opportunities for local companies to integrate into global
production value chains.



15
  This section draws on technical assistance provided by the World Bank Group led by Roberto Echandi (Lead Investment Policy
Specialist) with input from Priyanka Kher, Ralph Van Doorn and Persephone Economou.
However, not all FDI is the same and their impact and spillovers in the economy vary significantly.
There are broadly four types: natural resource seeking, market seeking, efficiency seeking and strategic
asset seeking. They do not have the same potential for positive spillovers. For example, each type of
investment generates different types of jobs. Natural resource seeking investment in agriculture tends
to generate mostly small-scale household/informal or low skilled jobs, while efficiency seeking
investment, such as that found in automotive and IT hardware, tends to generate high
skilled/technology intensive jobs. When considering investment policy it is critical to acknowledge that
the factors that motivate, dissuade and affect investors are vastly different depending on the business
they are in and the markets they target.

Policies and instruments to attract FDI to Sri Lanka should be guided by a clear vision on the type of
FDI that the country pursues. Countries often make the mistake of designing investment policies around
the type of foreign investments that they already have. As opposed to that, authorities in Sri Lanka
should instead tailor policies to suit the type of investment that they want to grow and the linkages with
the local economy they want to develop. To do this, authorities need to identify the types of investors
that are more likely to make a positive contribution to the domestic economy. In turn, the investment
policy that is developed for the country should address the specific concerns of these types of investors
and facilitate generation of linkages and spillovers in the domestic economy.

Investment attraction efforts are not enough in absence of a stable foundation. Investors seek
macroeconomic and political stability in the host country.13 Beyond that, they prioritize having access to
qualified staff (see figure below). Factors such as the availability of infrastructure have substantially
decreased in importance in recent years. The size of a domestic market has also become less important
for foreign investors, relative to the premium they put on efficiency and links to global markets.

The views of global investors offer insights that can be used to determine the priorities for policies
and investments aimed at attracting and retaining FDI. They also highlight the fact that the ability of Sri
Lanka to become a destination of choice for efficiency-enhancing FDI will require much more than
investment in infrastructure and incentives for investors.14 Sri Lanka can leverage its economic and
political stability, but additional factors will also need to be improved, including:
    a) minimizing uncertainty and fostering investor confidence through certainty on policies and
         regulations;
    b) eliminating unnecessary regulatory and policy obstacles to FDI;
    c) investing in education to ensure that the population (and especially the youth) has the skills
         demanded by efficiency-enhancing enterprises (see below);
    d) creating a level playing field that fosters competition and eliminates preferential treatment for
         specific public or private players; and

13
    Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (2013) World Investment and Political Risk 2013, Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency.
14
   While many countries have sought to attract FDI through offering incentives to investors, research has demonstrated that
incentives alone can be insufficient to attract efficiency-enhancing FDI, retention of FDI is low as incentives pose a significant
fiscal strain and investors often switch investment destinations when incentives dry up, and fixing enabling environment
deficiencies can be more effective than offering incentives to cover for such deficiencies.
     e) establishing a well-functioning financial sector that can contribute to the development of local
        firms in the ecosystem around foreign enterprises.


                Figure 14: main obstacles to FDI                     Figure 15: top Political Risks from 2012-2013

                               2013      2010                        Adverse regulatory changes

                                                                               Breach of contract
             Macroeconomic
               instability
                                                               Transfer/convertibility restrictions
                  Political risk
                                                                                 Civil disturbance
        Lack of qualified staff
                                                               Non-honoring of gov't guarantees
      Deficiencies in financial
      sector in host countries                                      Expropriation/nationalization
           Weak government
            institutions/red…                                                           Terrorism
          Poor infrastructure
                                                                                              War
           Limited size of the
                market
                                                                                                      0   20   40    60     80
                                   0%   5% 10% 15% 20% 25%

     Source: MIGA (2013) World Investment and Political Risk Report, IBRD/World Bank.

Minimizing uncertainty and fostering investor confidence will support greater FDI into Sri Lanka.
Governments have a major role in building investor confidence through ensuring predictability and
consistency in regulations that govern the activities of foreign investors, as well as protecting investor
rights and ownership. Arguably, this confidence is important in attracting efficiency-seeking investors,
whose business models depend on productivity and reliability of production – which can be easily
disrupted by regulatory changes – rather than on cheap access to natural resources. Actions such as the
nationalization of private property16 in 2011 and the passage of a Land Act forbidding the purchase of
land by foreign firms and individuals with retroactive application17 unnecessarily undermine investors’
confidence in the country as an investment destination. Going forward, close consultation with the
private sector will be necessary in order to minimize the negative impact and uncertainty from policy
changes.

Eliminating regulatory and policy obstacles help to increase FDI. Although most countries in the world
seek to attract foreign investment, very few countries maintain an entirely open investment regime. A
country can close or protect a sector for legitimate security or cultural reasons, or instead, may use

16
   Through the Underperforming Enterprises and Underutilized Assets Act No. 43 passed in November 2011 the Government
nationalized 37 enterprises many of which had foreign investment. The wording of the law provides for a ‘competent authority’
to administer ‘underperforming’ assets, although the criteria for definition of underperformance was considered vague.
17                                                           st
   Land (Restrictions on Alienation) Act effective from 1 of January 2013 prohibited the acquisition of land by foreign
individuals and companies with 50% or more foreign ownership. The Act created significant uncertainty to companies through
two provisions: a) The Act stipulates that companies with less than 50% foreign ownership can acquire land, but must retain the
shareholding mix by at least 20 years (within which term foreign ownership above 50% would make the land acquisition null).
B) the Act has a retroactive effect for the 22 months before enactment, thereby affecting investments already undertaken.
protectionism as a substitute for regulation (see table below). These limitations damage the ability of
the country to attract FDI, and especially efficiency-seeking FDI. Natural resource-seeking and market-
seeking FDI can compensate for the cost of dealing with barriers by getting cheaper access to natural
resources or increasing the product prices in local markets.

                                         Table 1: typology of entry barriers to FDI




Articulating an investment policy to guide the country’s efforts
Sri Lanka needs to develop a well-articulated and coherent Investment Policy, clarifying how the
country can use investment to better insert itself into a globalized economy and achieve the
development goals of the country. At the present time investment, trade and other policies relevant for
investment in Sri Lanka are not fully aligned and compatible. In addition, currently Sri Lanka does not
have a modern umbrella legal framework clarifying in a single instrument the roles of the different
agencies interacting with investors as well as the specific guarantees applicable to both domestic and
foreign investors18. Further, the lack of a clearly defined and comprehensive monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) framework prevents authorities from assessing whether policies being implemented actually
reach the envisaged results.

Such Investment Policy could focus primarily on how to better attract, enable the entry, retain and
link efficiency-seeking FDI with the domestic economy (that is, export oriented FDI using Sri Lanka as
part of international production processes within global value chains). As part of this process, other
types of FDI, such as market-seeking investment in certain services industries, key to enhance the
competitiveness of the Sri Lankan economy should also be envisaged. Formulating such an Investment
Policy through an internal consultation and collaborative process, could be an important tool for

18
     The BOI Act focuses predominantly on the structure, roles and responsibilities of BOI and does not explicitly address FDI
applying the Government’s vision regarding FDI in a consistent manner and would help in streamlining
institutional processes and linking the overall policy environment that impact investment.

An Investment Policy should be supported by a state-of-the-art investment legislation designed
according to international best practices. Such legislation should clearly articulate the institutional
structure, roles and functions of the relevant agencies as well as explicitly differentiate between two key
different government functions: investment regulation on the one hand and investment promotion on
the other. Further, it should level the playing field between foreign and domestic investors by providing
the latter with the high level of protection provided by international standards. The Investment Law
should be an instrument to enhance investors’ confidence, while signaling the Government’s renewed
commitment to attracting and retaining investment.

The creation of the Agency for International Trade provides a good opportunity to lead investment
policy related issues. Under the guidance of this agency, investment policy could be coordinated with
other key government areas –for instance trade, labor and environment, in such a way that different
ministries and agencies could better understand their specific roles, functions, obligations and lead to a
more articulated investment policy implementation.

The effectiveness of the Investment Policy should be assessed through a monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) framework. It is necessary to develop such M&E framework with clearly defined and monitored
metrics and performance indicators. With an M&E framework, the Government would be in a position
to undertake quantitative and qualitative analysis on the contribution of FDI to the country’s economy
and development objectives. Such M&E framework could measure whether reforms are actually leading
to impacts on key policy objectives, for instance, investment generated, investment retained, the
effectiveness of incentives and whether FDI is generating linkages and jobs.

Strengthening investment promotion

Investment promotion is undertaken by the Board of Investment (BOI), but its effectiveness may have
been undermined by competing institutional tasks. BOI is a large institution with a wider range of
functions than peer organizations in Asia. The size of its staff stems from the fact that BOI undertakes a
wide range of functions including investment promotion; regulatory functions; management of
economic zones and trade facilitation services. In other countries these functions would typically be
found in separate specialized agencies. In turn, this multiplicity of roles appears to have undermined the
BOI’s focus on investment promotion – to which less than 1 percent of BOI’s staff is dedicated.

The effectiveness of the BOI could be improved through streamlining of both its functions and
structure. Streamlining the range of functions that the BOI currently delivers could help the institution
to focus on FDI attraction as a strategic priority. Many of the BOI’s existing functions could either be
eliminated or reallocated to other more relevant government bodies. Specifically the streamlining of the
current investment screening and approvals processes as described in the section of investment entry
below, and the separation of regulatory and promotional functions, could be a major part of such
rationalization. Reviewing BOI’s staff resources and skills in the context of a new promotion strategy
would help ensure that the promotion efforts are adequately staffed and can effectively deliver against
agreed FDI goals.



Investment Agency      Total Staff                               Functions

BOI Thailand           ~ 300         Investment promotion and facilitation, administration of tax
                                     incentives, assistance to investors on the provision of visas and
                                     work permits, business Support Services (information, site visits,
                                     contacts. One stop shop investor center.
BOI Philippines        ~220          Investment promotion and facilitation. Supplying knowledge-
                                     based market information, sector studies and business feasibility
                                     studies, linking investors to the services chain and matching them
                                     with foreign and local business partners. Coordinator of Invest
                                     Philippines (multi-agency initiative).
Invest Korea           ~ 280         Foreign investment promotion, investor information services,
                                     aftercare services, one-on-one investor consultation services.
                                     Sector studies. One-stop Administrative Services Center.
BOI Sri Lanka          ~ 1,300       FDI promotion; various regulatory functions; management of
                                     economic zones and trade facilitation services

An FDI promotion strategy should identify Sri Lanka’s value proposition for foreign investors, as well
as identifying clear sector priorities for proactive promotion, based on strong comparative and
competitive benchmarking and new targeting methodologies. At the present time the GoSL has
identified priority sectors for FDI. However, the list of priority sectors is very extensive and the
articulation of what would make Sri Lanka a competitive location for investment in those sectors relative
to competitor locations is not well articulated. In practice, having too many priority sectors is the same
as having no priority sectors. In this context, a streamlined identification of sector priorities based on
sufficient analysis will likely enhance the ability of the BOI to focus efforts and develop the required
sector expertise.

Strengthening the BOI’s investment promotion capacity will require strengthened institutional
capacity.
More effective investment promotion efforts will require staff with relevant skills; enhancement of
investment promotion processes through adoption of state-of-the-art techniques; strengthening the
BOI’s aftercare capacity to leverage existing investors in a way that promotes second and third
generation investments; and a well-designed M&E system for investment promotion in order to assess
the effectiveness of the FDI promotion efforts.

A review of the management and development of economic zones within the context of the national
investment strategy can enhance their effectiveness. The model for managing and marketing the zones
has remained unchanged over the recent decades despite significant changes in global markets and in
the competitiveness of other countries’ zones. Specifically, the lack of adequate and detailed market
demand assessments, as well as a lack of assessment of supply side factors, such as availability of
infrastructure, labor and utilities for each zone has made sector focus somewhat ad hoc and ineffective
in many of the current zones. Similarly proactive sector-based investment promotion appears limited in
marketing of the zones. A full market assessment as part of any plans to develop further zones is
necessary in order to ensure that there is demand for them. Beyond that a detailed master plan to steer
the development and marketing of economic zones is needed.


Streamlining investment entry processes
Discussions with the private sector19 indicated that there are three main challenges affecting the
establishment and entry of investors into the country: first, cumbersome and slow entry procedures;
second, access to land and third, ownership ceilings to foreign investors in many sectors. These areas
are further elaborated below.

First, even when companies decide to invest in Sri Lanka, the process for entering and establishing
their operations in Sri Lanka is complex and can be very time consuming . First, the investment
approval process is a key impediment. Investors investing under the normal laws of the country need to
obtain an approval under Section 16 of the BOI Act and those seeking certain support measures need to
obtain an approval under Section 17 of the BOI Act. While Section 16 investment approval entails a
relatively short process, Section 17 process is longer and more time consuming - at times lasting several
months.

De-linking the investment entry approval process from the granting of incentives can help streamline
and simplify the entry process. At present, approval by BOI is required both for projects that benefit
from support measures and for those that do not. However, 80% of countries20 have eliminated entry
approval process referred to as “screening? (except for certain national security related activities) and
only a simple registration process exists. In Sri Lanka, eliminating investment approvals when support
measures by BOI are not sought by investors, can help free up BOI’s resources, reduce lead times for
investment establishment and reduce transaction costs for both the government and investors. Where
support measures are being sought by investors, Sri Lanka may consider further streamlining procedures
to ensure that they are transparent and non-discretionary. The establishment of a One Stop Shop for
foreign investors may help to reduce some of the regulatory difficulties for establishment of new
investors in the country (see box 4).


Box 4. Addressing regulatory obstacles through a One Stop Shop for foreign investors

The GoSL established in May 2016 a One Stop Shop (OSS) to facilitate the establishment of foreign
investment in the country. The OSS is expected to reduce lead times for investment approval by
facilitating the interaction between investors and the regulatory agencies involved in approval of new
investments21. This is a positive initiative given the fact that at present, foreign investors seeking to


19
   Based on interviews conducted by the World Bank during 2015 and 2016.
20
    Source: World Bank’s Investing Across Borders Database, which benchmarks foreign investment legal and regulatory
frameworks worldwide.
21
   Ministry of Provincial Councils and Local Government, Inland Revenue Department, Sri Lanka Customs Department, Colombo
Municipal Council, Department of Immigration and Emigration, Central environmental Authority, Forest Conservation
Department, Urban Development Authority, National Water Supply and Drainage Board, Ceylon Electricity Board, Sri Lanka
establish operations in Sri Lanka face high transaction costs and lead times to obtain all necessary
approvals from multiple regulatory agencies when establishing operations in Sri Lanka22. In this
context, a well-functioning OSS might facilitate the establishment of new investment by enhancing
clarity in approval processes and timeliness of response from regulatory agencies.

One stop shops for investment entry can be an important mechanism to support investors by
helping them understand requirements, navigate through procedures and institutions, and streamline
those procedures. It is also an indication to potential investors of the government’s interest in
prioritizing and providing support.

But international experience over a number of decades indicates that it is very difficult to establish,
and even more difficult to sustain successful OSSs. Many OSS have been set up worldwide but have
subsequently failed due to a decline in political support, insufficient legal foundations, unclear
operating procedures, a tendency for line agencies to take back their delegated staff and functions,
lack of accessibility for both geographical or virtual one-stop shops. Lessons learned from global
experience – including unsuccessful efforts – can inform Sri Lanka’s efforts to establish a successful
OSS. The following are some key considerations to enhance the effectiveness of the newly created
OSS.

    a) Clear strategic vision and mandate: Successful OSS have clearly identified objectives and
       sufficient mandate to achieve them. The mandate is a particularly important consideration
       given the fact that OSS usually need to interact with various regulatory agencies.
    b) A well-defined legal framework: The operations of OSS often require a legal and/or regulatory
       foundations to operate.
    c) A well-functioning operational process: rather than formalizing inefficient processes,
       successful OSS re-engineer processes to improve efficiency for both government and
       businesses.
    d) Adequate institutional capacity: Successful OSS have institutional capacity (including staff and
       systems) commensurate with the scope and complexity of their task. Shortcomings in this
       capacity undermine the effectiveness of the OSS and often transform them into additional
       hurdles in the approval process.
    e) A well-defined monitoring and evaluation framework: Successful OSS have clearly-defined key
       performance indicators (KPIs) that are constantly monitored versus actual results. KPIs are
       designed to fully reflect the expected results of the OSS. The monitoring and evaluation
       framework has also well-defined processes to identify and address deviations between
       expected and actual results.




Second, difficulties in gaining access to Land has been a critical constraint for further expansion by
investors. Under the recent Land (Restriction on Alienation) Act 2014, a foreigner, foreign company or a
company with 50% or more foreign shareholder is prohibited from owning land in Sri Lanka. Investors
also reported that the process of leasing land in Sri Lanka is cumbersome since it involves multiple

Land Reclamation & Development Corporation, Import & Export Control Department, Land Commissioner General’s
Department, Department of Registrar of Companies.
22
   The World Bank conducted interviews with various foreign investors during diagnostic missions undertaken in 2015 and 2016.
government agencies, is time consuming (can take even up to a year or more) and requires payment of
upfront 15% tax for the period of the entire lease.

Third, there are substantive restrictions on foreign investment which act as a deterrent to investors
looking to invest larger volume of capital. For example under the BOI Act, foreign ownership in sectors
such as education, freight forwarding, travel agency, shipping agency and mass communication is
restricted to 40% and can be increased only upon approval by BOI. The rationale for these barriers
should be revisited in light of the vision of the government for economic transformation.

Improving investment retention through enhancing investors’ confidence

The lack of well-established mechanisms to address investors’ grievances can have a negative impact
on retention and expansion of existing investments. Investors both domestic and foreign23, consistently
report lack of regulatory transparency and excessive discretion as key constraints to their ongoing
operations and investment expansion, suggesting low levels of implementation of investor protection
principles provided in Sri Lanka’s international investment agreements (IIAs). Consultations with the
private sector further suggest that one reason for lack of implementation may be that many government
agencies are not fully aware of the types of obligations they have towards investors under IIAs and other
laws and regulations of the country.

The implementation of a Mechanism for Investment Retention and Confidence (MIRC) has the
potential to effectively address investor grievances and enable retention and expansion of
investment, as well as prevent investor-state disputes. At present, Sri Lanka does not have a
mechanism (apart from legal recourse) that addresses investor grievances arising from adverse
government actions. Neither does it provide aftercare services to investors. To resolve grievances
private sector engages in ad hoc consultations with the relevant agencies. Apart from being costly for
both investor and the government, legal recourse negatively impacts the relationship between the
investor and the government and discourages investors from continuing with their investment in a
country24. Retaining existing investors and encouraging them to expand operations is therefore a
potentially important source of FDI for Sri Lanka that should be further leveraged. Content investors
already in Sri Lanka can also be a source of good publicity for the country. Thus, a MIRC as well as
general aftercare services would greatly benefit existing investors.


There is potential to strengthen the domestic legal and policy environment. Analyzing Sri Lanka’s
international investment commitments versus domestic laws governing FDI may reveal gaps in investor
protection. A consolidated legal framework for investment can substantively upgrade the domestic legal
framework by providing the same level of protection to both domestic and foreign investors.
Furthermore, aligning domestic laws and regulations with the provisions of international investment
agreements concluded by Sri Lanka and removing inconsistencies can help decrease Sri Lanka’s exposure
to the threat of international arbitration.

23
  Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys 2011 and consultations conducted in 2015 and 2016.
24
  Anecdotal evidence suggests that certain foreign investors have cancelled expansion projects due to adverse government
conduct.
Strengthening the efficacy of investment Incentives25
Investment incentives can be used to attract FDI to Sri Lanka. They are likely to be most influential
when investors are wavering between similar options, and when a country already has a favorable
investment climate. They can be used to compete for potential investors; to encourage certain business
practices; and to attract investment into priority regions and priority sectors.
As Sri Lanka seeks to attract and retain more transformative FDI it will need to analyze the
effectiveness and adequacy of incentives. Incentives can come at a significant fiscal cost and can
disrupt market dynamics through, inter alia, the creation of an uneven playing field. The effectiveness
and efficiency of tax and other financial incentives for FDI are affected by the presence of obstacles to
foreign investment. Analysis of the efficiency of incentives in generating and retaining the type of
investment that Sri Lanka seeks, and their effectiveness on fostering different policy objectives, can help
to inform policies.
                                    Table 2: modalities of tax and financial incentives




Traditionally, Sri Lanka has relied on a variety of investment incentives to attract investment. In the
past several years, the Government of Sri Lanka has adopted a number of changes to its incentives
regime. Notably, in 2011, the Board of Investment (BOI) moved from providing a separate set of
investment incentives to instead largely follow those offered by the Ministry of Finance under the 2006
Inland Revenue Act. Subsequently, in 2014, an amendment to the Inland Revenue Act discontinued
granting new tax holidays for most investment undertakings. More recently, the 2016 Parliamentary
Budget Speech made reference to new incentives to be offered including those to promote investment
in lagging regions.

At the same time, Sri Lanka is facing a long-term decline in fiscal revenue, coupled with high public
debt which reduces the ability of the country to continue foregoing revenue, prompting the need to
rethink the role of investment incentive going forward. Tax revenue to GDP was 24% in 1978, declining
to 15% in 2000 and reached 12% in 2013. Particularly in this current environment of changing incentive
25
     This section draws from findings of the technical assistance provided by Hania Kronfol (Investment Policy Officer).
policies and growing budgetary constraints, the Government of Sri Lanka has come under pressure to
improve the governance of its incentives regime, and increase the cost-effectiveness of incentives in
attracting investment and fostering different policy objectives. Under the recently agreed program with
the IMF, the incentives under the Special Development Projects Act and the BOI Act have been
suspended and will likely be derogated through amendments to these acts. The suspension of the
current incentives framework presents a good opportunity to re-think the role of incentives and
determine what incentives may be affordable to the country going forward and how to enhance their
efficacy.

Sri Lanka’s incentives regime is characterized by frequent changes to the design and types of
incentives offered. Investors value predictability in a country’s tax regime, particularly for establishing
longer-term projections for business operations and profitability. In Sri Lanka, the incentives regime is a
notably dynamic one, involving both minor and major changes over the past five years. There is a
practice of updating the incentives regime on an annual basis based on priorities set out in the
Parliamentary budget speech. Arguably, it is important for a country to periodically review its incentives
regime based on cost-benefit considerations, a shift in government priorities, and/or changing market
conditions. However, the frequency by which these changes occur in Sri Lanka, coupled with a lack of
clarity, as well as of underlying economic rationale around the revisions, contribute to an unpredictable
business environment for investors.

It is important to enhance the governance and administration of the incentives regime. A number of
different actors may be involved in the governance and administration of incentives, without clear
delineation of their roles and responsibilities. Although the Government has made efforts to unify the
coordination of incentives under the sole purview of the Ministry of Finance, there remains some
ambiguity regarding the role of BOI in granting distinct incentives. Notably, for example, the authority
of BOI to grant tax holidays under the BOI Act and Regulation No. 2 of 2006 was never formally
rescinded. Since August of 2015 (following uncertainty around the 2015 Budget), the BOI has been
following these older 2006 provisions--in effect recreating an alternate incentives regime. Moreover,
the BOI has traditionally played a role in developing tax packages for projects approved under the
Strategic Development Projects (SDP) Act of 2008. Under this Act, projects designated to be of strategic
importance to national interest, with Parliamentary approval, may receive preferential tax incentives,
including tax holidays. Although the 2016 Budget Speech announced that no more projects will be
approved under this Act, it is not clear whether these packages may be re-introduced at a later stage. It
is important that investors are approached with a coherent incentives regime under a governance
framework that supports clarity and transparency. These attributes should be codified in such a way
that minimizes discretionary application, different interpretations, and frequent or arbitrary changes.
While different agencies may be involved in attracting investment, their actions need to be aligned, and
their roles, responsibilities and authority clearly delineated.

Similarly, the legal framework pertaining to investment incentives is complex. The Inland Revenue Act
of 2006 involves a lengthy and expansive web of provisions, and includes an overlapping mix of
procedural and substantive provisions. Numerous additions, deletions and amendments to the Act have
made the text hard to follow and have largely obscured its original organizational tenets. Following
international good practice, Tax Codes should be organized around key tax principles, and use plain and
simple language, such that they are easy to understand and promote consistency in interpretation.
Particularly if incentives are to attract investors, the legal details supporting these incentives (including
the types of incentives offered, the eligibility criteria, and reporting requirements) should be easy to
locate and comprehend.

The way forward: re-designing the incentives framework

Conducting the systematic calculations of tax expenditure, estimating the revenue foregone through
the provision of tax incentives is a necessary first step. Currently these are not calculated
systematically and regularly by the Government. International good practice suggests that a country’s
incentives regime should be reviewed periodically to include analysis of the cost and benefits of
incentives. But without a coordinated system to accurately collect and review information on the
revenue foregone (to include corporate income tax exemptions, Customs exemptions, and VAT
exemptions), the Government will struggle to estimate the costs associated with these incentives –
hampering further analysis on their effectiveness. This lack of systematic data collection in Sri Lanka is
compounded by the practice in which firms receiving tax holidays are not required to file income tax
returns.

Similarly, it is necessary to conduct analysis of the costs and benefits of incentives and the economic
rationale for revisions to the incentives regime. While a number of changes have taken place over the
past several years relating to Sri Lanka’s incentives regime, these changes (and further suggested
revisions) are not readily supported by an evaluation of the cost-benefit implications. As such, it is
challenging to draw substantive conclusions on the extent and influence of Sri Lanka’s incentives in
attracting investment and fostering other policy objectives. Implications related to government revenue
comprise an important part of such reviews, but it is equally important to address other objectives
considered a priority by the Government, including for example, investment generated, job creation and
export promotion. If Sri Lanka is to adopt a targeted and smart incentives regime that maximizes value
for money, this type of cost-benefit assessment would be critical to underpin the design and application
of their incentive instruments.

The Government may benefit from adopting a more targeted set of investment incentives . The
Government has made efforts to limit the use of tax holidays, which are considered rather blunt
instruments for attracting investment. A variety of other tax instruments, particularly those that are
performance-based (e.g. linked to investment levels or jobs created) or those that promote skills or
innovation may be more effective in achieving different goals across various sectors. Understanding
firm-responsiveness across different activities and tailoring the incentives regime accordingly could help
the Government increase their cost-effectiveness.
     5. Enhancing innovation and entrepreneurship26

Sri Lanka is embarking on an ambitious journey of economic transformation and global integration,
wherein innovation and entrepreneurship are key drivers of competitiveness. The focus of the Sri
Lankan authorities is to rebalance its economic growth model to being more open, private sector-led,
knowledge-intensive, and one that successfully develops and sells higher value goods and services in
global and domestic markets. Three actions to enable this transition involve: (1) revitalizing export
oriented small and medium enterprises (SMEs), (2) fast-tracking the formation and scaling of growth
oriented start-up companies and (3) rationalizing and upgrading the research and development (R&D)
sector in Sri Lanka. Each of these actions will require very distinct yet highly complementary set of
initiatives to achieve the desired results. All three actions are essential elements of the economic
modernization process Sri Lanka is undertaking to improve its competitiveness vis-à-vis its competitors
in the global economy.

Sri Lanka’s post-war economic performance is encouraging but the transition to upper middle-income
status is not guaranteed. With the cessation of the protracted armed conflict, a new era of opportunity
has dawned. The country’s strategic geographical location, access to growing markets in Asia, high
human development indicators, and human and environmental assets, position it well for the transition
out of lower and beyond. However, the transition to middle-income status will be challenging. Sri Lanka
is already competing against cheaper labor in neighboring low-income economies (e.g. Bangladesh,
Cambodia and Laos) and with higher productivity, technologically sophisticated economies (e.g.
Singapore, Malaysia and South Korea). The challenge is already apparent. Sri Lanka’s exports to GDP
ratio has halved in the last decade, the proportion of high value exports in total exports is very low, and
the global market share of exports is declining.

Innovation and entrepreneurship offer potential for transformational impact on the Sri Lankan
economy. The transformation to upper middle-income status essentially requires a transition from an
economy largely driven by commodity products and relatively inexpensive inputs to production (e.g.,
labor) to a knowledge-intensive economy focused on developing and commercializing high value
products and services. Innovation and entrepreneurship can be key in this transition as they are the
source of the development and commercialization of these new products and services. This
transformation would need to be driven by a growth oriented agenda that leverages:

         Export oriented SMEs with strong growth potential
         Growth oriented start-up companies
         Industry-facing research and development capabilities




26
   This section was prepared by a team led by Natasha Kapil (Senior Innovation and Entrepreneurship Specialist) and reflects the
findings of the “Sri Lanka Innovation and Entrepreneurship Diagnostic? conducted by the World Bank in May 2016.
Enabling Export Oriented SMEs

Sri Lanka can strategically leverage its islands of excellence. Sri Lanka boasts a few important global
brands, however these are relatively small islands of success within the island of Sri Lanka. The
challenge is to leverage the vision, leadership, knowledge, and global networks of some of Sri Lanka’s
anchor firms and greatly expand the number of highly successful Sri Lankan firms selling high value
added products and services globally. One key area of focus is to enable export oriented SMEs to
achieve greater success. Traditional sectors and emerging industrial verticals could benefit from a
combination of the following initiatives, including:

       Reintroducing incentives for technology adoption
       Developing channels for greater access to supply chains and international markets
       Strengthening the national quality infrastructure (NQI)
       Addressing technological skills gaps

Building linkages between the larger anchor enterprises and export oriented SMEs could be an
important way to facilitate integration with global value chains and new markets. This approach
enables SMEs to build their market knowledge, understand product, quality, and service requirements in
international markets and pursue a growth strategy that involves both the use of existing technologies
as well as development of new high value products and services.


Enabling and Scaling Growth Oriented Start-Ups

Another area of focus is to enable and scale growth-oriented start-ups in Sri Lanka. Growth-oriented
start-ups are often the source of innovative business models, products and services that can have a
transformative economic impact. Although Sri Lanka’s progress in launching these types of start -ups is
very limited, there are signs of progress and early indicators of success, particularly in the area of digital
entrepreneurship and tourism.

Competitors are accelerating the innovation race by enabling their start-up communities through
comprehensive ecosystem approaches. In January this year, India launched “Start-up India? program
that provides three years of tax-free environment for newly formed start-ups (including an entire
package of regulatory simplification and incubation activities specially tailored for start-ups). Just this
month, Indian authorities announced an integrated national intellectual property rights policy to
strengthen the confidence of foreign investors keen on manufacturing products with high value IP in
India (a deterrent for multinationals that don’t produce highly innovative products in China so as not to
reveal sensitive intellectual property). Singapore, Korea, China, and many other Asian countries, have
developed robust national innovation agencies that stimulate early stage innovation in start-ups via
publicly funded schemes and establishment of shared infrastructure, and have also leveraged private
angel and venture capital investors to finance the scaling of start-ups. If Sri Lanka wishes to attract and
raise regionally or globally oriented startups it must focus on creating a simplified and enabling business
environment with a supportive innovation and entrepreneurship policy mix.
Sri Lanka’s policy and regulatory environment needs significant attention if it is to support the entry
and scaling of growth-oriented start-ups. Actions to accelerate startup formation or improve their
growth prospects include, but are not limited to:

       Eliminating the costs associated with starting up and closing an enterprise (Sri Lanka recently
        introduced a minimum Rs. 60,000 annual tax on enterprises and a Rs. 250,000 tax on enterprise
        closures that is creating substantial concern in the start-up community and could deter potential
        entrepreneurs from formalizing or starting altogether)
       Resolving payment gateway issues to enable swift electronic fund transfer from abroad,
        particularly important for new export-oriented firms with international clients
       Liberalizing labor laws to allow re-staffing of start-ups as they business models pivot
       Announcing the capital gains tax rate; uncertainty around the rate is causing consternation
        among start-ups and particularly their international investors
       Enabling access to early stage innovation finance, incubation or acceleration and shared
        infrastructure facilities
       Raising awareness around the distinct growth patterns and needs of start-ups among
        government agencies (e.g., Inland Revenue, Central Bank) as well as the banking sector to create
        a conducive environment in which the Sri Lankan start-up community can thrive.

The Sri Lankan start-up ecosystem has a globally connected heartbeat. Digital entrepreneurs typically
tend to be the first movers in most nascent innovation ecosystems as the barriers to their formation and
scaling tend to be lower. Sri Lanka’s start-up landscape is dominated by digital entrepreneurs. Most of
these start-ups are adapting proven business models to local circumstances and considering regional
markets to scale. Going forward, it will be important for Sri Lanka to nurture start-ups beyond digital and
enable those that are willing to take on both technology and market risk. A testament to Sri Lanka’s
potential is the impressive proportion of start-ups with diaspora or foreign co-founders. These start-ups
are well versed with global technological trends, highly networked with investors globally and active in
global markets. In short, they offer a fast track option to rebalancing the private sector landscape in Sri
Lanka (beyond large anchor firms and SMEs). This is a unique opportunity for Sri Lanka to catch up with
progressive countries in this important dimension of growth and take definitive actions to address the
distinct needs of the existing and future start-up community.


Upgrading and Rationalizing the Research and Development Sector

For a middle-income country aspiring to embark on a knowledge based growth trajectory, Sri Lanka’s
expenditures on R&D are dismally low (0.16 percent of GDP), and enterprise R&D is insignificant. Sri
Lanka’s investment in R&D is substantially below other economies in the region (and dominated by
public spend), particularly in comparison with countries like Vietnam (0.18 percent), Thailand (0.25
percent), Malaysia (1.0 percent) and India (0.81 percent). Low enterprise R&D investments put Sri Lanka
at a severe disadvantage when attempting to compete with countries in the development of high value
products and services, attracting R&D leaders and fostering foreign direct investment (FDI).
It’s important to note, that there are small islands of R&D progress in Sri Lanka. Select private sector
enterprises have demonstrated considerable success by harnessing R&D as part of their growth strategy
and in order to avoid being eliminated by downward wage pressures or disrupted by global innovation
trends (e.g., MAS Holdings). Further, institutions such as the Sri Lanka Institute of Nano Technology
(SLINTEC) - a unique public-private partnership model that brings together an interdisciplinary set of
anchor firms in Sri Lanka, Industrial Technology Institute (ITI), and the University of Moratuwa have all
made considerable progress in developing R&D capabilities to deliver value to Sri Lankan enterprises.
The Sri Lankan authorities would do well to celebrate the practices of these firms as examples of
domestic success that can be emulated.

However, if the Sri Lankan research sector is to become relevant and provide timely innovation inputs
to the private sector, the following major challenges need to be addressed:

       Severe fragmentation of research institutions and inadequate policy environment: There are
        around 44 research institutions and 17 universities in Sri Lanka. In general, there is little
        scientific research being conducted at global standards and incentives at the institutional and
        researcher level are not calibrated to incent either research excellence or relevance to societal
        or industrial needs. As a result, research programs are fragmented, supply driven and rapidly
        becoming irrelevant to private sector needs.
       Severe underfunding of the R&D Sector: Given the severe fragmentation of the R&D sector and
        limited public funding for R&D, programs are generally unable to conduct research that is
        impactful. It is also increasingly difficult to attract and retain high quality research staff into
        these organizations and brain drain has become a major concern. Many of these institutions are
        already in decline and on a path to failure if the current trends continue.
       Dominance of the Public Sector: In most developed economies, the private sector accounts for
        well over half of R&D spending. In Sri Lanka, the public sector dominates R&D funding. Steps
        need to be taken to foster greater private sector investment in R&D and innovation more
        broadly. Given the limited fiscal space, Sri Lanka has a unique opportunity to reorganize its
        public resources to leverage firm level investments as well as public private partnership models
        within verticals (e.g. SLINTEC).
       Weak Intellectual Property regime (IPR): There is no national intellectual property rights policy
        that would establish clear guidelines for the transfer of publicly funded research or create
        incentives for technology commercialization with the private sector. The National Patent Office
        also needs a complete overhaul in order to meet future demand from the private sector.


Towards a reform in innovation and entrepreneurship
Enabling innovation and entrepreneurship in Sri Lanka involves building and supporting an integrated
system with many stakeholders and actors. When considering the establishment of an enabling
environment, there are a number of initial steps that will be critical to success.

One of the first steps is to create a robust fast track environment for start-ups that fosters the
development of enterprises focused on developing and commercializing innovative products and
services based often on early stage technology emerging from public and private R&D operations. Key
actions to be taken involve establishing a friendlier and more conducive IP policy, regulatory, tax and
financing environment for start-up enterprises.

A second step is to enable vertical integration of SMEs in order to produce higher value products and
services and facilitate access to international markets. Key actions to be taken involve enabling SME
access to supportive R&D infrastructure and activities, supporting access to relevant technology
available internationally, and fostering SME linkages with anchor firms and relevant global markets.

A third step is to rationalize and modernize the R&D sector in Sri Lanka . Key actions to be taken
involve refocusing the R&D sector on creating value for society and the private sector (particularly in
support of SME and start-up enterprise success), strengthening the IPR regime to foster the
development and protection of high value technology, and consolidating the R&D sector as necessary to
improve performance, increase cost-effectiveness, and build valuable relationships with the private
sector.
Annex 1: Suggested reforms to improve Sri Lanka’s ease of doing
business
TOPIC                  SHORT-TERM RECOMMENDATIONS                MEDIUM- AND LONG-TERM RECOMMENDATIONS

                            (WITHIN SIX MONTHS)                           (MORE THAN SIX MONTHS)


Starting a    Complete computerization of records at         Introduce a Single Identification for
business       RoC, and link database with Inland              companies to be identifiable across
               Revenue Department’s tax registration           databases at the different government
               database                                        entities
              Implement a one-stop shop (OSS) that           Approve and implement amendments to
               allows new companies to register with the       the Companies Act to simplify the
               multiple entities involved in company           requirements related to having an external
               registration                                    company secretary and eliminate the
                                                               requirement for a public notice of
                                                               incorporation in the Gazette and
                                                               newspaper
                                                              Introduce paperless online registration
Dealing       Implement full computerization of              Introduce fully operational system for
with           construction permitting records at CMC          electronic document submission
constructi    Conduct comprehensive assessment of            Introduce and fully implement risk-based
on             construction permitting procedures at           inspections during construction
permits        CMC to identify current bottlenecks, and       Implement workflow management system
               implement improved workflow                     for filing, processing and tracking
                                                               construction permit applications
                                                              Introduce service standards and
                                                               accountability measures for Colombo
                                                               Municipality officers
                                                              Assess potential introduction of reliable
                                                               liability and insurance systems for the
                                                               construction sector
Registerin    Complete digitization of registration          Introduce standardized sale-purchase
g              records and cadaster for Colombo, to            contracts (deeds of transfer), and consider
property       allow for electronic records searching and      changes to the role of notaries
               encumbrances checking                          Link databases related to land registration
              Conduct an assessment to identify quality       information at CMC and land registry, and
               gaps in Sri Lanka’s overall land governance     introduce single window combining
               regime                                          property transfer processes at the two
                                                               locations
                                                              Make official statistics tracking property
                                                               transfers available to the public
Getting       Upgrade infrastructure at credit bureau to     Develop credit scoring and provide it as an
               allow inclusion of non-financial data           additional value-added service in credit
credit        (insurance, telecoms, utilities, retailers) in     reports
              the longer-run                                    Expand reach of credit bureau to include
             Approve and implement new Secured                  data from non-financial and microfinance
              Transactions Act (2015) allowing for               institutions
              secured transactions in movable collateral,
              ensuring that it includes international best
              practices such as:
                         o Unified legal framework that
                             extends to creation,
                             publicity and enforcement
                             of security interests in
                             movable assets
                         o Allowing general description
                             of assets, depts. And
                             secured obligations
                         o Ensuring that the movable
                             assets collateral registry is
                             indexed by borrower and
                             unified geographically, with
                             an electronic database
                             indexed by debtors’ name
                             searchable online
                         o Protecting secured creditors’
                             rights by providing clear
                             grounds for relief from stay
                             and/or a time limit
Protectin                                                       Revise and amend the Companies Act of
g                                                                2007 and other relevant regulations to
minority                                                         strengthen minority shareholder rights
investors                                                        and protections including:
                                                                          o Allowing minority
                                                                              shareholders to access
                                                                              relevant company
                                                                              documents, and easing the
                                                                              requirements governing the
                                                                              identification of documents
                                                                              requested
                                                                          o Requiring shareholders’
                                                                              approval for the issuance of
                                                                              new shares, and
                                                                              automatically granting
                                                                              shareholders preemption
                                                                              rights on new shares
                                                                          o Barring CEOs from also
                                                                              serving as Chair of the board
                                                                              of directors
                                                                          o Requiring that the
                                                                             compensation of individual
                                                                             managers be disclosed
Paying       Conduct a process-mapping exercise to           Simplify the Inland Revenue Act to
taxes         simplify the current tax administration as a     facilitate the administration of the tax
              first step towards an efficient                  system and improve tax compliance
              administration                                  Simplify the VAT framework with the
             Test run and evaluate RAMIS online               objective of establishing a single broad-
              taxpayer registration and filing system          based VAT legislation administered under
              capabilities and gradually expend its            a single implementation framework
              application                                     Strengthen current audit practices with
             Introduce periodic taxpayer perception           the objective of moving towards a
              and compliance surveys                           functional risk-based audit system
Trading      Identify opportunities to streamline            Enable fully electronic, paperless
across        documentation requirements for export            submission of documents and payment to
borders       and import                                       Customs and Port Authority
             Conduct a multi-agency review of trade          Fully implement best practices in
              information availability, and develop an         processing and audits (such as risk
              online National Trade Portal Website             management systems, pre-arrival
             Update Customs Ordinance and other laws          processing and post-clearance audits)
              and regulations to allow for the                Connect relevant agencies through an
              implementation of best practices in              electronic single window
              processing and screening of traded
              merchandise such as risk management,
              pre-arrival processing and post-clearance
              audits
Enforcing    Develop comprehensive and verifiable            Use the data collected at the courts to
contracts     court statistics to allow for the                introduce accountability measures and
              identification of causes for delays at the       improve efficiency
              courts                                          Pass amendments to Civil Procedure Code
             Conduct an assessment of court processes         to reduce delays for commercial disputes
              and the legal framework to identify and         Publish more detailed court data once
              address underlying causes of delays              data collection has been completed for at
                                                               least a year, and make publicly available
                                                               judgments in commercial cases
                                                              Introduce automated case management
                                                               systems at courts
                                                              Implement good practices in use of
                                                               electronic systems for filing of summons,
                                                               service of process and payment of court
                                                               fees such as electronic filing, electronic
                                                               service of process, and electronic payment
                                                               of court fees
Resolving          Revise and implement new                  Invest in the capacity of the institutions
insolvenc           Companies Act chapter to allow for         handling insolvency cases, and in
                    restructuring of viable businesses         regulations and training for practitioners
y   facing insolvency, and ensure that        Introduce legislation strengthening
    good practices for restructuring are       creditors’ rights in participating in
    implemented, such as:                      insolvency proceedings
        o Allowing the continuation of        Explore establishing an expedited
             contracts supplying essential     framework for SME insolvency
             goods and services to the
             debtor;
        o providing for the possibility
             of the debtor or
             administrators to obtain
             secured and unsecured
             financing after
             commencement of
             insolvency proceedings, and
             assign priority to post-
             commencement credit;
        o Requiring that dissenting
             creditors in reorganization
             receive at least as much as
             what they would obtain in a
             liquidation;
        o Dividing the creditors into
             classes for the purposes of
             voting on the reorganization
             plan (with each class voting
             separately and with
             creditors in the same class
             treated equally).
Annex 2: Recommendations on trade facilitation stemming from the
Sri Lanka–WTO TFA Validation and Reform Map

TFA Article   Recommendations
              Short = < 1 year; Medium = < 3 years; Long = > 3 years
              Institutional (I); Processes, procedures, and operations (P); Laws and Regulations (LR);
              Information Technology and Automation (IT); Capacity Building, Training, and Human
              Resources (HR); Facilities (F); Analytical (A); Information Dissemination and
              Communication (C); Strategy and Policy (SP)
1.1            Short
Publication     Review all publications produced by border agencies and in consultation with the
                    business community; identify and fill gaps in available information. (P)
                In consultation with the business community, identify easily accessible points for
                    obtaining publications dealing with processes, fees, penalties, and appeals. These
                    points should typically be the enquiry points; see 1.3. (A, P)
               Medium
                Ensure all laws, regulations, directives, and procedures involving all border agencies
                    are published and made easily available to the public in Colombo and in other major
                    towns. (I, P, F)
                Review agency facilities and resources, including staff numbers and training, to
                    successfully deal with increasing volumes of information requests. (F, HR)
                Issue clear guidelines on time lines for publishing information and answers to
                    queries. (L)
                Clarify with the AG’s office concerns over 1.d, e, and h, and articulate a clear plan of
                    action to mitigate issues. (L, P)

1.2           Short
Information    Clarify and ensure legal requirements exist or promulgate the need to have all laws,
Available          regulations, orders, guides, and forms to be made available on the Internet. (SP)
through        Review the management, operation, and content of the Customs website to ensure
Internet           that information is comprehensive, easily accessible, and current. (P, IT)
               Develop and provide long-term support for a query-based, user-oriented trade
                   information portal that contains all trade-related regulatory information. The
                   decision to develop a national trade portal has not been made, and consequently the
                   design has not yet been determined nor have the procedures, roles, and
                   responsibilities of stakeholders been defined. It is recommended that design and
                   implementation of any future national trade enquiry portal should be aligned with
                   international best practices. (Background and additional guidance on the trade portal
                   principle and benefits can be found at the World Bank’s site under “Developing a
                      Trade Information Portal.? These have been implemented in the Lao People’s
                      Democratic Republic and Lesotho.) (I, L, P, IT, HR)

                 Medium
                  Provide support to ICTA to further develop and implement e-government services in
                     the trade-related agencies. (I, IT)

1.3              Short
Enquiry Points    A feasibility study should be undertaken to ascertain the following (A):
                        o If it would be appropriate to expand the One-Stop Shop representation to
                           include more border regulatory agencies
                        o If the current enquiry points have the capability to adequately provide trade
                           information
                        o The need to provide more enquiry points both in Colombo and in the regions
                           (single versus multiple enquiry points, agency or agencies to host and
                           participate, staffing needs, modes of operation, information to be provided)
                  Publish guidelines and time frames for provision of information in response to
                      enquiries from the public or business community
                 Medium
                  Enhance the number, motivation, and training of staff dealing with enquiries in all
                      agencies to deal with a wide range of information in a timely manner. (I, HR)
                  Define required procedures, and roles and responsibilities for collection and
                      coordination of information and operation of the enquiry point. (P)
                  Provide IT and material support as required. (F, IT)
                  Provide training and public outreach (HR, C)
                 Long
                  In the long term, establish a South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
                      (SAARC) enquiry point that would be capable of giving trade informational for all its
                      members. (I, F, HR, L, SP)

2.1              Short
Opportunity to    Develop standard operating procedures (SOPs) for obtaining stakeholder comments
Comment and          and input on government proposals which will apply to all agencies. (P, I, C)
Information      Medium
before Entry      Implement a legal requirement to mandate a statutory period for consultation with
into Force           stakeholders and information on any changes prior to their entry into force. (L)
                  Implement a legal requirement to mandate government to allow a specified grace
                     period between the passage of laws, regulations, and policies and their entry into
                     force. Publish new or amended laws and regulations of general application as early as
                     possible before their entry into force. (L)
2.2              Short
Consultations     Develop SOPs for consultative fora. (P)
                  Review the membership, terms of reference, and key agenda items of the National
                     Trade Facilitation Committee (NTFC). (P, I)
                  Publicize the terms of reference and information for the NTFC within the business
                     community. (C)
                 Medium
                  Provide the necessary legal requirement for regular consultations with stakeholders.
                     (L)

3.               Short
Advance           Develop an advance ruling system for determining the origin of imported goods. (P)
Rulings           Ensure appropriate staffing and equipment for staff who provide advance rulings,
                     and provide them with suitable training. (HR, F)
                  Develop a communications strategy to ensure the business community is aware of
                     the advance ruling process and the benefits it provides. (C)
                  Support allowing rulings on all matters covered under paragraph 9(b) of the article.
                     (SP)
                 Medium
                  Include the provisions of this article in any revision or amendment to the Customs
                     Ordinance. (L)

4.               Short
Procedures for    Ensure there is a legal basis for Customs appeals in line with international best
Appeal or             practice—within the agency, through an independent tribunal, and through judicial
Review                review (L).
                 Medium
                  Review appeals procedures for other border agencies, in consultation with the
                      business community, to ensure procedures are fair and effective. (A, C, P)
                  Ensure there is legal basis for appeals in all other agencies. (L)

5.1              Medium
Notifications     Implement a common risk-based methodology across all related agencies in regard to
for Enhanced         the issuance of notices for controls and inspections. (I, SP, P)
Controls of       Ensure all enhanced controls are included and removed from the risk management
Inspections          system promptly. (I, LR, P)
                  Develop and implement a system for issuing and canceling special (enhanced) alerts.
                     (IT)
                  Develop connectivity between border control agencies, and enable the issuance of
                     notifications and alerts under any single-window project. (IT, P, HR)
5.2               Program ASYCUDAWorld to include a “detention notice? that will indicate that the
Detention             goods are being detained and the reasons for detention. (IT)
                  Formalize the process and procedure for communication to importers of the
                      detention of imported cargo. (P, C)
                  Ensure all government agencies have appropriate legislation in place authorizing the
                      detention of cargo. (LR)
5.3              Short
Test              Identify any legal gaps on second tests in all border agencies conducting tests. (L)
Procedures        Put in place procedures to ensure that independent testing is available in the event
                      of appeals. (P)
                  Ensure that the “right to a second test? procedure, the list of laboratories, and other
                      information is made publicly available through the trade portal. (IT)
                  Review all aspects of the availability, legal provisions, procedures, publication, and
                      accreditation of laboratory testing for imports and exports, with a particular focus on
                      the provisions for appeals and second tests. (A, L, P)
6.1              Short
General           Review all fees to ensure compliance with the WTO; i.e., limited to cost recovery and
Disciplines on        not ad valorem. Eliminate any fees that are no longer necessary. Implement
Fees and              recommendations from the review. (I, L, P, A)
Charges           List and publish all fees and charges in one consolidated document that is made
                      easily accessible on the Internet and the trade portal. (IT)
6.2              Short
Specific          Ensure fees are charged only for services provided. (L)
Disciplines on    Review all Customs fees to align them with the requirements of the article. (L)
Fees and          Consider reviewing the fees of other agencies, including the SLSI. (SP, P)
Charges
6.3              Short
Penalty           Ensure all penalty schedules, guidelines, and procedures are published on agency
Disciplines           websites and available in print from enquiry points. (C)
                 Medium/Long
                  Review the penalty system to ensure it is in line with TFA obligations and best
                      practice. There are implications for overall institutional reform (see cross-cutting
                      issues). (P, L, I)
                  Introduce legislation to support the current Customs administrative penalties regime
                      (support would be required). (LR)
                  Review the current Customs ordinance and update the provisions to reflect WTO and
                      other international standards, to remove inconsistencies, and to ensure that
                      penalties are imposed only on those responsible for a breach. (LR)
                  Abolish the current reward schemes and/or replace them with others that comply
                      with the TFA requirement. (LR, I, HR)
7.1              Short
Pre-Arrival       Formulate proper legal provisions to address pre-arrival processing. (L)
Processing         Revise relevant laws and procedures to eliminate the dependency on original bills of
                    lading and delivery orders to initiate processing and clearance. (L, P)
                 Develop SOPs for Customs’ use and guidelines for traders’ use to ensure consistent
                    application of pre-arrival processing procedures. (P)
                Medium
                 Undertake consultations with all stakeholders in the border agencies and the
                    business community to ensure the system is implemented effectively and provides
                    for the advance issue of import permits. (I, C)
                 Undertake a sensitization program to ensure the business community has a greater
                    understanding of the benefits of the process. (C)
7.2             Short
Electronic       Accommodate multiple private sector banks in the electronic payment system. (L, P,
Payment             I)
                Medium
                 Develop policy and/or legislation to allow payment of duties, taxes, and fees online
                    and/or by credit and debit cards. Consider amalgamating clearance-related charges
                    into a single payment (for example, through Customs). (l, SP)
                 Ensure that the legislation for all border regulatory agencies clearly allows for the
                    electronic payment of all fees and charges related to international trade. (L)
                 Mandate that all border agencies implement electronic payments for fees and
                    charges collected for international transactions. (L, P, I, IT)

7.3             Medium
Separation of    Include the provisions of this article in any revision/amendment to the Customs
Release from         Ordinance. (L)
Final            Ensure that policy and procedures are consistent with the Revised Kyoto Convention.
Determination        (SP, P)
                 Develop SOPs for the use of Customs officials. (P)
                 Develop guidelines for importers outlining the procedures to be followed, and make
                     them available through the Internet and hard-copy publication. (IT)
7.4             Short
Risk              Prepare the legislation necessary to fully implement risk management. (A)
Management        Include the provisions of this article in any revision/amendment to the Customs
                    Ordinance. (L)
                  Lobby the government to adjust policies and legislation that currently prevent the
                    effective application of risk management. (C)
                  Eliminate the mandate to examine 100 percent of shipments. (L)
                  Establish a risk management compliance policy and guidelines. (SP)
                  Develop a risk management policy, strategy, procedures, and SOPs. (SP, P)
                  Conduct a training needs assessment for risk management to significantly
                    enhance the human resource capacity within the Customs risk management
                      team. (A)
                  Medium
                    Introduce intelligence-based risk profiles. (P)
                    Fully implement the ASYCUDAWorld selectivity module. (IT)
                    Significantly enhance the human resource capacity within the Customs risk
                      management team. (HR)
                    Allocate dedicated resources within each border agency, in addition to those in
                      Customs, to undertake risk analysis using a range of resources, while obtaining
                      continuous feedback on results, to create more timely and accurate profiles. (HR, IT,
                      C)
                    Guide and assist other agencies to introduce and apply risk management. (P)
7.5               Short
Postclearance      Include the provisions of this article in any revision or amendment to the Customs
Audit                  Ordinance, and in particular address all kinds of audits. (L)
                   Develop a PCA policy, manual, and procedures, and instructions at Customs. (SP, P)
                  Medium
                   Review the issues that are creating staff turnover in PCA, and introduce measures to
                       encourage retention and development of staff. (I, HR)
                   Provide enhanced training in audit skills, including in the analysis of electronic
                       accounting systems. Provide IT tools to staff. (IT, HR)
7.6               Short
Establishment      Develop a formal government requirement to conduct time release studies on a
and Publication        scheduled basis. (P, L)
of Average         Conduct further time release studies involving all stakeholders (public and private).
Release Times          (P)
                   Publicize the results of the studies on agency websites and eventually on the trade
                       information portal. (C, IT)
                  Long
                   Develop the internal capacity to conduct and analyze time release studies. (HR)

7.7               Short
Measures for       Include the provisions of this article in any revision/amendment to the Customs
Authorized             Ordinance. (L)
Operators          Enhance the Authorized Operator (AO) program to be in line with the TFA and
                       international best practice. Develop a manual of procedures and instructions. (SP, P)
                  Medium
                   Continue to develop the program and increase the number of businesses within the
                       AO scheme, including consulting the business community about what would
                       encourage businesses to participate. (P)
                   Build understanding and training of staff within Customs to ensure they fully
                       understand and participate in the effective operation of the AO process. (HR)
                   Enhance the business community’s awareness and understanding of the scheme and
                    their need to comply with the criteria, including that related to supply chain security.
                    This can be undertaken through proactive publicity campaigns and information
                    sessions. (C)
                   Review the involvement of other border agencies within the AO process and develop
                    a system for incorporating their regulatory needs in the process, with appropriate
                    benefits for compliant businesses. (SP, P, I)
7.8                Clarify and streamline the de minimis concession to be simple, transparent, and fair
Expedited           to the private sector and easy to apply for Customs. (SP, P)
Shipments          Ensure instructions and orders are published including online and enquiry points are
                    trained to deal with questions and complaints. (SP, P, HR)
                   Implement ASYCUDA at the airport. (IT)
                   Ensure the clearance processes for expedited shipments are streamlined across all
                    agencies. (P)

7.9             Medium
Perishable       Ensure that the proposed amended Customs Ordinance and amendments to other
Goods              acts and regulations require priority be given to examination and release of
                   perishable shipments. (L)
                 Develop and implement a common set of procedures across the border agencies for
                   the clearance of perishable goods. (P)
                 Develop and implement a coordination mechanism among border agencies and the
                   appropriate elements of the private sector, potentially through a working group
                   under the NTFC. (I)
                 Assess the need of government agencies to establish storage facilities for perishable
                   shipments pending their release, and develop a strategy based on the analysis of
                   gaps and constraints in the sector. (A, SP, F)

8               Short
Border Agency    Entrust the NTFC to be the key avenue to develop, strengthen, and formalize border
Cooperation         agency coordination. (I)
                Medium
                 Identify and develop MOUs and SOPs for key activities that require interagency
                    coordination; for example, joint inspections, dealing with rejected goods, working
                    hours. (I, HR, L)
                 In the medium term, consider developing a coordinated border management
                    strategy or policy that incorporates the above elements. (I, SP, LR)
9                     No recommendations
Movement of
Goods
Intended for
Import under
Customs
Control
10.1              Short
Formalities and    Review all documentation requirements for imports and exports across all agencies,
Documentation          with a view to reducing the number of documents and increasing use of electronic
Requirements           submission of documents. (L, P, A)
                   Enable through law or regulation the requirement to review documents and
                       formalities on a regular and periodic basis. (L)
                  Medium
                   Review the need for multiple registrations across numerous agencies. This would
                       require automation and electronic links between agencies to enable data sharing.
                       This may also require legal amendments. (A, L, IT, P)
                   Clarify the roles of all officers in respect to document inspection and control to
                       ensure a risk-based clearance process is implemented. (I, HR)
                   Enable delegation of roles on a legal basis for agencies that carry out same or similar
                       tasks that result in additional costs to businesses. (L, P)
                   Create a port action plan to deal with issues of ingress and egress, dwell time, system
                       redundancy, and operational efficiency. (SP, P, LR)

10.2              Short
Acceptance of      Conduct a thorough review of current legislation and data standards relevant to the
Copies                 acceptance of copies and electronic sharing of information across all border related
                       agencies, with a view to rationalization and standardization. (A, LR)
                   Resolve the legal ambiguity over the acceptance of copies of documents across all
                       border agencies. This effort could be conducted through the NTFC. (L, A)
                   Conduct a data harmonization assessment to prepare for the upcoming electronic
                       environment as part of the ESW blueprint. (A)
                  Long
                   With the proposed development of the single window and Customs’ electronic
                       clearance system, ensure maximum uptake of electronic documentation by all
                       agencies and the business community. (SP, P)
                   Develop training for and understanding of all border staff of the use and benefits of
                       electronic documents. (HR)
                   Sensitize the business community to the benefits of electronic documentation and
                       processes. (C)
10.3              Short
Use of               Revise and modernize the Customs Ordinance. The new law will require subsidiary
International         regulations. (L)
Standards         Conduct a gap analysis on the implementation of the other international standards,
                      conventions, and frameworks acceded to by Sri Lanka (for example, IPPC, OIE, Codex
                      Alimentarius) to identify legal, institutional, facility, training, and other resource gaps.
                      (A)
                 Medium
                  Increase the business community’s comprehension of and compliance with
                      international standards. (C)
10.4             Short
Single Window     Establish a single-window steering committee with a legal mandate, potentially
                      under the NTFC. (I, L)
                  Prepare a blueprint for ESW implementation that includes a legal action plan,
                      business process model, functional and technical architecture, operational and
                      governance model, fee model, capacity building plan, change management plan, risk
                      management model, procurement plan, and implementation plan (see the WBG
                      guide to ESW). (A, P, I)
                  Ensure the ESW plan is integrated with an e-government strategy and leverages the
                      ICTA experience. (I)
                  Review and develop stakeholder understanding, equipment, and human resource
                      capacity to implement the single window effectively. (I, C)
                 Medium
                  Implement the national single window based on the plan developed through the
                      blueprint. (IT, F, HR)
10.5              Customs should investigate other ways to establish the value for duty of imported
Preshipment           used vehicles that are consistent with the TFA and the WTO Valuation Agreement.
Inspection            Once a methodology is agreed upon and officers trained in its use, the PSI report
                      should not be used for Customs valuation purposes. (LR, P, HR)
10.6             Medium
Use of Customs    Consider the possibility of allowing legal entities (such as companies) to clear goods
Brokers               on their own behalf using their own employees without requiring the employee to
                      hold a license. (L)
                  Review Customs house agent licensing rules to ensure that all licensing criteria are
                      appropriate. (A,L)
10.7             No recommendations
Common
Border
Procedures and
Uniform
Documentation
Requirements
10.8             Short
Rejected Goods    Establish MOUs between agencies and SOPs for the control and safe handling of
                      rejected goods that may be dangerous. (SP, P)
                  Review the imposition of the fee by Customs to determine if there is a method of
                      applying a fee that is consistent with article 6. (L, SP)

10.9                No recommendations
Temporary
Admission of
Goods and
Inward and
Outward
Processing
11                  No recommendations
Freedom of
Transit
12               Short
Customs           Develop and implement a voluntary compliance regime as described in the article. (L,
Cooperation           SP, P)
                 Medium
                  Issue directives to traders regarding the voluntary compliance regime so that they
                      are aware of their rights and obligations. (C)
                  Review Sri Lanka’s commitments under the Nairobi Convention with a view to
                      accepting more annexes. ( A, SP)
                  Develop and implement operational guidelines to give effect to additional
                      commitments made respecting the Nairobi Convention (if any). (P)
23.2             Short
National          Review the current structure, membership, and terms of reference of the NTFC in
Committee on          line with recommended actions in the report. (I)
Trade             Establish a legal mandate for the NTFC. (L)
Facilitation
