Report No: AUS9677




Socialist Republic of Vietnam
Capacity Building for the Management, Planning
and Coordination of the Sanitation Sector at
Subnational Level in Vietnam
Summary Report



10 June, 2016




GWASE

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC




                                       1|Page
Standard Disclaimer:




This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:




The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work
promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                              2|Page
Capacity Building for the Management,
Planning and Coordination of the
Sanitation Sector at the Subnational Level
in Vietnam (P132458)


SUMMARY REPORT


6 June 2016




                                      3|Page
List of acronyms
CNA         Capacity Needs Assessment

CPC         City People’s Committee

CFS         Centre for Flood Control and Sanitation

DARD        Department of Agriculture and Rural Development

DOC         Department of Construction

DOF         Department of Finance

DONRE       Department of Natural Resources and Environment

DPI         Department of Planning and Investment

MOC         Ministry of Construction

MOH         Ministry of Health

PPC         Provincial People’s Committee

U3SAP       Unified Sanitation Sector Strategy and Action Plan

WSP         Water and Sanitation Program




                                                                 4|Page
Summary


Context
Sanitation Services Management in Vietnam
1.     The combined effects of urbanization and economic growth have created increasing pressure on
Vietnam’s ageing and inadequate sanitation infrastructure and services. Water pollution by industrial
wastewater also causes significant economic damage, impacting the quality and output of aquaculture
products. In addition, wastewater from trade villages and aquaculture is causing adverse environmental
impacts.

2.      In most urban centers up to 50% of the urban population are living in “deprived? conditions1
and the environment is degraded by a number of factors relating to poor sanitation such as uncollected
and untreated waste water, polluted surface water (rivers, lakes and coastal waters), polluted ground
water, uncollected solid waste, clogged drainage systems, and industrial pollution.

3.      Ministry of Health (MOH) statistics show that 6% of all diseases are related to polluted water
and 3% of deaths are due to water-borne diseases. A 2008 Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) study
on the economics of sanitation in Vietnam2 found that poor sanitation accounts for some 7.05 million
cases of diarrhea per year and 4,600 deaths. The study estimated that water- and sanitation-related
diseases were responsible for 34% of the US$780 million annual economic impact of poor sanitation in
Vietnam.

4.      Another major challenge in Vietnam’s sanitation sector is the failure to provide satisfactory solid
waste management services, which has resulted in air and water resource pollution. Eye, skin, and
respiratory diseases are more common in the residential areas neighboring landfills that do not conform
to national environmental regulations and standards.

5.      The Government has recognized these challenges and the need for an umbrella strategy to
address all aspects of environmental sanitation in a comprehensive manner. The concept of a unified
sanitation sector strategy came out of a regional water and sanitation meeting in 2005, and since then
WSP has facilitated a national-level dialogue leading to the formulation of the Unified Sanitation Sector
Strategy and Action Plan (U3SAP) proposal.

6.    The Draft Final Report on the U3SAP was submitted to the Ministry of Construction (MOC) in
March 2013. It highlighted many of the challenges and identified priority action plan needs in the

1
      National Urban Upgrading Strategy and Overall Investment Plan for Urban Upgrading to 2020 (NUUP 2020) – Draft Final
     Report, World Bank 2008
2
    Thang P, Tuan H, Hang N and Hutton G. Economic impacts of sanitation in Vietnam. Water and Sanitation Program, World Bank.
     2008.

                                                                                                                 5|Page
management of wastewater and solid waste, covering safe and hygienic collection, transport, treatment
and disposal. The key issues to be addressed include:
         inadequate investment in the sanitation sector,
         poor cost recovery and lack of commercial orientation in service provision,
         technical challenges in the management of surface water drainage, wastewater and solid
           waste,
         limited technical and managerial capacity,
         inconsistencies in the policy framework,
         absence of sector leadership, and
         limited public concern for environmental protection.


Rationale for Providing Technical Assistance to Can Tho City
7.      Although MOC has not yet been able to gain inter-ministerial support for implementation of the
U3SAP, there is general recognition that many of these challenges will take time to address and that
they can only be tackled effectively if human resources capacity in the sector is improved. Given these
delays at the central level of government, this TA will pilot the development of capacity building for the
management, planning and coordination of sanitation services at the provincial level - in the city of Can
Tho.

8.       Under the scope of the U3SAP technical assistance a Sanitation Development Plan was
developed for Can Tho city as a pilot.3 This Plan was approved by Can Tho City Peoples Committee by its
decision No. 2508/QD-UBND dated August 12, 2013. The City Sanitation Development Plan for Can Tho
(the City Sanitation Plan) aims to coordinate the environmental sanitation activities of the city
departments, the district peoples committees, and other related agencies in the city. The City Sanitation
Plan focuses on urban drainage, wastewater collection and treatment, and solid waste management
activities, as well as providing direction and guidance to improve environmental conditions in rural
areas, industrial zones, handicraft villages, and medical institutions. The City Sanitation Plan will be
implemented in 2 phases: a short term phase during 2013-2016 and long term phase during 2016-2020.

9.       Can Tho is the largest city in Mekong Delta prioritized economic zone. The city has 5 urban
districts and 4 rural districts with a total population of around 1.2 million (5th largest city in Vietnam).
The principal commercial activities of the city are agriculture, industry, trade and services. The average
annual economic development rate during the last five years was 13.5%.

10.      Despite the efforts of the City in recent years, the technical infrastructure systems of the city
(including drainage, wastewater collection and treatment, and solid waste management) remain under-
developed and there are inequalities in access to sanitation services. It is estimated that 59% of the
population have access to a flush toilet – 47% indoor and 12% outdoor (2009 Census data). The

3
    Sanitation Development Plan for Can Tho City prepared by Can Tho City Technical Team and U3SAP TA consultants, September
    2012.

                                                                                                               6|Page
remaining 41% will use a latrine.

11.      In the approved City Sanitation Plan, the City has set very clear targets for developing poor-
inclusive sanitation infrastructure systems. By 2016, the City plans to develop and improve policies,
strengthen institutional arrangements, mobilize adequate financial resources, introduce
appropriate/advanced technologies, implement education programs, and build capacity to support the
successful implementation of the second phase the Plan. By 2020 the City plans to have improved the
drainage system to reduce flooding, to have completed a wastewater collection and treatment system
that can serve all urban areas of the city, and to have implemented a solid waste management system
that can adequately cope with the volume of solid waste generated by the city.

12.     To implement the City Sanitation Plan, the City decided to establish a City Environmental
Sanitation Coordinating Committee (the Sanitation Committee), to be chaired by the Vice Chairman of
the City Peoples Committee, with the Director of the city Department of Construction (DOC) as a
standing member. The Sanitation Committee, in collaboration with the city Department of Planning and
Investment (DPI) and Department of Finance (DOF), will be responsible for the development and
implementation of capacity building programs to improve and strengthen sanitation management and
planning capacity in related state management agencies and service providers.

13.      A Study on Human Resources was undertaken as part of the U3SAP technical assistance.4 The
conclusions and recommendations of this study inform the scope of this TA. At the provincial level, DOC
(the Infrastructure Division) is the department most involved in urban sanitation management.
Identified capacity building needs included: using information technology (IT) for managing
infrastructure data; specialized training on planning, and appropriate technologies for surface water
drainage, waste water and solid waste treatment; drafting of legal documents, and; updating knowledge
on sanitation policies. The capacity building needs of the PPC’s Urban Management and Economic and
Infrastructure Division include: planning, coordination and monitoring skills; knowledge on sanitation
management and related legislation, and; project management. Staff from the Department of Natural
Resources and Environment (DONRE) often lack the required skills and training for the inspection and
management of violations of environmental regulations related to wastewater and solid waste
management.

14.      In many provinces it was also noted that there is a shortage of sanitation managers (DOC,
DONRE, PPC Urban Management Divisions and relevant offices at district level) and that the majority
have to take on other responsibilities beyond sanitation. Their basic qualifications and expertise in
planning and managing urban wastewater and solid waste services are often limited, especially at
district and town levels.

15.         Operators are generally seen as weak in management, operations and maintenance, financial


4
    Vietnam Technical Support to the Formulation of a Unified Sanitation Sector Strategy and Action Plan (U3SAP) – Study on Human
    Resources (Draft Report), June 2012

                                                                                                                   7|Page
management and customer services. Technical aspects of wastewater treatment and solid waste
management (e.g recycling and energy recovery) are also areas requiring new training and
qualifications.

16.     A number of universities, colleges and vocational schools provide potentially relevant degree
and certificate programs, but they often lack qualified lecturers and modern curricula capturing up to
date technical and operational experiences. In addition, many training institutions have inadequate
teaching facilities and there is significant scope for improving teaching methods. There are no colleges
and vocational schools that offer training in wastewater treatment.

17.     From the above it is apparent that a program of human resources development is needed by
Can Tho city to support the development of adequate technical, operational and policy/planning
capacity in sector institutions. To meet this challenge the city authorities will require a medium to long
term human resources capacity building program. In the short term, however, it will be critical to focus
on elements that will help improve the city’s capacity to start implementing its poor-inclusive City
Sanitation Plan - especially in terms of sector planning, coordination, monitoring and evaluation.

18.      This message has been reinforced recently through a World Bank diagnostic study on urban
resilience in Can Tho5 which identified six “immediate measures? for the city, one of which was to
consolidate the momentum for sanitation capacity building – “to develop and implement capacity
building programs to improve and strengthen sanitation management and planning capacity?. With
respect to inclusiveness, this study also noted that there is no participation of civil society and user
groups under the current sanitation management arrangements, and that there is a need to expand the
sanitation services to include all districts and end users in Can Tho, including informal settlers. It will be
important that capacity building and training programs specifically address the issue of inclusiveness in
sanitation planning and management – specifically on giving society a voice and providing improved
sanitation access to poor/informal communities.

19. The assignment was divided into three main tasks, as follows:
     Support the City to establish and strengthen the organization of the City Sanitation Committee,
        by developing a “working protocol? for that committee
     Verify the training gaps identified under the earlier U3SAP study by conducting an assessment of
        capacity development gaps of the City Sanitation Committee, its members and other local sector
        stakeholders
     Develop a capacity development strategy and training plan for identified stakeholders, while
        identifying a number of priority trainings, develop curricula for these priority trainings and
        deliver these


Task 1 – Develop and pilot a subnational level working protocol for the sanitation sector
5
    Can Tho, Vietnam: Enhancing Urban Resilience, CityStrength Resilient Cities Program, World Bank 2014



                                                                                                           8|Page
20.       To implement the City Sanitation Plan, the City had originally decided to establish a City
Environmental Sanitation Coordinating Committee (the Sanitation Committee), which was to be chaired
by the Vice Chairman of the City Peoples Committee (CPC), with the Director of the city Department of
Construction (DOC) as a standing member. The Sanitation Committee was to comprise representatives
from all the stakeholder committees, agencies and departments involved in managing sanitation in the
city: the Department of Planning and Investment (DPI); Department of Finance (DOF); Department of
Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE); Department of Health (DOH); Department of Industry and
Trade (DOIT); Department of Agriculture and Rural Development (DARD); Ninh Kieu District People’s
Committee; Binh Thuy District People’s Committee; Cai Rang District People’s Committee; O Mon
District People’s Committee; Thot Not District People’s Committee; Phong Dien District People’s
Committee; Phong Dien Town People’s Committee; Can Tho Urban Construction Sole Member Limited
Liability Company; Can Tho City Water Supply and Waste Water Sole Member Limited Liability Company.

21.     When the consultancy commenced work it was discovered that the “City Sanitation Committee?
had yet to be established in Can Tho (as was assumed in the ToR of the assignment). The Can Tho
authorities unanimously suggested that the establishment of a “committee? would not be e ffective
enough to tackle and solve the problems the city is facing - committees in the Vietnamese context
usually have a temporary character only and consist of leading officials who assume their posts
concurrently to their existing duties and therewith lack the time and motivation to initiate and manage
necessary changes. Therefore, the authorities and WSP agreed that the consultant should support the
city (under task 1) in its ongoing efforts to establish a “City Sanitation Center? rather than a
“committee?.

22.      The Report on: Study for the Establishment of Can Tho City Center for Flood Control and Urban
Sanitation (CFCUS) and Tentative Working Protocol for Relevant Agencies in Can Tho focuses on the
following:
         Reviewing the existing situation of the sanitation sector functions, duties and organizational
            structures related to drainage, flood control, wastewater and solid waste (domestic,
            medical, industrial) in Viet Nam and in Can Tho
           Assessing the operation of Ho Chi Minh City’s model on drainage and sanitation
            management, including the operational model and functions of the Ho Chi Minh City Flood
            Control Center
           Proposing institutional arrangements and a tentative working protocol for Can Tho city for
            the drainage, flood control and sanitation management


23.      Modeled after the “Flood-control Center? of Ho Chi Minh City, this “Can Tho City Sanitation
Center? would be an entirely new professional organization, directly subordinated to the CPC, with its
own human and financial resources, taking over a leading role in managing the sanitation sector of the
city on behalf of CPC, while reducing the roles of the city departments, districts and wards to their actual
state management, rather than operational functions. Led by the Department of Construction, the
consulting team collaborated with a task force consisting of members from each line department to


                                                                                                9|Page
develop a comprehensive proposal (instead of a “working protocol?) drawing up and recommendi ng
various options for the establishment of the “City Sanitation Center?, including possible tasks,
responsibilities, authorities as well as financial and organizational implications of each option.

24.       The Study recommends the following institutional arrangements for the Center:

         report to the Can Tho CPC with separate legal status and its own seal, and its own staff - subject
          to the organizational and operational direction and management of CPC
         financial autonomy, with revenues coming from drainage, sanitation and solid waste
          management fees (via City Treasury - with roadmap to O&M cost recovery), state budget, and
          the public management fund (for investment projects)
         carry out the operation and maintenance of the drainage and wastewater collection/treatment
          systems, and solid waste management in all Can Tho’s districts
         be the owner of drainage, wastewater, flood control and solid waste projects (as assigned by the
          Can Tho City PC). Organize, inspect, monitor and supervise the preparatory activities and
          implement the projects
         coordinate with DOC, DONRE, DARD and the relevant departments and agencies in the
          management of drainage and sanitation services in Can Tho, and with DOC, DPI, DOF and
          District People’s Committees (DPCs) on the development of sanitation plans for the City
         coordinate multi-sectoral and multi-basin activities in the sanitation sector
         develop regulations on household connections to sanitation networks
         organize the implementation of communication activities and customer/community relationship
          management
         develop and implement strategies, programs, and plans for capacity strengthening relating to
          sanitation management

Figure 1 summarises the proposed organization structure of the reformed Can Tho sanitation sector
after the CFS has been established and Figure 2 the proposed sanitation management model after the
CFS has been established (after initial transition arrangements). The Steering Committee will advise the
CPC in the management of sanitation related activities. WASSCO is the City’s principal water and
wastewater utility (Water Supply-Sewerage Joint Stock Company).




                                                                                               10 | P a g e
Figure 1. Organization Structure of the Reformed Can Tho Sanitation Sector After the CFS has been Established




Figure 2. Sanitation Management Model for Can Tho for the Period from 2020-onwards.

                                                                                                    11 | P a g e
Task 2 – Capacity needs assessment and develop a poor-inclusive capacity development
strategy and plan for Can Tho
25.     Given the realignment of the TA to focus on the establishment of a “City Sanitation Center?
(rather than a “committee?) the original scope of Tasks 2 and 3 were amended. The assessment of
capacity development needs as presented in the Report on Capacity Needs Assessment of the Sanitation
Sector in Can Tho City, therefore, is an assessment of needs of existing stakeholders (line departments,
other involved authorities and operators/utilities) rather than that of the future center. Similarly, the
capacity development strategy, the training plan and the priority training curricula can only be
developed on the basis of the assessment conducted with the existing stakeholders.

26.     It is assumed, however, that the future officials of the “City Sanitation Center? will partly be
recruited from existing departments and agencies and that therefore the outputs produced under tasks
2 and 3 will, after a review and slight adaptations, also fit the needs of the human resources of that
Center.

    (i)       Capacity Needs Assessment

27.     Based on the situation described above, the Report on: Capacity Needs Assessment (CNA) of the
Sanitation Sector in Can Tho City pursues the following main objectives:

   Analyzing the current institutional framework of the sanitation sector of Can Tho city, while
    identifying problems and bottlenecks that hinder an improvement in sector performance
   Identifying the needs for training and capacity development of local government stakeholders and
    infrastructure operators in the sanitation sector
   Verifying and cross-checking the training gaps identified in the Can Tho City Sanitation Development
    Plan prepared under the Can Tho U3SAP pilot project
   Providing conclusions and recommendations for the capacity development strategy and training
    plan to be developed under task 3 of the consultant’s assignment


The approach for this CNA followed the methodological elements presented below:

         Review of supplied written information on human resources, such as educational level, past
          training records, job descriptions, future staffing projections, staff development plans, etc.;
         In-depth interviews with leaders (directors and vice-directors)
         Group discussions with relevant staff of each agency
         Written questionnaires for each relevant staff member identified to assess individual training
          needs
         The presentation and discussion of a list of possible topics and capacity development areas in
          the sanitation sector that trainings could be required in. In each meeting the list of topics was
          introduced by consultants carefully and used as an input for the subsequent discussion. Leaders


                                                                                               12 | P a g e
           and staff were asked to add topics they feel missing and then to prioritize the most pressing of
           these topics based on the urgency (immediate, mid-term, long-term demand) of the demand
          A rapid survey of local and regional (Can Tho & Ho Chi Minh City) training providers, such as
           universities and vocational schools



    (ii)       Sanitation Capacity Strategy and Action Plan

28.     The Government of Can Tho city has committed to develop its city’s sanitation sector into a role
model for all cities in Vietnam. Its vision is an environmentally sustainable clean, green and beautiful Can
Tho, free of litter, clean surrounding rivers and pollution-free air, land and water.

29.      Based on this policy statement and the CNA findings presented above, a Sanitation Capacity
Strategy and Action Plan was developed. Seven sector management priorities were identified. The City
administration’s development objective for the sanitation sector and the identified sector management
priorities are presented in figure 2 below. Strategic goals, core strategies and key actions were
identified for each of the seven pillars of the capacity development strategy – to be implemented by
2015.




                                                                                                13 | P a g e
Figure 2. Capacity development strategy until 2025 for the sanitation sector in Can Tho City



Task 3 – Develop tailored training programmes for city agencies and deliver critical/priority
training
30.     Annex 1 shows the identified training needs and recommended training course topics for key
sector stakeholders that resulted from the CNA. It also shows the ranking of the training topics. Based
on the findings presented above a Critical/Priority Training Program was developed. The Critical/Priority
Training Program comprised the following 6 training courses:
 Wastewater Fundamentals
 Decentralized Sanitation Planning for Peri-Urban Areas
 Urban Storm Water Management
 Construction Contract Management
 Strategic Corporate Development Planning for Public Service Utilities
 Managing Performance-based Operation Contracts in Public Sanitation Services

31.     The six training courses were implemented (in Vietnamese) in Can Tho City in April 2016.
Detailed training curricula, training reports and training documentations for each of the six courses are
available in Vietnamese and English language. The Critical/Priority Training Program schedule and course
summaries are attached to this report in Annex 2. Each course was attended by 11 – 17 participants
from relevant City departments, agencies, operators and district government.

Objectives and Results
32.     The development objective of the TA is to support the City Peoples Committee and DOC in
implementing the poor-inclusive City Sanitation Plan by providing expertise to develop curricula,
guidelines and training programs to increase implementation capacity for the Plan.


 Intermediate                           Indicators                           Results
 Outcome
                          Can Tho Sanitation Committee develops         Modified to reflect proposal to establish
 Improved capacity
                           its working protocols                          Sanitation Centre. Proposed institutional
 in sanitation
                                                                          arrangements and tentative protocols
 sector
                                                                          developed with City authorities
 management at            Training program curriculum is developed      Priority training topics identified in
 the provincial/city                                                      consultation with key stakeholders and
 government level.                                                        staff
                          Basic training is delivered on sector         Six priority training courses developed and
                           planning, operations and management,           delivered to key staff in City departments
                           and capital investment                         and agencies

                          Knowledge and experience sharing              Other provinces have already used and
                           between    provincial agencies is              carried out training using some of the
                           undertaken                                     priority training courses developed for


                                                                                                   14 | P a g e
 Intermediate                         Indicators                          Results
 Outcome
                                                                       Can Tho.



33.     The Development Objective was broadly met. The City Sanitation Plan will be implemented
through a proposed new agency, the City Center for Flood control and Urban Sanitation. The TA
supported the City in developing recommendations for institutional arrangements for establishing the
Center and associated tentative working protocols. A curriculum (priority training topics) was
developed, and six priority training courses developed and delivered to key staff in City departments and
agencies. A number of provinces and bilateral donors have already used and carried out additional
training using a few of the priority courses developed for Can Tho – demonstrating knowledge and
experience sharing has taken place.


Gender
Strategic Goal 5 of the Capacity Development Strategy Until 2025 for the Sanitation Sector in Can Tho
City is to: recruit, train and maintain a professional, loyal, integrated and dedicated workforce for all
state management agencies active in the sanitation sector. Within this:

Core Strategy 5.5:
Particularly encourage women working in the city administration to apply for training courses and aim
that at least 40% of leadership positions in the administration are held by women by 2021.


Key actions are :

       Develop a gender equity policy applicable for every state management agency in the city of Can
        Tho.
       Introduce realistic recruitment quota for women for each agency and set financial disincentives
        for non-compliance.
       Include paragraphs on preferential treatment of women in job postings and in the city’s training
        regulation.
       Post advertisements in local newspapers and public panels with the message to encourage
        women to apply for jobs in the city administration.

Social Inclusiveness
Strategic Goal 4 of the Capacity Development Strategy Until 2025 for the Sanitation Sector in Can Tho
City is: transparency and high quality services in exchange for active citizen’s contribution and
appropriate environmental behavior. A number of strategies and key actions have been proposed to
guide Can Tho City in achieving this goal by 2025:




                                                                                               15 | P a g e
Core Strategy 4.1:
Ensure a high transparency and accountability for investments as well as O&M funds and full public
disclosure of the use of collected tariffs and other key financial data.
Key Actions:

   1. Frequently publish and update key financial performance data related to tariffs and operations
      on the city’s website.
   2. Provide fund disbursement data of non-private investment projects on request to citizens.


Core Strategy 4.2:
Initiate a community dialogue and seek citizen’s contributions to draft a set of sanitation service
standards that will be promulgated in public and are an integral and binding part of performance based
O&M contracts for wastewater and solid waste services.
Key Actions:

   1. Research international best-practices for service standards in wastewater and solid waste
      services.
   2. Develop a set of draft service standards.
   3. Develop a community consultation plan.
   4. Implement community meetings and focus group discussions to retrieve feedback and revise
      standards.
   5. Conduct a community stakeholder workshop involving mass organizations and representatives
      of the party, people’s councils and local media; ratify service standards on workshop.
   6. Publish final service standards on website, in brochures and in service contracts.
   7. Conduct a round of community meetings every 2 years to discuss the achievement and revision
      of standards.


Core Strategy 4.3:
Educate our young generations to set seeds for a life dedicated to environmental protection,
compassion and sustainability.
Key Actions:

   1. Develop and implement public awareness campaigns targeted at parents and families
      encouraging to discuss environmental issues at home and to educate children in appropriate
      behavior from early childhood onward.
   2. Make environmental education an integral and obligatory part of school curricula in the city,
      develop teaching materials, train teachers and evaluate effectiveness in regular city wide school
      competitions on environment.




                                                                                           16 | P a g e
Core Strategy 4.4:
Mobilize all strata and groups of the community, with a special consideration of the poor, to actively
contribute with pro-active, self-driven action and financial contributions.
Key Actions:

    1. Allocate budget and set-up an annual fund that gives out grants to private non-government
       initiatives (e.g. student cleaning campaigns).
    2. Advertise fund on city website, provide detailed project application instructions, application
       forms, eligibility and auditing criteria.
    3. Conduct annual project competition with an equal, fair and transparent selection mechanism.
    4. Use documentation of projects to advertise and raise awareness within and beyond the city.

Implementation, Dissemination and Scale-up
The new Bank lending project: Can Tho Urban Development and Resilience Project (P152851) will
support the implementation of the outputs and recommendations of this TA. The Task Team were kept
fully appraised of the development of this TA during the preparation of the project. A number of
workshops have been held with relevant stakeholders in the City.

Course contents of three of the priority training courses (01 on Wastewater Fundamentals, 04 on FIDIC
Contract Management Regulations, and 05 on Strategic Corporate Development Planning for Public
Utilities in the Sanitation Sector) have been disseminated, or will be in June 2016 to participants from
other provinces in the scope of other ODA projects e.g. ADB (Greater Mekong Sub-region Corridor
Towns Development Project) and DANIDA (Training project in connection with the operation of 5
wastewater treatment projects and 1 water supply project). These provinces include: Cao Bang, Ha
Giang, Thanh Hoa, Tay Ninh, Quang Tri, Hau Giang, Dak Lak, and Quang Binh.

In addition to that, JICA, in connection with their ongoing Wastewater Sector Training Center project
(with MOC), has shown a very high interest in these (and the other training materials developed under
the TA). They would like to use the training contents for their training center so that the center can offer
these training's to all 63 provinces in Vietnam in the future.

The outputs will also be shared with GIZ and the German Water Partnership who are active in national
sanitation management capacity building with the Vietnam Water and Sewerage Association. The
outputs will be also shared with the members of the Vietnam Wastewater Donor Coordination Group
(chaired by ADB).

The outputs will be discussed with MOC as an example of best practice in urban sanitation management
in Vietnam and could form the basis for national policy guidance in the sector. The Bank will also use the
outputs to inform policy dialogue and the design of future projects eg the proposed Coastal Cities
Sustainable Environment Project which has a component for institutional reform for urban sanitation
management in the four project cities (Dong Hoi, Quy Nhon, Nha Trang and Phang Rang).




                                                                                               17 | P a g e
18 | P a g e
   ANNEX 1
PRIORITY TRAINING TOPICS




                           19 | P a g e
                                                                 PRIORITY TRAINING TOPICS
    1    STATE MANANGEMENT FUNCTIONS                                         DoC   DoNRE   DARD   DoIT   DPI   DoH   DoST   ODA   N.KIEU   B.THUY   URENCO WASSCO   TOTAL

  1.1    Policy Formulation Skills                                            3      2      5      3      4                  5               3        3              28

  1.2    Advisory skills                                                      3      3      5      3      5                  5      3        5        4              36
  1.3    Strategic corporate development planning for urban utilities                                     3                  5               4        5      5       22
  1.4    Construction Supervision                                             2                           3                  5               2        4      2       18

  1.5    Contract Management (contractors, service providers, operators)      2                           3                  5      5        2        5              22
  1.6    Proposal Writing Skills for ODA Projects                             2      3      5             5     5            5               2        4              31
  1.7
    2    MANAGEMENT AND ORGANISATION SKILLS
  2.1    Data Management                                                      2      5      5      3      4                  5      4        3               5       36
  2.2    Knowledge Management Principles                                                                                     5               3               2       10
  2.3    Using Computers Efficiently                                                 3                    4                  5               2               1       15

  2.4    SOP Development Skills                                               2      2      5             4     5            4      3        3               1       29
  2.5    Result-based Project Monitoring and Evaluation                       2                           4     5            4               3               1       19
  2.6    Leadership Skills                                                           3      5             4     3            4      3        2               2       26
  2.7    HRM Skills                                                           2      3      5             4                  4               1               5       24

  2.8    Organization and Planning Skills                                     4      2      5             4     3            5               2               5       30
  2.9    Negotiation Skills                                                   2      4      4             3                  5               2               4       24
 2.10    Conflic Management Skills                                            3      2                    4     5            5      3        2               5       29
 2.11    Group Moderation and Team Building Skills                            4      2      5             4     3            4               2               5       29


     3 TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE
   3.1 Wastewater Collection & Treatment
       Legal Frame and Local Regulation of Urban Wastewater
 3.1.1                                                                        3                           4                  5      3        3               5       23
       Management
 3.1.2 Demand-based O&M planning and budgeting                                5      3                    3                  5      3        2               3       24
 3.1.3 Performance-based Management of Public Services                        5                           3                  5               2               4       19

 3.1.4 Wastewater Tariff Calculation and Introduction                         2                           3     5            4               2               5       21
       Asset Management (includes asset investment planning,
 3.1.5                                                                        3      4                    3                  5               2               5       22
       replacement planning, risk management)
 3.1.6 Documentation and Management of Wastewater Infrastructure              3      3                    3                  5               2               5       21
 3.1.7 Wastewater Fundamentals                                                3                           3                  4               2               1       13
 3.1.8 Labor Safety on Wastewater Treatment Plants                            4      2                    3                  5               2               5       21
 3.1.9 Wastewater Sampling and Analysis                                       2      3             3                         4               2               5       19

       Monitoring of non-domestic dischargers of wastewater into urban
3.1.10                                                                        3                                 5            4      5        3               4       24
       public sewer systems (indirect dischargers)
3.1.11 O&M of centralized municipal wastewater treatment plants               4      3                    3     5            4               3               5       27
3.1.12 O&M of centralized wastewater collection systems                       4                           3     5            4      3        2               3       24

3.1.13 Wastewater Treatment Technologies and Selection Criteria               5      5                    3     5            5      5        2               5       35
3.1.14 House Connection Surveys                                               3      2                          3            4               2               1       15
3.1.15 Design and Installation of House Connections                           4                                              4               2               1       11

3.1.17 Wastewater Management in Industrial Zones                              3                           3                  4               2               1       13
3.1.18 Overview on Modern O&M Equipment                                       3                           2     5            5               2               3       20


   3.2 Decentralized Wastewater Treatment in Peri-urban Areas
       Implementation of DWWT projects in unfeasible-to-connect
 3.2.1                                                                        3      3                    2     5            5               4               3       25
       locations (e.g. public buildings, residential areas, markets, etc.)
       General design criteria for close-to-nature, low-tech, easy-to-
 3.2.2                                                                        4      4                    2     5            5      3        3               3       29
       replicate DWWT systems
 3.2.3 O&M Requirements for DWWT Systems                                      5      2                    2     5            5               2               3       24


   3.3 Rainwater Drainage and Flood Prevention
 3.3.1 Disaster Risk Planning and Flood Management                            2                           3                  5      5        4               5       24

       O&M of rainwater Drainage Systems (includes canals, lakes, ditches,
 3.3.2                                                                        5                           3                  5               3               5       21
       sluice gates...)
 3.3.3 Flood prevention and after flood restoration                           5                           3                  5               3               5       21

 3.3.4 Basic Knowledge on Climate Change                                      2                           2                  5               2               2       13
 3.3.5 CO2 Emission Reduction in O&M Works                                    2                                              5               1               2       10


   3.4 Sludge Management
 3.4.1 Safe Sludge Treatment                                                  3      3                    2                  5      5        5               5       28

 3.4.2 Sludge Reuse and Marketing for Agricultural Application                       2                    2                  5               5               4       18


   3.5 Urban and Rural Solid Waste Collection and Treatment
       Legal Frame and Local Regulation of Urban Solid Waste
 3.5.1                                                                        3                           4                  5               5        5              22
       Management
 3.5.2 Enforcement of Violation Penalties                                     2                                              5               3        5              15

 3.5.3 3R Campaigns (Reuse, Reduce, Recycle)                                  4                           4                  5               2        3              18

 3.5.4 Solid Waste Separation at the Source                                   4                           4                  5      5        3        3              24
 3.5.5 Hazardous Waste Collection and Treatment                               3      2                    4                  5      5        2        4              25

 3.5.6 Solid Waste Treatment Technologies                                     4      3             4      4                  5               2        4              26

 3.5.7 O&M of Landfills                                                       4      2                    4                  5               2
                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                        | P a g21e
 3.5.8 Rural Solid Waste Collection Systems                                   2                           3                  5               5        3              18


   3.6 Public Hygiene and Health
 3.6.1 Water Quality Management                                               4                           4     5            5               5               5       28

 3.6.2 Epidemy Control After Floods                                           3                                              5               4               2       14
  4 PUBLIC RELATIONS
4.1 Basic Communication Skills                                                5       5   4       5   4   5   3   1    32
    Planning and Implementation of Behavior Change Communication
4.2                                                                           3           4       5   5   5   5   1    28
    Campaigns
4.3 Mass Media Information Management                                         2       4   4       5       2   3        20
4.4 Presentation and Rethoric Skills                                          4   3   3   3       5       2   4   2    26
4.5 Community Participation in Sanitation                                     4           3       5       3   4   1    20
4.6 Complaint and Conflict Management                                         2       4   4       4   3   2   3   5    27


  5   ADDITIONALLY REQUESTED TOPICS
5.1 Emergency and Risk Prevention and Management                              2       5                           5    12
5.2 Optimization of O&M Procedures of WWT Systems                             2                                   5    7
5.3 Proeject Proposal Evaluation: social-economic, financial                              5                            5
5.4 Effective and Efficient Project Management                                            4                            4
5.5 Team Working Skills                                                                   4                            4
5.6 Project Cycle Management                                                              5                            5
    Decentralized Treatment Solutions for Medical Waste and Sewage in
5.7                                                                                           5                        5
    Densely Populated Areas
    Decentralized Treatment Solutions for Medical Waste and Sewage in Small
5.8                                                                                           5                        5
    Hospitals / Rural Health Stations
    Automatic Quality Control of Clean Water, River Water, and Medical
5.9                                                                                           5                        5
    Wastewater


      5 training topics as the most critical

      5 training topics stand second for priority

      8 training topics as special needs of specific departments




                                                                                                              21 | P a g e
Note: The numbers in the columns reflect the reported level of importance placed on the learning topic
by the various stakeholders in Can Tho City’s sanitation management – departments, utilities, district
government (scored 1-5, with 5 reflecting the highest priority). Those topics with the highest total
priority rating were deemed the most critical and were incorporated into the content of the Priority
Training Courses given under the TA.




                                                                                           22 | P a g e
         ANNEX 2
CRITICAL TRAINING PROGRAM SCHEDULE




                                     23 | P a g e
24 | P a g e
Contents Overview for Courses:


01 – Wastewater Fundamentals
Contents Overview for Course
Training Session Key Learning Objectives
Opening Session
After this session participants will:
     Know the trainer and his/her professional background
     Know each other better
     Know why they are here and what will happen during the next couple of days
     Have shared their personal expectations for the training outcomes
Session A: Basic concepts of wastewater
After this session participants will:
     Have an overview of wastewater, where does wastewater come from, how many sources which
        produce wastewater
     Know basic elements of wastewater
     Understand chemical and physical processes in the nature
Session B: Basic elements in collection systems
After this session participants will:
     Have an overview of the entire sewerage system
     Understand basic operation modes of components in a sewerage system
Session C: Centralized wastewater treatment plant
After this session participants will:
     Understand the operation of Bac Ninh wastewater treatment plant
     Know basic principles of components in Bac Ninh wastewater treatment plant
     Be shared practical information of the plant operation
     Know difficulties and challenges during operation
Closing session
After this session participants will:
     Understand necessary processes for the operation of sewerage systems
     Know difficulties and challenges as the basis for coming up with recommendations for
        improvements
     Have an informal agreement with other participants to regularly stay in touch


02 – Decentralized Sanitation Planning for Peri-urban
Areas
Training Session Key Learning Objectives
Opening Session
After this session participants will:
     know the trainer and his/her professional background

                                                                                  25 | P a g e
        Know each other better
        Know why they are here and what will happen during this training, and what this training is
         about
      Have shared their personal expectations for the training outcomes
Session A: Terms and Definitions
After this session participants will:
      Have learned basic terms related to sanitation planning and decentralised wastewater
         management / treatment
Session B: Framework Conditions
After this session participants will:
      Understand what kinds of regulations, guidance and legislations need to be in place before
         sanitation planning should be endorsed and implemented
      Have developed a deeper understanding on (potentially) missing framework conditions in Can
         Tho
Session C: Decree 80 as the legal basis for improved decentralized wastewater management
discussion
In this session participants will learn about the legal background for city sanitation, and its relevance for
DWWM
Session D: Basics of Sanitation Planning
After this session participants will:
      Understand the concept of “sanitation planning?
      Understand the advantages and disadvantages of sanitation planning
      Understand how to develop a sanitation plan
Session E: Drafting a Sanitation Plan for Can Tho City / Group Work Group work
After this session participants will:
      Understand the structure and content of a typical city sanitation plan
Session F: Decentralised Wastewater Management as a Core Element of Sanitation Planning
After this session participants will:
      Understand the concept of DWWM and its potential applications
Session G: Selection of Appropriate DWWT Technologies
In this session participants will learn about the typical DWWT technologies, their applications and
advantages / disadvantages
Session H: Operation and Maintenance of DWWT Plants
After this session participants will:
      Understand the definition of O&M
      Understand why O&M is crucial for sustainability in sanitation
Session I: Site Visit DWWT Plant at Cai Khe Market / Lessons Learnt / Discussion
After the site visit and following discussion, participants will have a deeper understanding of the many
obstacles and hurdles that may occur when a DWWT project is implemented.
Session J: Summary of Workshop Results (Fish Bowl), Workshop evaluation, Closing Session
After this session participants will:
      Have discussed and clarified open issues
      Have evaluated the training course
      Have consolidated their new knowledge and skills gained during the training event
      Have an agreement with the trainer to stay in touch regarding follow-up activities
      Have an informal agreement with other participants to regularly stay in touch and exchange on
         management contract development processes in their utilities

                                                                                                 26 | P a g e
03 – Urban Storm Water Management
Training Session Key Learning Objectives
Opening Session
After this session participants will:
     know the trainer and his/her professional background
     Know each other better
     Know why they are here and what will happen during this training, and what this training is
        about
     Have shared their personal expectations for the training
Session A: Terms and Definitions
After this session, participants will:
     Have learned basic terms related to stormwater management
Session B: Stormwater Management - Basic Considerations and Group Discussion
After this session, participants will:
     Understand the many elements of a stormwater management system, and to what extent those
        elements are available in Can Tho City.
Session C: Storm water Management in Urban Areas - Traditional and modern approaches for
dealing with stormwater runoff, O&M issues / group discussion
After this session, participants will:
     Have gained an overview on the many technical options and solutions for drainage, storage,
        retention and use of stormwater. O&M issues will be discussed.
Session D: Software Tools for Stormwater Management
After this session, participants will:
     Understand the need for applying suitable software solutions in stormwater management
     Have learned the features and potential applications of an exemplary software solution
Session E: Summary of Workshop Results, (Fish Bowl), Workshop evaluation, Closing Session
After this session, participants will:
     Have discussed and clarified open issues
     Have evaluated the training course
     Have consolidated their new knowledge and skills gained during the training event
     Have an agreement with the trainer to stay in touch regarding follow-up activities
     Have an informal agreement with other participants to regularly stay in touch and exchange on
        stormwater management


04 – FIDIC Contract Management
Training Session Key Learning Objectives
Opening Session
After this session participants will:
     know the trainer and his/her professional background
     Know each other better
     Know why they are here and what will happen during this training, and what this training is
        about
     Have shared their personal expectations for the training
Session A: Construction contracts - FIDIC & Viet Nam

                                                                                          27 | P a g e
After this session participants will:
     Have overview of FIDIC contracts (Red Book, Yellow Book, Silver Book, Green Book, Golden
        Book, White Book);
     Have overview of Viet Nam construction contracts (Decree 48/2010 and Decree 37/2015),
        including construction consulting contract, construction contract, technological equipment
        supply contract, engineering & construction contract (EC), Engineering and Procurement
        contract (EP), Procurement and Construction contract (PC), Engineering Procurement
        Construction contract (EPC), Turnkey contract, and contract on provision of equipment,
        materials and workmanship.
     Have basic knowledge on FIDIC Plant Design & Build Contract (Yellow Book), Advantages &
        Disadvantages of D&B contract; considerations for the selection of Plant & DB contract;
     Comparison between FIDIC Plant Design Build Contract and Viet Nam EPC contract
Session B: Management of FIDIC Plant and Design - Build Contract in Viet Nam
After this session participants will:
     Understand activities of contract, including key events, payment events, dispute settlement.
     Understand roles and responsibilities of Parties, including the Employer, Consultant and
        Contractor.
     Understand design (FIDIC Article 5): design phases, design approval as required by Vietnamese
        authorities;
     Understand quality management, equipment, materials and workmanship (FIDIC Article 7 and
        Article 13, Decree 48/2010 & 37/2015):
     Understand knowledge on time management (FIDIC Article 8; Article 14 Decree 48/2010 &
        Article 14 Decree 37/2015): commencement of works, time for completion, progress program,
        etc.
     Understand requirements of testing, acceptance and taking-over (FIDIC Articles 9 & 10);
     Understand requirements of Defects Notification Period (FIDIC Article 11): performance
        certificate, etc
     Understand requirements of financial articles, including variation and adjustment (FIDIC Article
        13; Article 35 of Decree 48/2010 & Article 37 of Decree 37/2015), contract price and payment
     Understand content of other articles: termination by the Employer, suspension and termination
        by the Contractor, risks and responsibilities, insurance, force majeure, claims, disputes and
        arbitration
     Topics related to contract management as required by Viet Nam (Decree 48/2010 & 37/2015)
Closing Session After this session participants will:
     Have evaluated the training course and passed a final test
     Have consolidated their new knowledge and skills gained during the training event
     Have an agreement with the trainer to stay in touch regarding follow-up activities


05 – Strategic Corporate Development Planning for
Public Service Utilities
Training Session Key Learning Objectives
Opening Session
After this session participants will:
     know the trainer and his/her professional background


                                                                                          28 | P a g e
       Know each other better
       Know why they are here and what will happen during this training, and what this training is
        about
     Have shared their personal expectations for the training
Session A: Introduction to Corporate Development Planning and Strategic Thinking
After this session participants will:
     Be able to distinguish between logic of strategic and operational thinking processes
     Understand the importance for leaders of organisations to think strategically
     Understand the ratio of strategic corporate development planning and the difference to normal
        business planning
     Agree that CDPs are a suitable and feasible tool for wastewater utilities in Vietnam
     Have learned basic terms related to corporate development planning
Session C: Useful Methods & Tools for the Corporate Planning Process
After this session participants will:
     Understand the advantages and disadvantages of participatory group discussion techniques
     Have an overview of a selection of tools and methods that are available to facilitate visualized
        group discussions
     Be able to point out the advantages and disadvantages of each tool and decide which tool to
        apply in which situation
Session D: The CDP Elaboration Process
After this session participants will:
     Have a thorough understanding of the extent and duration of the process of elaborating a CDP
     Be able to realistically assess how complex and resource intensive the CDP elaboration for their
        own company is going to be
     Be able to identify which parts of the CDP process the companies can do by themselves and
        which parts will need external consulting support
Session E: Data Collection & Analysis – Scan Yourself and Your Environment
After this session participants will:
     Understand the importance of the availability of reliable primary and secondary data about the
        company’s internal and external environment.
     Have an overview about the types of data required for a proper CDP elaboration and about
        which collection tools are available
     Be able to plan and steer various data collection and environmental scanning processes required
        for the SWOT analysis of their company.
     Have a basic understanding of SWOT analysis framework and its application for a strategy
        formulation
     Be able to practically apply the SWOT analysis tool to their own purposes
Session F: The Policy Statement
After this session participants will:
     Understand the purpose and importance of a policy statement for a strategic planning process
     Have studied a number of practical examples of policy statements from inside and out of
        Vietnam
     Comprise of a first draft policy statement for their own company
     Know how to formulate their own final policy statement after the training course
Session G: Formulate Strategies and Strategic Goals
After this session participants will:


                                                                                          29 | P a g e
       Understand how to transform SWOT analysis results into strategies (by use of TOWS analysis
        framework)
     Understand the difference between strategies and strategic goals
     Understand that goals have to be prioritized and balanced
     Be able to formulate mid-term development strategies and SMART goals for their utilities
Session H: Action Planning & Budget Forecast
After this session participants will:
     Be able to organize and conduct the action planning process in their companies
     Understand the importance of letting all key staff participate in the planning process
     Understand the importance of coming up with realistic and affordable actions
     Understand how to realistically set time frames and project costs and required budgets
Session I: Examples of CDPs
After this session participants will:
     Know practical examples for CDPs and action plans of other wastewater utilities in Vietnam
     Have a clear picture of what a CDP looks like, its size and extent
Session J: The CDP Implementation Process
After this session participants will:
     Be able to steer the CDP approval and implementation process within their companies
     Understand that involvement of asset owners and other local authorities in the entire planning
        process is crucial to obtain approval and to receive funding for implementation
     Understand how to communicate and cascade a CDP down to individual staff level and to
        ensure that the CDP is “lived? by the management and all staff
     Understand how to monitor the implementation of a CDP
     Understand the CDP updating and review cycle
Session K: The CDP Roadmap –Plan your Plan!
After this session participants will:
     Have an individual plan (roadmap) how to elaborate a CDP in their own company (including a
        rough time frame)
     Have a clear idea about the next steps they need to take after returning from the training vent
        to their utility
     Know which steps of their planning process will require external consulting support
Closing Session
After this session participants will:
     Have evaluated the training course and passed a final test
     Have consolidated their new knowledge and skills gained during the training event
     Have an agreement with the trainer to stay in touch regarding follow-up activities
     Have an informal agreement with other participants to regularly stay in touch and exchange on
        the CDP development processes in their utilities


06 – Managing Performance - based O&M Contracts in
Public Sanitation Services
Training Session Key Learning Objectives
Opening Session
After this session participants will:


                                                                                          30 | P a g e
        know the trainer and his/her professional background
        Know each other better
        Know why they are here and what will happen during this training, and what this training is
         about
      Have shared their personal expectations for the training
Session A: Terms and Definitions
After this session participants will:
      Have learned basic terms related to performance-based contracts
Session B: Framework Conditions
After this session participants will:
      Understand what kinds of regulations, guidance and legislations need to be in place before
         management contracts should be endorsed and implemented
Session C: Contract Preparation Stage
After this session participants will
      Understand what steps need to be taken prior to signing a management contract with a future
         operator
Session D: Performance-based contracts. Performance Indicators
After this session participants will:
      Understand the concept of “performance-based contracts?
      Understand how to develop, apply and survey performance Indicators
Session E: Contents of a Management Contract
      After this session participants will:
      Understand the structure and content of a typical management contract
Session F: Reporting
After this session participants will:
      Understand the rational for regular reporting
      Understand what and how needs to be reported
Session G: Typical Problems Arising During Contract Execution
In this session participants will:
      Understand about the many potential problems and obstacles that may arise during contract
         execution
Session H: Drafting a Management Contract for Can Tho City
After this session participants will:
      Be able to draft a template for a management contract
Session I: Presentation and Discussion of Group Working Groups’ Results
The discussion on the outcomes of the group work will make trainees understand about the complexity
of management contracts in public utilities
Session J: Summary of Workshop Results, (Fish Bowl), Workshop evaluation, Closing Session
After this session participants will:
      Have discussed and clarified open issues
      Have evaluated the training course
      Have consolidated their new knowledge and skills gained during the training event
      Have an agreement with the trainer to stay in touch regarding follow-up activities
      Have an informal agreement with other participants to regularly stay in touch and exchange on
         management contract development processes in their utilities



                                                                                         31 | P a g e
