MOZAMBIQUE




Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013
Recovery Framework Case Study
August 2014
Conference Version
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION TO THE CASE STUDIES SERIES	                                         ii
n ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS	                                                      iii
n RECURRING DISASTERS IN MOZAMBIQUE	                                                1
n POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR RECOVERY	                                                    3
    CONCEPT OF RECOVERY	                                                            3
n INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR RECOVERY	                                             6
n COORDINATION AND COMMUNICATION MECHANISMS	                                       11
n RECOVERY FINANCING AND MANAGEMENT	                                               14
    ALTERNATIVE FINANCING MECHANISMS FOR RECOVERY	                                 16
n MANAGING RECOVERY IMPLEMENTATION	                                                18
    VULNERABILITY REDUCTION THROUGH RELOCATION	                                    19
    RISK REDUCTION AND READINESS AS PART OF DISASTER RECOVERY	                     21
n MONITORING IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOVERY	                                           22
n RECOMMENDATIONS FROM CASE STUDY PARTICIPANTS FOR STRENGTHENING
  THE MANAGEMENT OF POST-FLOOD RECOVERY	                                           24
    DISASTER RECOVERY POLICY	                                                      24
    INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS	                                                      24
    PLANNING AND ASSESSMENT	                                                       26
    MONITORING RECOVERY	                                                           27
    FUNDING	27
n CONCLUSION	28
    ANNEX 1: CONTINGENCY FUND ALLOCATIONS, BY MINISTRY AND PROVINCE, 2013 -2014	   29
    ANNEX 2: ESTIMATED COSTS OF POST-DISASTER RECONSTRUCTION IN 2013	              30
    ANNEX 3: CONTRIBUTORS TO CASE STUDY	                                           31
      INTRODUCTION TO THE CASE STUDIES SERIES
      The World Bank’s Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), the United Nations
      Development Program (UNDP) and the European Union (EU) are working on a guide for developing disaster
      recovery frameworks (DRF). This guide aims to help governments and partners plan for resilient post
      disaster recovery while contributing to longer term sustainable development. It is based on practices
      gleaned from country experiences in disaster recovery around the world. Hence, the development of the
      DRF Guide entailed the development of country-level case studies as well as thematic case studies on
      disaster recovery.
      These case studies have been designed to collect and analyze information on: i) disaster recovery standards
      and principles adapted by countries for specific disasters; ii) planning efforts for making such recovery
      efficient, equitable and resilient; iii) policies, institutions and capacities to implement and monitor disaster
      recovery; and iv) ways and means for translating the gains of resilient recovery into longer-term risk
      reduction and resilient development.
      Importantly, these case studies aim to learn from, and not evaluate, country reconstruction initiatives. Practices
      learned from each country’s experience will inform the contents of the guide for developing a DRF. Additionally,
      the case studies examine the planning processes and not the implementation details of recovery experiences.
      As such, they do not seek to offer a comprehensive account of the post-disaster recovery program, but instead
      provide details and insight into the decision-making processes for reconstruction policies and programs.
      Disclaimer:This document is the product of work performed by GFDRR staff, based on information provided by GFDRR's partners. The findings, analysis
      and conclusions expressed in this document do not necessarily reflect the views of any individual partner organization of GFDRR, including, for example,
      the World Bank, the Executive Directors of the World Bank, UNDP, the European Union, or the governments they represent. Although GFDRR makes
      reasonable efforts to ensure all the information presented in this document is correct, its accuracy and integrity cannot be guaranteed. Use of any data
      or information from this document is at the user's own risk and under no circumstances shall GFDRR or any of its partners be liable for any loss, damage,
      liability or expense incurred or suffered which is claimed to result from reliance on the data contained in this document.

ii	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
CCGC	       Coordinating Council for Disaster Management
CENOE	      National Emergency Operations Center
CLGRC	      Local Risk Management Committee(s)
CPCCN 	     Coordinating Council for Preventing and Combating Natural Disasters
CTGC	       Technical Council for Disaster Management
DPCCN	      Department for Preventing and Combating Natural Disasters
DRM	        Disaster Risk Management
GACOR	      Office for Reconstruction Coordination
HCT	        Humanitarian Country Team
INGC	       National Institute for Disaster Management
MPD	        Ministry of Planning and Development
PARP	       Poverty Reduction Action Plan
PDGC 	      Master Plan for Disaster Management
PES 	       Socio-Economic Plan
PESOD 	     District-level Socio-economic Plan
SETSAN 	    Technical Secretariat for Food Security and Nutrition
UNAPROC 	   National Civil Protection Unit




                                                 Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   iii
     RECURRING DISASTERS IN MOZAMBIQUE
     The three biggest floods recorded in Mozambique happened in the 21st century: the first in 2000/2001, the
     second flooded Central Mozambique in 2007/2008, and most recently the 2013 floods. By its location on the
     southeastern coast of Africa, and located downstream from several major rivers, Mozambique is considered
     to be extremely prone to recurrent natural hazards, namely floods, tropical storms, drought, and earthquakes.
     Nine of its rivers have sources in neighboring countries, requiring cross-border coordination for early warning
     alerts. Sixty percent of the population lives along the coastline and are therefore vulnerable to tropical storms.
     Economic gains in the country are significantly undermined as a result of recurrent water and weather related
     hazards; consequent economic losses are estimated to average 1.1 percent of GDP annually. Worse, natural
     disasters such as floods and cyclones have a lasting impact that affects disproportionally the poorest. The
     World Bank estimated the relative impact of various shocks on poverty: floods and cyclones were estimated to
     have the strongest impact at the household level, reducing expenditures by about 32 percent and contributing
     more than 2 percentage points to the poverty rate. When facing a shock, poor households are often forced to
     sacrifice their long-term interests for the sake of immediate needs, for example by withdrawing children from
     school to supplement household labor, or by selling or consuming productive capital. In the long run these
     coping mechanisms make households poorer and even more vulnerable, and may transmit these adverse
     effects to future generations through their impact on education and health outcomes1.
     The 2000 floods were caused by heavy rainfall in the Southern Africa region that lasted for five weeks,
     exacerbated by tropical cyclones. For the first time in recorded history, simultaneous and major flooding
     occurred in all of the major rivers that flow into the Indian Ocean through Mozambique – impacting the
     population in the southern half of the country, from the Limpopo River basin to Maputo (the capital). The
     flooding of the Limpopo, Incomati, Umbeluzi, Save, Buzi and Pungue rivers were also one of the costliest
     disasters in Mozambique’s history. At least 700 people died, up to 650,0002 were displaced and 4.5 million
     were affected, totaling a quarter of Mozambique’s population. GDP fell from a forecast 7 percent to 1.5 percent.
     The rainy season of 2013 recalled the year 2000 in terms of the height to which the flood waters rose, but
     with much lower impact on the population. Southern Mozambique was again devastated: 30 people died as
     a direct consequence of floods3 in the Limpopo River basin, and up to 186.000 were evacuated. Damages
     were estimated to exceed US$250 million; of which 50 percent on the road network and 30 percent in the
     agricultural sector.

     1	
          Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit, World Bank, June 19, 2013, paragraph 114.
     2
      	   Relatorio do Balanco das cheias de 2013
     3	
          A total of 117 deaths were registered by INGC from October 2012 to 4 March 2013. Other causes of death include being struck by lightning, electrocution,
          house collapse.


1	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
Most of the infrastructure on the Lower Limpopo flood plains was built in the 1950s, before increasingly
severe flooding needed to be factored into engineering designs. At the same time, the population of Chókwe
has nearly doubled since 1997, and infrastructure development has increased rapidly in the lower Limpopo –
making more people and material assets vulnerable to climatic risk.
The impact from the two flood events are compared in Table 1. The sharp decrease in fatality rates and
the impact of natural disasters indicates that disasters are being managed more effectively. This reflects
lessons learned in the prior decade, including flood forecasting, early warning systems and trans-boundary
cooperation. Most importantly, national investment and international cooperation in strengthening
institutional capacity and readiness has noticeably reduced the devastating impact of disasters on
human lives and housing.

Table 1: Flooding Key Facts
                                            2000                                       2013
                                            Southern half of Mozambique,               Districts of Chokwe, Guija,
Area Most Affected
                                            from Limpopo River to Maputo               Chibuto, Xai-Xai
                                            4.5 million of which                       478, 892 of which
Affected Population
                                            500-650,000 displaced                      186,000 displaced
Number of Fatalities                        700                                        117
                                            Housing; health; agriculture;              Education (schools); transport
Most Affected Sectors (based on needs)
                                            education;                                 infrastructure; agriculture
Estimated Overall Damage                    $449.5 million
                                                                                       US$521 million
(US$ at exchange rate of that year)         (approx. $620m in 2014 dollars)
Percentage of GDP                           14.4                                       3.4




                                                   Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   2
     POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR RECOVERY
     CONCEPT OF RECOVERY
     A natural disaster is an event that disrupts normal life, causing physical dmange and loss to property and
     infrastructure, and possibly causing emotional trauma and loss of livelihood to impacted communities.
     Recovery is the process of responding to that disaster, in order to return to normal life as quickly as possible.
     Post-disaster recovery is specific to each affected person and community, and its duration may be relatively
     short or long, depending on the magnitude of the event. The resources that are applied to recovery may be
     used in ways that can reduce future risks and/or mitigate damage.

     Figure 1: Post-Disaster Phases


                            Relief
                            Phase
                         /Humanitarian
                             Help
                                              Framework for
                                               Operational     Reconstruction
                                              Rehabilitation       Phase
            Disaster

                                                                           Recovery
                                                                            Phase


             Phase 1               Phase 2           Phase 3                                               Time
           Disaster...                                                                             Development


     As sketched in Figure 1, recovery planning gets underway even as emergency programs are ongoing. It includes
     the restoration of basic servicesk infrastructure, and markets that will support the phase down of emergency
     support. It is a transition period that bridges to development, that continues to merit special conditions for
     mobilizing resources and skills in order to help affected populations to resume their daily routines.




3	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
MOZAMBICAN CONTEXT
After independence in 1975, Mozambique was affected by various natural disasters, notably flooding along the
banks of the Limpopo River in 1977 and other rivers in 1978/79, as well as widespread drought in 1982/83.
The government largely reacted to each disaster as it occurred, and depended upon international assistance
for humanitarian relief and recovery.
By adopting a Disaster Management Policy in 1999, however, the Government of Mozambique started
to introduce proactive measures for disaster management, using early warning systems with community
involvement, allocating funds for contingencies and supporting livelihood recovery through labor-
intensive strategies. This policy was part of a broader post-independence development strategy to shift
from supply-driven service delivery to a demand-driven approach involving effective community participation
in making decisions and managing systems.
This 1999 national policy is based on six guiding principles:
     1.		Support affected communities in the development and implementation of disaster
         management activities;
     2.		Assess risks to manage disasters better;
     3.		Donations to be distributed to the most vulnerable populations;
     4.	 Focal points to be identified at all levels for all types of activities, so that state coordination
         agencies can exercise adequate authority during emergency situations;
     5.		Avoid the creation of parallel institutions by managing disasters through multi-sectoral
         capacities, in order to maximize scarce resources;
     6.	 Active involvement of civil society in responding to national disasters.
This national policy promotes mainstreaming of disaster risk management through national and sector
development planning. It also emphasizes the importance of inter-sectoral coordination in disaster
prevention and response.
From 2005, the spirit of self-esteem (or “auto-estima”) gained ground as a guiding principle for national
development. This changed the focus in how the government would henceforth manage disasters –
moving from dependence on foreign aid to strengthening national capacity. While funding would most likely
continue to be sought from external sources, assessment and planning could be undertaken more pro-
actively by national institutions.
The Master Plan for the Prevention and Mitigation of Natural Disasters (2006-2014)4 serves as the key
reference for disaster risk management in Mozambique. It clearly links disaster mitigation and recovery
with poverty and vulnerability reduction in an agriculture-based economy. For example, water resource
management includes considerations for both irrigation to improve crop production and control of water
levels to mitigate the impact of floods and droughts. Food security considerations extend beyond strategic
reserves of seeds and emergency rations, to advocate for introduction of drought-resistant plants that can
be used industrially to alter the structure of the rural economy in semi-arid areas. Disaster readiness is
based on early warning, information management, communication and trained capacity for search and
rescue. The implementation strategy for this plan is decentralized, so that local and traditional governments
as well as civil society are engaged as primary managers of information and risk. INGC has been updating
this plan for disaster risk management since mid 2013.

4	
     INGC, Master Plan for the Prevention and Mitigation of Natural Disasters (in Portuguese), 2005.



                                                                            Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   4
     The first National Relocation and Reconstruction Plan was elaborated in 2007. The Government’s main
     strategy was to resettle the populations in locations less prone to flooding and with potential for economic
     growth. In urban areas, relocation programs would include sewage and drainage protection. For the past
     six years, the post-flood program to resettle, recover and reconstruct has been reducing the vulnerability of
     populations residing in flood plains.
     Disaster risk management (DRM) is also explicitly incorporated into the five-year Development Plans
     since 2005 and the Poverty Reduction Action Plan (PARP) since 2006. Through these documents,
     the Government recognizes that successful disaster risk management not only mitigates the negative
     impact of recurrent weather-related events; risk reduction is inextricably linked to poverty reduction of
     populations who are most exposed to such disasters. The Master Plan, discussed above, is thus an integral
     part of the government’s strategy for poverty reduction. The Policy gives communities an important role
     to play in planning, organizing and implementing DRM activities through Local Disaster Risk Management
     Committees (CLGRC). In addition, it emphasizes the importance of regional coordination for managing
     natural hazards that cross national borders.
     Given the negative impact that natural disasters pose for achieving national program goals, and with the
     objective of ensuring the rapid return to normal life for the affected population and the national economy,
     government strategy has been refined to divide post-disaster action into four categories:
                    •	 Emergency Actions – supplementing the Contingency Plan and budget to ensure continuity of
                       humanitarian assistance and disease control
                    •	 Immediate (early) recovery
                    •	 Post-disaster reconstruction
                    •	 Vulnerability reduction
     The government uses these categories to inform the development of realistic objectives, reallocating
     resources from the 2013 national budget when necessary to respond to priority needs, or to mobilize
     additional resources from traditional partners to respond to emerging needs.
     Since April 2014, Mozambique has a legal instrument that obligates every sector or stakeholder to take
     action for disaster risk management5. With the President of the Republic signing Disaster Management Law
     15/2014, there exists a window of opportunity to clarify policies and responsibilities for disaster recovery.
     The government has six months to elaborate the regulations for responsibilities related to disaster risk
     management, including the implementation of activities that follow resource mobilization.




     5	
          Boletim da Republica, publicacao official da Republica da Mocambique, 20 de Junho de 2014, Series 1, numero 50, pp1291-93.

5	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR RECOVERY
The Coordinating Council for Preventing and Combating Natural Disasters (CCPCCN) was created by
presidential decree no. 44/80 on 3 September 1980. Its executive arm, the Department for Preventing and
Combating Natural Disasters (DPCCN), had the mandate to provide humanitarian assistance to refugees and
internally displaced people, as well as to drought-impacted populations.
In 1999, a new national government policy on disaster management was promulgated, replacing DPCCN
with the National Disaster Management Institute (INGC) under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This reflected
the country’s dependence on foreign assistance for funding and the importance of donor coordination to
recovery from disasters.
Although floods were known to pose a risk by September 1999, human and financial resources were limited
both in preparing for the floods of 2000 and in recovering from them.6 The country did not have a large
corps dedicated to disaster management on standby, but instead had to mobilize personnel both within and
from outside the country and when the situation demanded.
Between 2005 and 2009, INGC gained credibility as a leader and manager in emergency relief and
disaster mitigation, particularly through effective operations in response to floods during the rainy seasons
of 2007 and 2008 in central Mozambique (along the banks of Zambeqe, Buai and Save rivers). During this
time, INGC was shifted from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Ministry of State Administration, enabling
closer collaboration for relief and recovery with line ministries and provincial governments. It was also
restructured to focus on the two areas of emergency response and vulnerability reduction.
Structurally, INGC was authorized in 2006 to create a National Emergency Operations Center (Centro
Nacional de Emergência, known as CENOE) to coordinate overall humanitarian support, and a civil protection
unit known as UNAPROC to support search and rescue operations. At the same time, the legal basis for INGC’s
work was strengthened through judicial statutes (2007 and 2008) and approval of internal regulations by the
Council of Ministers (2009).
CENOE functions at four different levels of alert:
     1.	Green alert, when it is the department of INGC that monitors potential disaster risks, organizes
        technical training and simulation exercises for disaster readiness of the population. This is not an
        emergency or alert phase.
     2.	 Yellow alert, when there is a potential emergency on the radar, and institutional actors move to a state
         of alert and stand-by for response.

6	
     Frances Christie and Joseph Hanlon, Mozambique and the Great Flood of 2000, 2001.

                                                                         Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   6
          3.	 Orange alert, when INGC coordinates CENOE to prepare a contingency plan for impending disasters
              with other government institutions. Communities are alerted to move to safety and bulletins are
              issued regularly to both communities and to the council of ministers through CCGC (see section on
              Coordination Mechanisms).
          4.	Red alert, when an emergency is declared, INGC proposes that CENOE be expanded beyond line
             ministries and specialized agencies, to include search and rescue through the Civil Protection Unit
             (UNAPROC), and impacted local governments. Depending on the magnitude of the event, emergencies
             are managed at district, provincial or national level. INGC will act as a technical advisor for district
             and provincial emergency levels. CENOE may be coordinated by its own national director or the
             Director-General of INGC, as warranted by the disaster’s impact. In extreme cases, where it is
             necessary to declare a national state of emergency, there is a provision for the President of the
             Republic to coordinate CENOE7. During crises or critical moments leading up to an emergency,
             CENOE has up to twice-daily meetings with district and provincial levels, by teleconference, to
             review the day’s events and to plan for the next. The entire community involved in emergency
             response participates in these meetings.
     It is as the emergency response (Level 4) is being deactivated that CENOE has responsibility8 for identifying
     and reporting on achievements and pending actions for recovery, as part of its final report on interventions
     related to specific disaster events. CENOE members and focal points also transmit sector-specific information
     to their home ministries.
     When CENOE scales back to Level 1 operations and focusses on vulnerability reduction and disaster
     mitigation, it re-assumes its position as one department of INGC. Institutionally, this flexibility allows a
     permanent institution to respond to different types and magnitudes of disasters.
     Distinct from its responsibilities for CENOE, INGC also coordinates the implementation of multisectoral
     recovery programs that are not explicitly covered by line ministries. To respond to the needs for relocation
     of flood-affected populations, an Office for Reconstruction Coordination (GACOR) was created within
     INGC in 20079 to work with sector ministries, provincial and district governments and other partners.
     They have concentrated the coordination on relocating vulnerable populations. This includes support to
     the construction of resilient houses far from flood zones, land use planning, provision of basic services
     and structures in newly established communities, livelihood support, water supply and sanitation
     infrastructure.
     As can be seen in the organigram of INGC (see Figure 2 ), three regional offices (or “direcçoes regionais)
     have been set up in northern, central and southern parts of Mozambique, which respectively suffer different
     types of natural disasters. Provincial departments of INGC have also been opened, to be closer to areas of
     potential disasters and to decentralize the institutional structures for disaster management. Their role is to
     support provincial governors and district administrators in the planning, coordination and implementation
     of provincial- and district-based programs.10




     7	
          INGC, Plano Director de Gestao das Calamidades (PDGC), 2006
     8	
          “Establishment and functioning of the National Emergency Operations Center,” Council of Ministers, Republic of Mozambique, October 2006, approved by the
          25th session of the Council of Ministers, 17 October 2006.
     9
       	 Boletim da Republica, 3 July 2008, Series 1, number 27, p216-(4).
     10
        	 PDGC op.cit


7	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
Figure 2: Organigram of INGC
                                                                                    ORGANIGRAM
                                                                    NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT

                                                                                           DG

                                                                                                    DGA

                                                                                           GC

                                                     Intervention Units                                     Divisions

                        CENOE                 UNAPROC                  GACOR                       DPM            DARIDAS         DARH

                           Information             Operations             DT                                    Departments

                           Monitoring              Security               DEP                              RA               RA           DA


                           Communications          Communications         Administration                   DP               DT           DP


                           IT                      Volunteers                                              DM               DEP          DRH


                           Administration          Logistics                                                                             DCF
                                                                                    Regional Offices

                                                                DRS                        DRC                     DRN

                                                                                    Provincial Offices


                                                                 District Offices                  CERUMs

                                                                                             RDT    RSAN     RA


The restructuring and transformation of INGC in 2005 benefitted from the flexibility given to the new manager,
in terms of creating a completely new team and introducing innovative processes. INGC recruited and trained
new (mostly young) staff to implement the new vision of disaster risk management; civil servants who had
preceded the introduction of the new philosophy were almost entirely transferred to other government sectors.
The agency had room to experiment, train, and prepare for responding to the next emergency situation – as
observed in the good quality of teamwork and coordination in the aftermath of floods in 2007 and 2008.
Notwithstanding INGC’s achievements in the areas of readiness and disaster response, its role in post-disaster
recovery is more ambiguous. The authority of INGC in drought-stricken areas is supported by local governments,
but the implementation of recovery programs in flood-prone areas has been subject to questioning by line
ministries and provincial governments. Furthermore, INGC’s leadership mandate for disaster prevention and
mitigation is distinct from coordination of recovery programs, in terms of skill sets and functions. For example,
the coordination of rapid humanitarian assessments at the outset of an emergency draws upon field observations
and provides information for immediate relief, whereas damage and loss assessments for post-disaster recovery
draw upon secondary sources of information to estimate recovery and reconstruction needs. At this writing,
INGC does not have the tools to coordinate the latter, nor does it have the staff structure in GACOR to coordinate
decentralized multi-sectoral recovery, despite its name. In 2012, out of 167 staff in INGC headquarters, four were
assigned to GACOR 11, as of July 2014 there are nine staff.12 INGC has a limited number of staff based in the high-
risk provinces who are willing but poorly equipped to cover the large areas for which they are responsible.

11	
      KPMG, Auditoria de Desempenho do Sector de Calamidades Naturais, 11 October 2012, page 126.
12	
      Interview with Higino Rodrigues and Leovigildo Marcos (GACOR/INGC), 17 July 2014.



                                                                          Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   8
     Yet INGC is the only government agency with a dedicated department for reconstruction and relocation.
     Other sectors of government are not structured for recovery and reconstruction activities, yet they
     have responsibility for assessing disaster-related needs, estimating costs for addressing the needs, and
     developing projects for funding and implementation. This gray area of post-disaster responsibilities creates
     gaps between humanitarian action and development plans, raising issues of sustainability for normal
     development activities. For example, government-sponsored resettlement policies are implemented
     differently if related to disasters or development.13 The mandates of INGC and the Environment Ministry
     (MICOA) also overlap and require public negotiation.
     In fact, it is the Ministry of Planning and Development (MPD) that coordinates budget revisions to fund urgent
     recovery needs. Created in 2005 to lead and coordinate development planning, the MPD also oversees the
     integration of longer-term recovery actions into development plans with line ministries and external donors.
     MPD currently plays an important role in disaster recovery, through its function in coordinating with
     line ministries and sectors for the use of national resources and developing investment projects for
     external financing.
     Within MPD, the Department for National Planning works with line ministries for budget revisions and
     reallocations, while the Department for Investment and Cooperation is more directly involved with the
     mobilization of resources for development of projects and programs which (might) include post-disaster
     reconstruction and rehabilitation. (See Figure 3).

     Figure 3: Organigram of Ministry of Planning and Development


                                                                                MINISTRY

                                                                               Vice-Minister

                                                                                               Permanent
                                                                  Minister’s                   Secretary
                                                                  Office




               CPI              National                  Research and              Investment and            Administration and   Management
                                Planning                  Policy Analysis           Cooperation               Human Resources      and Information
              GAZEDA
                                Macro-economic            Sectoral                  M&E of External           Human                Network
               FARE             Policy Dept.              Policy Dept.              Financing                 Resource Dept.       Management

               MCA              Operational               Population                Reg'l and Int'l           Finance Dept.        Application
                                Planning                  Studies Dept.             Organizations                                  Development
               MARP             and M&E                                                                       Patrimony
                                                          Macro-economic            External                  (Heritage)           Information and
                                Decentralized             Policy                    Relations                                      Documentation
                                Planning                                                                      General Support      Center
                                                                                    Administration




     13	
           Development-related resettlement triggers national decree 31/2012 and World Bank Resettlement policy OP/BP 4/12.

9	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
Institutionally, oversight of disaster recovery is transferred by default (in the absence of any regulation
or directive on this matter) from INGC to MPD. Those government officials who serve as focal points for
their respective ministries in CENOE collaborate with their respective planning departments to use their
assessments in activities led by MPD as well. In 2013, the relocation activities implemented by GACOR/
INGC were part of the recovery actions compiled by each sector and consolidated in one document by MPD,
called “Preliminary Assessment of Post-Disaster Reconstruction Activities”.
Recovery assessments are thus being undertaken by each sector, and may or may not be addressed,
depending on the level of urgency and related possibility of funding, as will be discussed in the section on
Financial Management. In the process, disaster recovery shifts from emergency to development in terms
of management perspective, financing, and processing. This will be discussed further in the section on
Implementation Arrangements.




                                                 Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   10
      COORDINATION AND COMMUNICATION MECHANISMS
      In times of disaster or emergency, INGC reports to an advisory body on disaster management, known as the
      National Council for Disaster Management (CCGC), of which its own oversight ministry (of State Administration)
      is a member. The CCGC14 is a high-level body of the Council of Ministers, chaired by the Prime Minister,who
      meets regularly during emergencies to make policy decisions regarding government response. (See Figure 4).

      Figure 4: INGC’s Coordination Function

                                             COUNCIL OF MINISTERS


                                                                            National Council for Disaster Management
                                     MAE
                                                          INGC                           Technical Council
                            UN, NGOs,
                             Donors                                                          Meteorology                  Fire Dept.
                                                        Regions
                                                                                             Water                        Defense
                                                       Provinces
                                                                                             Agriculture                  Roads
                                                        Districts                            Environment                  Transport

                                                                                             Health                      Mineral
                                                                                                                         Resources
                                                                                             Urban Habitat
                                                                                                                          Industry and
                          Note: solid lines represent reporting lines;                                                    Commerce
                          dotted lines represent coordination lines


      The CCGC role is to:
            1.		Propose projects, policies and strategies of disaster prevention and mitigation to the Government;
            2.		Approve the contents of disaster management, post-disaster reconstruction and development programs,
                including assistance to the victims and rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure;
      14	
            CCGC member ministries are: the Prime Ministry, Foreign Ministry; Ministry of State and Administration; Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries; Ministry for
            the Coordination of Environmental Affairs; Ministry of Women and Social Action; Ministry of National Defense; Ministry of Industry and Trade; Ministry of
            Tourism; Ministry of Internal Affairs; Ministry of Public Works and Housing; Ministry of Finances; Ministry of Health; Ministry of Transport and Communications;
            Representative of INGC.


11	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
      3.		Approve the revision of the National Disaster Management Plan;
      4.	 Advise the President of the Republic on declaring a state of emergency;
      5.		Mobilize national and international communities for assistance and post-reconstruction;
      6.	 Advise the Cabinet on the need for creating an emergency fund.
The CCGC is advised in its oversight role by the Technical Council for Disaster Management (CTGC),
which is chaired and coordinated by INGC. According to the existing regulation, the CTGC is the national
platform for disaster management. It is comprised of directors (department heads) and technicians who are
oriented toward disaster management within the line ministries and sectors responsible for development
and vulnerability reduction. This structure is replicated at the provincial and district levels where
the technical councils report to the Provincial Governor and district administrators respectively. By
ministerial decree, one of the focal points from each line ministry may also be seconded to CENOE during
emergency situations.
Both CTGC and CENOE are organized into four sectors: Information management and planning,
Communication, Infrastructure, and Social Services, as per Table 2:

Table 2: Post-Disaster Coordination, Organized into Four Sectors
  SECTOR I – Information and planning                                               SECTOR II – Communication
  Led by the Ministry of Planning and Development (MPD)                             Led by State Information Office (GABINFO)
  Planning                                                                          Equipment maintenance
  Information                                                                       INGC website updating and maintenance
  Resources                                                                         Publications
                                                                                    Social Communication
  SECTOR III – Infrastructure                                                       SECTOR IV – Social Services
  Led by Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MOPH)                                Led by Ministry of Health (MISAU)
  Transport                                                                         Social Welfare
  Public works and engineering                                                      Medical and health services
  Energy                                                                            Food and potable water
                                                                                    Manage volunteers and donations

Overall, CENOE and CTGC are involved in mobilizing resources, ensuring linkages between the emergency
and rehabilitation phases, and keeping the ministerial level CCGC informed of rehabilitation activities. The
humanitarian country team15 clusters are embedded in these four sectors in support to coordination of relief
operations during emergencies. These clusters include: Shelter, Telecommunications, Logistics, Protection
and Education; Food Security, Health, Nutrition, Water and Sanitation and Early Recovery.
Of particular interest in this case study is the first sector, for Information Management and Planning, which
is led by MPD, and has representatives from the Ministry of Agriculture, Finance, Foreign Affairs, and the
National Institute of Meteorology, Water and Geology Departments, and Information Office. The National
Meteorological Services and the National Water Department in turn coordinate with their international
affiliates, so that meteorological, fluvial and geophysical information is constantly available and monitored
for possible impacts on the country. As predictive capacity increases, room for unpleasant surprise is reduced.

15	
      The humanitarian country team (HCT) is a forum comprised of United Nations agencies, the Red Cross and international non-governmental organizations led by the
      UN-designated Humanitarian Coordinator.




                                                                            Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014           12
      The objectives of the sectors are to:
                   •	 coordinate the efficient and effective use of resources, avoiding waste and duplication of effort;
                   •	 provide timely information for decision-making both to the field and within CENOE;
                   •	 provide resources to enable emergency assistance and disaster relief.
      Their function within CENOE includes:
                   •	 planning for prevention, mitigation and response to natural disasters;
                   •	 recommending adequate resources for responding to such events;
                   •	 recommending the appropriate level of response to such events;
                   •	 analyzing, updating and disseminating timely information.
      The Infrastructure sector also assesses damage caused by disasters as part of its functions.
      INGC’s role in CTGC as well as CENOE is key in both of the coordinating bodies, one for advising government
      and the other for executing emergency response and recovery operations, as depicted in Figure 2 above.
      Coordination with the private sector and civil society has been limited during emergency periods to early
      warning and the distribution of emergency supplies. To coordinate with communities at times of disaster,
      the government first invested in the creation of Local Risk Management Committees (CLGRC) in areas
      identified as being at high risk of disasters. CLGRC members are elected by communities and composed of
      respected local leaders. They receive and communicate early warning information and coordinate emergency
      response locally. In 2006, simulation exercises were introduced to maintain community-level readiness in
      high-risk areas. The CLGRC also received training and equipment for disaster prevention and mitigation.
      The know-how of communities and their resilience capacity can be strengthened further. For example,
      communities often monitor the water level of rivers in ways that are dissimilar from government monitoring
      methods, but which effectively serve for local evacuation alerts. Their desire to remain close to their places
      of livelihood has contributed to adjustments in government relocation strategies.
      Grievance redressal mechanisms, which exist through INGC during emergencies, disappear after the
      emergency phase ends. Communities are expected to use the CLGRC to provide feedback regarding post-
      disaster management. Local administrations and district authorities must be involved in developing,
      disseminating and enforcing such mechanisms.




13	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
RECOVERY FINANCING AND MANAGEMENT
Financing post-disaster recovery in Mozambique must be considered within the country’s macro-economic
context. Mozambique’s economic performance has been strong since the end of the civil war in 1992,
with GDP growth from 1993 to 2013 averaging 7.4 percent. Its strong performance is attributed to sound
macroeconomic management, a number of large-scale foreign-investment projects (“megaprojects”),
and significant donor support.16 Public debt growth reflects the government’s plan to temporarily boost
infrastructure investment through the increased use of external non-concessional financing. This highlights
the importance of maintaining prudent macroeconomic policies and continuing to pursue structural reforms
to strengthen debt management and ensure efficiency in public investment, building on progress achieved
under the current IMF- and Word Bank-supported programs.17
To manage recovery from the floods and cyclones of 2000 and 2001, the government set in motion a
post-flood reconstruction programme with the support of external donors and managed largely through
the national budget system. This avoided complex and multiple funding arrangements while strengthening
national accountability and transparency mechanisms.18
Following the donors’ conference in 2000, government officials signed agreements with all donors who
had pledged resources, to have legally binding contracts with a schedule of financial disbursements,
corresponding reconstruction activities and reporting procedures. Donors were encouraged to channel
funds through the government budget and not through the establishment of a donor trust fund or parallel
funding arrangements. Managing donor assistance through the Treasury gave the government full
responsibility for using the funds as well as for ensuring accountability and supervision. It also meant that
the reconstruction programme would be fully integrated into the public sector financial management system.
Strong government ownership and commitment to the goals of the recovery programme seem to have
provided incentives for donors to pledge agree to work largely through the national system.
Fund management was consequently handled through SISTAFE, the national system for financial
administration. Assistance was disbursed rapidly, totaling over 90 per cent in late 2002. Establishment
of a parliamentary task force to oversee the programme further ensured that the government was held
to account by both its external partners and national legislators. SISTAFE was upgraded in 2004 to be
accessible on-line (as e-SISTAFE), and provides transparency in the management of public revenues.

16	
      World Bank, Second Climate Change Development Policy Operation (CCDPO2), June 2014, paragraph 2.
17	
      Report N. 75117-MZ, International Development Association program document for a proposed credit in the amount of sdr 73.4 million (us$110 million
      equivalent) to the Republic of Mozambique for a ninth poverty reduction support credit, June 6, 2013. Poverty Reduction and Economic Management - AFTP1
      Africa Region.
18	
      Christie and Hanlon, “A casebook of experiences and lessons.”




                                                                          Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014      14
      By 2013, the Government of Mozambique had opted to work with donor partners through existing programs
      of cooperation, and without appealing to donors specifically for disaster recovery needs through donor round
      tables, for example. Continuing the practice from the previous decade, funds are channeled through SISTAFE
      as much as possible, after negotiation with donors.
      Following the floods in 2013, MPD provided guidance to line ministries for organizing information regarding
      post-disaster recovery by sector; actions for addressing damage and replacement; and estimated cost of
      reconstruction. Total estimated costs exceeded USD521 million, of which 68 percent was for public sector
      reconstruction and vulnerability reduction. (See annex 2).
      Funding needs for post-disaster infrastructure refurbishment and inventory replacement were grouped into
      the following four categories:
         1.	 Emergency actions to be realized by October 2013, using the national contingency fund, were largely
             humanitarian in nature, and includes the distribution of food and non-food emergency items, as well as
             health and education services.
         2.	 Early Recovery needs identified by line ministries, funded from reallocations of the national budget,
             included the repositioning of infrastructure, service delivery and revitalizing production (through
             agriculture, fishing, industry and commerce).
         3.	 Post-disaster recovery, namely the reconstruction of infrastructure, such as roads, bridges, and health
             clinics. Detailed engineering studies were required to include measures to reduce future risk and
             increase resilience, cost estimates, and possible sources of financing. Funding for this category was not
             immediately available through the state budget; MPD encouraged external resource mobilization.
         4.	 Measures to reduce vulnerability, or structural and non-structural interventions, based upon
             engineering studies designed to mitigate the impact of future disasters, including slum upgrading or
             relocation of slum residents. Funding for such actions would be identified outside of the national budget.

      SOURCES OF FUNDING
      Government-managed funding for disasters takes a number of forms, including ex-ante and ex-post budgetary
      provisions for disaster response, recovery and reconstruction.
      Contingency funds for disaster response and short-term recovery are made available to line ministries, local
      government, and the National Institute for Disaster Management (INGC) through two mechanisms:
                   •	 Central reserve provisions: the Ministry of Finance withholds 10 percent of each sector and local
                      government budget in reserve for unforeseen expenditure, such as disaster losses. If the funds
                      are not used for contingency spending, they are released for planned expenditure in the last three
                      months of the fiscal year.
                   •	 The Contingency Plan: Each year since 2008, the government has allocated US$3.5 to 4 million to
                      cover a percentage of spending needs estimated for disaster response and early recovery, based
                      on population exposure, historical activity and meteorological forecasts under three different
                      scenarios presented in the annual contingency plan. The state provision is typically sufficient
                      to fund the first 72 hours of a disaster; the remaining funds are provided by international
                      cooperation partners. INGC is allocated more than half of the total budget, given its disaster
                      response and coordination responsibilities.




15	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
Funds for longer term recovery and reconstruction are sourced separately. Budgets for multi-year recovery
needs, particularly in categories (c) and (d) above, are largely folded into the rolling national development
plan and macro economic framework as articulated in the Medium Term Fiscal Framework (CFMP or Cenario
Fiscal de Medio Prazo) every year. In this way, reconstruction needs are incorporated into the regular budget
cycle, and managed as medium to long-term development projects through existing mechanisms. For example,
World Bank loans for the national productive social action program or the roads and bridges management
both include the financing of recovery or rehabilitation after the 2013 floods. The 2014-16 includes post-flood
reconstruction among the priorities to be funded, in order to attain poverty reduction goals.19
Other funding for recovery from external sources may be managed off-budget, in parallel to the national
system, directly by the funding organizations. ODAMoz20, or the electronic database maintained by the local
United Nations Resident Coordinator’s office, contains categories for donor funds received by Mozambique
which distinguish between emergency response, reconstruction relief and rehabilitation, and disaster
prevention and preparedness. It is probable however that the amount reflected under “reconstruction relief”
is under-stated, since other project categories, such as infrastructure and education, have tranches which are
being used for rehabilitation activities.

ALTERNATIVE FINANCING MECHANISMS FOR RECOVERY
In addition to existing mechanisms for financing post-disaster recovery, the Government of Mozambique
has been considering other possibilities. This includes:
      1.	 A mechanism to spread disaster losses over time, given low uptake of insurance for public assets,
          and redistribution of contingency budget balances at the end of the fiscal year for other purposes. A
          proposal for a national fund for disaster risk management (Fundo de Gestão de Riscos Naturais) and
          climate change adaptation has been drafted and is under discussion within the CCGC. This fund would
          aim to create a source of funding independent of the budget cycle, accumulate across years; bypass
          normal budget disbursement procedures to increase flexibility and speed of access for funding for
          disaster response and recovery; and introduce more efficient coordination, oversight and tracking
          of donor and government funds applied to DRM21. This pooled fund would mobilize national, regional
          and international resources, with credible and flexible mechanisms for receiving, channeling, and
          monitoring such funds, as well as building internal capacity to absorbe these funds.
      2.	 Programs for risk transfer to respond to severe events, using established scientific parameters to
          index insurance for calamitous events. In other words, this mechanism would classify disaster events
          to support the future use of financial instruments that link payouts to event severity.
      3.	A national safety-net scheme is also under consideration to reduce the burden on the central
         government for post-disaster response financing. This would take the form of a National Program for
         Productive Social Action in response to chronic food insecurity and vulnerability to climatic shocks,
         price fluctuations, and the seasonal variability of agricultural production.



19	
      “Cenario Fiscal de Médio Prazo 2014-2016,” Republica de Mocambique Ministerio da Planificacao e Desenvolvimento e Ministerio das Financas, Maputo June
      2013, paragraph 10.
20	
      ODAmoz 2.0 is the updated version of the original EC funded electronic data base that provides information on Official Development Assistance (ODA) to
      Mozambique. The original version was created in response to the Paris Declaration advocating for strengthened coordination and harmonization among Donors
      and alignment with the Government of Mozambique. ODAmoz track donor and United Nations agency projects and programs in the country: where they are
      operating, who finances them, and which organization implements them.
21	
      World Bank, Mozambique: Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (DRFI) Country Note, June 2012.




                                                                          Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014        16
      Another possible mechanism for financing post-disaster response and recovery is PREVINA.22 Since the
      restructuring of INGC in 2006, it was envisaged as an account where the balance of contingency funds
      could be deposited at the end of each fiscal year, and it has long been envisaged as an account where the
      balance of contingency funds at the end of each fiscal year, and non-earmarked monetary donations would
      automatically be transferred.
      The possibility of temporary tax suspensions and subsidized access to credit to promote post-disaster
      recovery also exists.
      Budgets for sector development, coming from both national resources and partner contributions need
      to be aligned with disaster risk management. A culture of prevention and adaptation is gradually being
      introduced to Mozambican society, to create a foundation for national development that is based on its
      own resources. What requires more work is rapid financial execution – decentralized and specialized – of
      recovery funding, obligating the application of exceptional budgetary execution measures as recognized in
      the Disaster Management law.




      22	
            When INGC was created in 1999, all transport equipment of the extinguished agency – DPCCN—was liquidated and proceeds were deposited in an account
            called PREVINA.




17	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
MANAGING RECOVERY IMPLEMENTATION
As discussed in an earlier section on the institutional framework, both INGC and MPD have coordination
roles in post-disaster recovery. Neither of their respective assessments of recovery needs are actively used
however to monitor or evaluate the completion and impact of actions undertaken.
Relocation-related activities that are under the direct responsibility of GACOR are clearly monitored, as will
be discussed below. Other actions to rehabilitate damaged infrastructure are enfolded into development
projects and are not labeled as post-disaster recovery programs per se, even when resources for recovery
come from donor funds earmarked for emergency.
A sampling of projects that include recovery components are the Safer Schools Project jointly financed by the
EU, UN-Habitat and GFDRR, the Baixo Limpopo Development Project financed by the African Development
Bank; and two projects financed by the World Bank for (1) Roads and Bridges management and maintenance
and (2) a national productive social action program.
During emergencies, the Government applies accelerated procedures for procurement of goods and services,
to enable INGC to assist disaster victims as soon as possible. Customs duties and taxes are suspended for
the importation of emergency supplies. After the emergency phase is over, INGC is obligated to reconcile
these exceptions with the fiscal authorities. (This responsibility is eased somewhat by the participation of tax
authorities within CENOE.)
In the absence of a defined recovery phase, recovery projects are subject to standard financial management
procedures that have been constructed for transparency and embedded with safeguards for accountability –
but which are not time sensitive to the aim of returning to “normal” as quickly as possible. This can frustrate
the expectations of partner organizations that adjusted their funding to address a post-disaster situation,
but find that disbursements are not treated with any urgency.
During consultations for this case study, it was suggested by both government and funding partners
that more pro-active measures be applied for recovery activities. Procurement processes under normal
development conditions can take at least three to six months – quite long for recovering from disasters.
Donors can urge that projects managed within the government system use accelerated procurement and
management mecanisms for recovery activities. Projects managed off-budget, or outside of the government
system by donors or civil society organizations can explicitly be designed to address recovery needs, and
be managed through the funding organizations’ expedited processes.




                                                   Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   18
      VULNERABILITY REDUCTION THROUGH RELOCATION
      The Government of Mozambique has long had a policy of “reassentamento”23. This policy has been
      implemented after disasters as well as for development projects since independence, and subsequently means
      different things to different people and areas in the country. Relocation policy, as currently implemented
      through INGC, represents a government initiative to reduce vulnerability to natural disasters among rural
      populations24, through provision of plots of land25, construction of resilient housing for vulnerable population
      groups, provision of basic social services, and an effort to increase income generation opportunities.
      The guiding principles for relocation are to:
                       •	 Engage the affected population to return to “normal” life, with government and civil society
                          facilitating this process;
                       •	 Mobilize national capacity to support this process, through the use of military personnel,
                          volunteers, students and civil society;
                       •	 Protect the vulnerable, by according the elderly, disabled, chronically ill, and orphaned children
                          priority in housing.
      INGC involvement in relocation activities began after the Council of Ministers approved the Chimoio Plan
      and “Preliminary Assessment and Post-Disaster Reconstruction” plan in April 2007. These documents
      defined the main relocation support activities as the demarcation of plots of land 30 x 40 meters, the
      construction of estaleiros (or lumberyards), the procurement of construction materials and the construction
      of houses for 30,000 families, at a cost of 193 million meticais (MZN) or USD 7.9 million, at exchange rate of
      2007. The government could finance one third or 66.5 million MZN, from available resources, out of which
      92 percent was earmarked for the four affected provinces of Sofala, Manica, Tete and Zambezia.
      Responsibility for program implementation was initially attributed to the Ministry of Public Works, provincial
      governors and concerned districts. The role of INGC was limited to working with communities on disaster
      management, and coordinating with the Ministry of Science and Technology on income generation activities.
      However, the Prime Minister designated INGC as the overall coordinator of the relocation process in 2008,
      and GACOR was created for this purpose; their first disbursements took place in 2009.
      As a result of relocation activities, the population faces visibly reduced risk of being victimized by floods,
      as compared to those of 2000 and 2007. A performance audit conducted by KPMG recognizes positive
      performance indicators26. For example, 99 communities were settled along the river basins of Zambeze,
      Punge, Save, Buzi and Limpopo. Socio-economic infrastructure (e.g. health centers and schools) was also
      rehabilitated and repositioned in these areas. Also, economic conditions in the resettled areas have improved
      somewhat, as indicated by the development of local markets for bricks and the local construction capacity.
      At the same time, GACOR-INGC have learned important lessons for disaster recovery through the
      relocation process:
                       •	 First, each relocated community has unique specifications and characteristics. Thus the amount
                          of time and effort invested in each location is highly variable. Contrary to the quick jump from
                          emergency to development phases in other areas of post-disaster activity, GACOR is much
                          slower to formally bring relocation activities to a close. Therein lies some ambiguity about what
                          is recovery versus what is development.
      23	
            GACOR/INGC - Plano para a II Fase do reassentamento pós-cheias 2007
      24	
            KPMG op.cit
      25	
            All land is the property of the state; title is granted to legal persons. Its use is regulated by a mixture of traditions, concessions and local customs.
            Lei de Terras, number 19/97.
      26	
            KPMG op.cit

19	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
                •	 Economic opportunity is a critical part of recovery. People opt to relocate when the socio-
                   economic gains are understood; conversely they may prefer to continue living in (unsafe)
                   flood zones when economic opportunities in the new communities are fragile. Some families
                   hedged their bets by continuing to cultivate their fertile traditional fields near the (flood-prone)
                   riverbanks, as well as initiating plots near their relocated community.
                •	 District government must be involved. Local leaders play a critical role in coordination and
                   interaction between government, communities, and relocation partners. They play a bridging
                   role in identifying (vulnerable) individuals who merit special assistance, and priorities for
                   replacing or repairing damaged infrastructure and equipment27. In one relocated community,
                   the move of the public school, the proximity of the trunk road, and availability of jobs at a
                   juice factory seemed to motivate a wholesale shutdown of the flood-prone location. In another
                   location, the school continued to function in the original community and few had started to
                   exercise their right to live on newly allocated plots of land.
                •	 Community participation increases consumer satisfaction. While the size and allocation of land
                   parcels may not be negotiable, families who customize the standard brick-based resilient house
                   design can introduce space for chicken coops, animal pens or a terrace and garden. Some civil
                   society organizations use owner-driven contributions as the criteria for providing additional
                   support to relocation; for example, Caritas provides doors, windows and paint to selected
                   families who have produced a minimum number of bricks.
                •	 Building Back Better: relocation is more than reconstruction. The families and households who opt
                   to relocate recognize the opportunity to live in housing that is designed to be more resilient and
                   secure than where they lived prior to the floods. In the two areas visited for this case study,
                   the governmented funded the construction of houses for vulnerable populations, as per the
                   principle mentioned above. After the plots of land were designated, activities focused on housing
                   construction, led by the Ministry of Public Works and Housing. Social services (education and
                   health) and an accessible market are equally important for helping communities to adjust to life
                   in new locations.
                •	 Logistics management is critical. The government tries to provide construction material for a
                   certain number of houses, and expects the relocating families to produce reinforced bricks
                   for housing construction. This requires fuel wood to fire brick-making ovens, which may not
                   be easily available in new relocation areas; and without transport to deliver fuel wood to the
                   construction areas.
The MPD guidelines for planning post-disaster needs specifies28 that settlements located far from flood plains
be considered a definitive solution to eliminate risks, and to substantially reduce loss of property, given that no
dyke or dam can guarantee total protection to cities and settlements in case of catastrophic floods. Options for
transferring social infrastructure and public administration services to new locations are being identified, together
with the allocation of enough land to progressively transfer to inhabitants in these same areas. The locations
under consideration are small and medium-size cities and settlements along the banks of the major rivers.
Other views for reducing vulnerability and risk, as proposed by some cooperation partners , are seen through
a paradigm of learning to live with floods in situ (introducing different building techniques and designs),
instead of moving communities away from flood zones to reduce their vulnerability.29

27	
      Raúl M. Chambote and Boaventura S. Veja, "Reassentamento pela Metade no Vale do Zambeze: O Caso de Mutarara," Um Estudo Independente sobre a
      Abordagem de Reassentamento Pós-Cheias em Moçambique à Luz da ERR 2007/8, Oxfam, May 2008.
28	
      MPD, Guiao para o Diagnostico Preliminar, 2013.
29	
      “Focus on Mozambique: A Decade experimenting disaster risk reduction strategies,” UN-HABITAT, 2012, p.9

                                                                         Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   20
      RISK REDUCTION AND READINESS AS PART OF DISASTER RECOVERY
      Disaster risk reduction is another area that has been led by INGC. Measures to improve early warning and
      public disaster awareness have improved after each disaster in the past decade – translating into reduced
      expenditure on response. This has been particularly evident in the cost of evacuation;
                   •	 In 2007, INGC had two days of advance warning to evacuate around 150,000 people, and
                      disbursed an estimated US$5 million for this effort;
                   •	 In 2008, they had five days of warning to evacuate the same number of people, and US$3
                      million was disbursed;
                   •	 In 2011, with ten days of warning before an event similar in scale to 2007/2008, INGC
                      disbursed less than US$1 million.
      The government’s commitment to risk reduction and disaster readiness has been evident in the annual
      budget allocation to the contingency plan. Also, District Disaster Risk Management Committees have
      been set up in areas prone to flooding; they have played an important role in sensitizing the population
      to disaster warnings and evacuation procedures. With strong monitoring mechanisms, the benefits of
      investing in recovery would also be more visibie.




21	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
SISTAFE and ODAMoz have been mentioned in an earlier section as financial management tools and
databases. These systems help to monitor funding at a national level, but do not provide correlations
between available funding and post-disaster needs, let alone the overall state of recovery from the most
recent disaster.
Nevertheless, the 2013 guide for preliminary assessment of post-flood damage stipulates that recovery,
reconstruction and vulnerability reduction should merit priority attention of all sectors, and consequently
will be periodically monitored by the Council of Ministers. Progress reports are prepared by MPD, in
coordination with the Ministry for State Administration (MAE), for review by the Council of Ministers,
with the possibility of mid-course corrections if the reviewers deem it necessary.
The early recovery strategy defined by key international partners is not monitored by either INGC or
MPD. Within the humanitarian country team, composed of international organizations and led by the
United Nations, the Early Recovery Cluster working group considers this strategy to have been developed
for fund-raising purposes, and does not use it (or any other baseline) to track how recovery needs are
being addressed after each disaster in Mozambique, even if they are incorporated into and financed as
development projects that are coordinated by the MPD.
Similarly, long-term recovery needs are not explicitly included when defining government development
priorities or socio-economic plans. Thus there is no certainty that the needs identified in post-disaster
assessments are implemented or financed. Within the MPD guidelines, line ministries are responsible for
reconstruction within their respective mandates, but they each face the challenge of limited resources
and balancing between recovery needs and those already identified in socio-economic development
plans (e.g. PES, PESODs). For World Bank-financed projects that contain tranches of recovery activities,
it is possible to envision the eventual inclusion of monitoring indicators for recovery. For example, the
Safer Schools project will note locations for more resilient schools that are slated to be constructed in
areas already affected by past floods. The Second Climate Change Development Policy Operation will
monitor the number of households in climate vulnerable districts who benefit from the National Productive
Social Action Program, and the percentage of district roads that are re-constructed or upgraded from
2014 onwards in pilot provinces (Gaza and west Inhambane) in compliance with revised guidance and
design standards.




                                                 Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   22
      Insufficient financing for rehabilitation of major infrastructure such as dykes and dams has resulted
      in disasters which could have been avoided. Also, when funding for infrastructure is sourced through
      budget reallocations, it is likely to cover a return to the status quo ante, but rarely to a “build back better”
      standard that is resilient for the next disaster, let alone one of a greater magnitude, such as the dam
      breakage in Chokwe in 2013. New projects with concessional financing are more likely to be developed
      with consideration of disaster-sensitive safeguards.
      The resources allocated to INGC for recovery are subject to monitoring and control by the same
      institutions and mechanisms that monitor line ministries and development activities. While the active
      participation of a comptroller (from the Finance Ministry) within CENOE creates room for maneuver
      during the emergency phase, the Administrative Tribunal who audits state accounts reviews accounts
      only years after the disaster – when appreciation for the special circumstances has long dissipated. With
      the promulgation of the Emergency Law, there is an opportunity to resolve many of these issues, giving
      INGC greater financial autonomy with appropriate mechanisms and safeguards.




23	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM CASE STUDY PARTICIPANTS FOR
STRENGTHENING THE MANAGEMENT OF POST-FLOOD RECOVERY
This case study was prepared through a combination of literature reviews and discussions with organizations
active in the area of post-disaster management in Mozambique, between March and July 2014. The following
recommendations are a synthesis of the discussions. The names of all of who were consulted for this study
are listed in Annex 3.

DISASTER RECOVERY POLICY
The 2013 floods demonstrated that challenges faced by INGC in managing, leading and coordinating the
recovery process are primarily due to the absence of national recovery policies. Currently, the post-disaster
emergency phase is immediately followed by resumption of development mode, despite outstanding needs
to be addressed and people’s lives still in disarray. The Law 15/2014 ratified by Parliament in April 2014
established the legal basis for managing disasters, including prevention, mitigation, relief, reconstruction
and recovery in affected areas. The regulations and strategy for implementing this law should serve to
articulate national recovery policy.
With regards to disaster-related relocation, this law needs to be harmonized with MICOA-led resettlement
and Decree 31/2012, to ensure consistency in the safe and sustainable handling of resettlement in
Mozambique. (The difference between disaster-related and development- related resettlement is not
clear to the general public and even within government.) The distinction ought to be defined so as to
ensure that citizens who relocate from disaster affected zones can recover and smoothly transition
towards sustainable livelihoods over time.

INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS
 1.	 Re-examine the national disaster management system, particularly regarding competencies and
     authority for post-disaster recovery. The legal basis and parameters of INGC’s role and authority need
     better definition, particularly for the period after deactivation of CENOE when INGC reverts to normal
     operations (or Code Green) and reconstruction activities are underway.
 	   If the disaster recovery framework were elaborated to encompass four phases – from the event
     (disaster) through emergency response, post-disaster needs assessment, to programming for and
     implementation of recovery and institutionalization; it would be depicted in a circle (see Figure 5).




                                                 Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   24
        	    By identifying the Mozambican institutions that are responsible and/or active at each of these phases,
             it is possible to identify where further definitions are necessary. Starting from the disaster event
             (at "11:00" in the circle, INGC is clearly leading the response. CENOE is conducting an assessment
             of post-disaster needs, as is MPD. As discussed earlier, MPD is currently the most active institution
             in Phase II of this graphic, although they do not prioritize recovery any more than other strategic
             objectives. This results in fracturing recovery among the respective sector ministries through Phase
             III, with no consolidated overview nor monitoring and evaluation relative to the initial assessment —
             as noted with question marks in Figure 5. INGC again comes into a visible role in Phase IV.

      Figure 5: Developing Disaster Recovery Frameworks to Facilitate Resilient Recovery & Development

                                              Ex-Post
                                                                                             CENOE

                             DI




                                                                                                       of sector needs
                               SA




                                                                                                       Prioritization
                                   ST


                                                                                Conducti ry
                                                                                               nt
                                     ER         INGC


                                                                                              to
                                                                                             ng

                                                                                 Assessme
                                                                    REC




                                                                                                                                           ent
                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                  MPD

                                                                                         ip




                                                                                                                                Ass acity
                     Ex-Ante




                                                                                                                                      essm
                                                                                      ic
                                                                      OVE




                                                                                   rt
                                                     RE




                                                                                                                                  Cap
                                                                                Pa




                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                        RY




                                                                                                                                  tio
                                                     SP




                                                                                                                           go t
                                                                                                                         Ne dge
                                                                                                                              tia
                                                        ON




                                                                                                                           Bu
                                                          SE




                PREPAREDNESS                                                                                                                            nd r
                                                                                         PHASE I                                                 i c y a y fo
                                                                                                                                               l         g y?
                                                                                         Post Disaster Damage                                Po trate ver
                                                                                         and Needs Assessment                                  S eco
                                                                                                                                                    R               al
                                                                                                                                                              ution
                                                                                                                                                        Instit work
                                                                                       Information                                                       Frame covery?
                    INGC          Institutionalize                                     Management                                                         for Re
                                  Recovery                       Monitoring &                                            Institutions                  Financing
                                  Functions                       Evaluation                                                                           Mechanisms
                                                                                        Recovery
            MITIGATION            in National
                                                                                                                                PHASE II               for Recovery
                                  and Local                                            Coordinator
                                                     PHASE IV                                                                   Post Assessment Strategic
                                  Governance         Institutionalize
                                  Systems                                                                                       Planning and            Prioritizatio
                                                     Recovery, DRR              Policy                        Finance           Programming                           n?
                                                     and DRM                                                                    for Recovery          S e que
                                                                                                                                                     of ne ncing
                                                                                                                                                             eds?
                      INGC                                                                                                                       Pro
                                                                                         PHASE III                                              of n gram
                                                                                         Implementation                                   Di         eed min
                                                                                                                                             ss           s? g
                                                                                         of Recovery                                            em
                                                                                                                                                   ina
                  PREVENTION                                                                                                                           tio
                                                                                                                                                           n?
                                                          Ev nito




                                                                                                                           CE cove
                                                           Mo




                                                                                                                            Re
                                                            al




                                                                                                                             NO ry
                                                               u




                                                                                                                               Reco agemen
                                                                 a


                                                                 D




                                                                                                                                Ef ?
                                                                                                                                Man
                                                                  Capa
                                                                   tio g an


                                                                    e


                                                                                      Arrangements
                                                                                      Implementatio


                                                                                                         Project
                                                                      v




                                                                                                         of Need




                                                                                                                                  or
                                                                      rin
                                                                       n? d



                                                                        e




                                                                                                                                    very t
                                                                          lopm
                                                                           city




                                                                                                                 ization
                                                                                ent




                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                   n




                                               Sequenced, prioritized, programmatic and criteria-based action plan




25	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
2.	 Establish a “CENOE for Recovery” in order to continue coordinating and monitoring recovery
    activities after the emergency phase is declared over. Such coordination would form a bigger and
    more coherent scenario of recovery actions and programs that are currently dispersed between
    INGC, MPD and sector ministries. It would introduce a monitoring mechanism to maintain an
    overview of recovery activities, much like CENOE during the emergency phase. Recovery should be
    clearly articulated under the responsibility of INGC.
3.	 Clarify the responsibilities of CTGC and “CENOE for Recovery” regarding recovery operations – as
    distinct from development programs. CTGC members clearly continue to contribute to the definition
    of recovery actions, even as CENOE phases down. Therefore, they should all be involved in pre-
    disaster recovery planning and more explicitly in the management of recovery processes. Currently
    their contributions are rendered invisible by being re-absorbed into development programs.
4.	 Involve the Ministry of Women and Social Affairs more actively from the beginning of recovery planning,
    so as to plan an Exit Strategy for INGC from communities that transit from Disaster to Recovery and
    to normalcy. This Exit Strategy ought to be factored in and developed with an estimated funding
    and budget.
5.	 Concentrate INGC’s “core business” on coordination, instead of managing activities in sectors where
    others have the competence and mandate. The INGC mandate should extend around the full circle (see
    above Figure 5), between Prevention-Recovery-Mitigation/Prevention- Preparedness. Achievements
    in vulnerability reduction, prevention, communication with communities, and teamwork have made
    INGC an acclaimed national institution, despite its small number of staff and limited budget, and this
    should continue.
	      MPD should continue to contribute to recovery, as a member of CTGC and CENOE (for recovery),
       in working with the Ministry of Finance to make financial resources available for recovery within
       the rolling development plans and CFMP. This would not replace the importance of INGC for on-the-
       ground coordination.

PLANNING AND ASSESSMENT
    6.	 Train national and local authorities and other relevant partners to ready for recovery by reviewing and
        adapting PDNA guidelines to Mozambique’s characteristics and structures. A consolidated post-disaster
        assessment of damage and needs is sine qua non to plan for recovery and reconstruction. Therefore,
        the final report prepared by CENOE/INGC in its phase down from level 4 needs to be harmonized with
        the preliminary assessment coordinated by MPD, as well as those used by key partners and NGOs. One
        multi-sectoral report of recovery priorities and implementation framework would be more transparent
        and efficient to organize funding, planning and monitoring.
7.	 GACOR’s involvement in relocation should be better defined, so that their direct involvement is phased
    down to encourage local authorities to assume responsibility for community well-being and development.
8.	 Increasingly sophisticated meteorological sciences open the possibility of multi-annual contingency
    plans that could include projected reconstruction needs and cost. The “needs assessment” that follows
    a disaster would then be refined rather than constructed from scratch after a disaster event, and the
    road between emergency and development would be fore-shortened.




                                                   Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   26
      MONITORING RECOVERY
            9.	 Create a consolidated database of (demographic, geographic, infrastructure) information collected
                through the assessments of CENOE and MPD. Databases should be regularly updated in order to be
                able to provide a credible baseline on short notice. INGC can also establish formal agreements with
                other agencies (e.g. INAM) and line ministries that collect data on disaster risk loss and exposure,
                to ensure the sharing of this data and its consolidation.30 This can be supplemented with data on
                exposed assets, covering private buildings, crops and infrastructure with characteristics including
                location, replacement value, and construction type/crop type.
            10.	Clarify accelerated mechanisms for recovery, while maintaining transparency and accountability, by
                working ahead of the next floods with donors who can use their existing emergency procedures in the
                recovery phase.
            11.	Monitoring of post-disaster recovery and reconstruction is not yet conducted consistently. The
                mechanisms for monitoring should be developed to link recovery activities with the allocated budget,
                such as the Reconstruction Plan of 2013-2015 and related plans of action.
            12.	Include recovery-related action within the national monitoring/ evaluation framework of CCDPO2.
                Given that MPD is overseeing the post-disaster budget revisions, and categorizing what activities fall
                into longer-term recovery and resilience-building measures, this would seem feasible, even if not the
                same type of activity.

      FUNDING
            13.		Funding for recovery should be labeled in its own category, in both ODAMoz and e-SISTAFE, regardless
                 of the source of funding, so that it can be compared to the estimated cost of post-disaster reconstruction
                 such as in Annex 2. This would facilitate monitorign or recovery activities. For example, within the
                 Safer Schools Project, schools that are rehabilitated in flood-affected áreas or built in communities
                 that have been relocated due to permanente risk of floods would be recognized. The purpose of
                 tracking is to ensure that the need identified in the post-disaster assessment have been addressed,
                 preferably before the next event.
            14.	The private sector has been able to mobilize resources more easily than public institutions, and to
                more quickly help markets return to normal. As such, it is in the interest of both government and the
                private sector to work together in post-disaster recovery and reconstruction.




      30	
             An initial database was created for disaster losses in the last 20 years, using the DesInventar methodology through UNDP/BCPR’s Global Risk Identification
             Program (GRIP). This work can be scaled up by having relevant sectors contribute their existing information to feed a national database on disasters.

27	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
CONCLUSION
Today, coordination is palpable and visible in Mozambique during an emergency, but not so visible in the
recovery/reconstruction phase. Without a dedicated recovery program, subsequent natural disasters may
further aggravate the risk to populations and infrastructure. This makes it urgent to carry out reconstruction
plans more systematically. The recommendations provided by government and international stakeholders
to this case study show that Mozamique is ready to further institutionalize post-disaster recovery measures.
The transition between emergency and development is a dynamic and distinct process. Although the
normal planning and development process can accommodate some exceptions and emergencies, the
situation must be publicly defined and articulated in order to qualify for special treatment. The transition
from emergency to development should be treated as an interim phase, called Recovery. INGC is
well-placed by its institutional mandate to coordinate recovery policy and programs – working with sector
ministries, provincial and district governments, international partners and civil society organizations.
The stakeholders in Mozambique are urged to take advantage of recently approved Disaster Management
Law to debate, define and formalize the roles and responsibilities of individuals, organizations, and
institutions, to ensure that recovery needs caused by recurrent disasters be fully funded, implemented
and monitored.




                                                  Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   28
      ANNEX 1: CONTINGENCY FUND ALLOCATIONS, BY MINISTRY AND PROVINCE,
      2013-2014

                                                                         ('000 MZN)
       Central Level Organs                                                   Value
       Ministry of Agriculture                                             1.900,00
       Ministry of Public Works and Housing                                2.025,00
       Ministry of Education                                                 740,00
       Ministry of Health                                                  1.100,00
       Ministry of Women and Social Action                                 1.100,00
       Ministry for Coordination of Environmental Action                    800,00
       National Institute of Meteorology                                    800,00
       Total                                                              8.465,00
                                                                         ('000 MZN)
       Provincial Organs
       Provincial INGC Office, Niassa                                      1.900,00
       Provincial INGC Office, Cabo Delgado                                2.090,00
       Provincial INGC Office, Nampula                                     1.800,00
       Provincial INGC Office, Zambézia                                     7.334,81
       Provincial INGC Office, Tete                                        2.090,00
       Provincial INGC Office, Manica                                      1.450,00
       Provincial INGC Office, Sofala                                      4.250,00
       Provincial INGC Office, Inhambane                                   1.670,00
       Provincial INGC Office, Gaza                                        9.700,00
       Provincial INGC Office, Maputo                                      3.150,00
       Total                                                              35.434,81




29	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
ANNEX 2: ESTIMATED COSTS OF POST-DISASTER RECONSTRUCTION IN 2013

Description                      Total cost of Reconstruction                       Cost of Public Sector
                                                  ('000 MZN)                  Reconstruction ('000 MZN)
Social Sectors                                      2 305 437.14                                2 305 437.14
Education                                           2 075 249.94                                2 075 249.94
Health                                                188 687.20                                   188 687.20
Culture                                                41 500.00                                   41 500.00
Economic Sectors                                     720 078.58                                  447 970.00
Agriculture                                           529 315.00                                  365 775.00
Fishing                                                  11 765.70                                    1 622.00
Industry and Commerce                                  178 997.88                                  80 573.00
Infrastructure                                     8 765 140.23                                 4 176 114.60
Roads and Bridges                                   3 337 398.90                                3 337 398.90
Water and Sanitation                                 806 800.00                                  806 800.00
Railroads                                           4 322 055.00                                                -
Energy                                                266 970.64                                                -
Public Buildings                                        31 915.70                                    31 915.70
Vulnerability Reduction                            3 861 422.50                                     31 915.70
Housing and Urban                                   1 253 900.00                                1 253 900.00
Social Protection                                       45 557.50                                   45 557.50
Disaster Management                                   236 240.00                                  236 240.00
Water Resource Management                              77 000.00                                   77 000.00
Meteorology                                             17 650.00                                   17 650.00
Hydraulic Infrastructure                              967 075.00                                  967 075.00
Relocation                                         1 264 000.00                                1 264 000.00
Total ('000 MZN)                                  15 652 078.45                              10 790 944.24
Total ('000 USD)                                      521 735.95                                  359 698.14




                                 Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   30
      ANNEX 3: CONTRIBUTORS TO CASE STUDY
      We wish to thank the following people who participated in the validation workshop, small group discussions, interviews, and
      review of drafts.

                                                               Government
               Name                                                                     Email Contact
                                                               Organization
       1       João Ribeiro                                    INGC                     jribeiro_moz@yahoo.com
       2       Higino Rodrigues                                INGC                     higinorodrigues@hotmail.com
       3       Leovegildo Marcos                               INGC                     lcruzmarcos@hotmail.com
       4       Mauricio Xerinda                                INGC                     xerinda68@gmail.com
       5       Bonifacio Antonio                               INGC                     bonyantonio@gmail.com
       6       Rita Almeida                                    INGC                     ritaalmeida_9@msn.com
       7       Elias Massicame                                 INGC                     ezmassicame@gmail.com
       8       Marta Manjate                                   INGC                     martamanjate@yahoo.com.br
       9       Nadia Morar                                     INGC                     nadia.morar@yahoo.com.br
       10      Tereza Pinto                                    INGC                     ginapinto27@yahoo.com.br
       11      Fátima Belchior                                 INGC                     jacintabelchior@hotmail.com
       12      Xavier Chavana                                  MPD                      xchavana@gmail.com
       13      Ana Chichava                                    MICOA
       14      Telma Manjate                                   MICOA
       15      Guilhermina Amurane                             MICOA
       16      Luís Varela                                     MICOA
       17      Lorna Gujral                                    MISAU                    lgujral@misau.gov.mz
       18      Amelia Zandamela                                MISAU                    melitazanda@gmail.com
       19      Carlton Artur Lencol                            MISAU/DNSP               lencol087@gmail.com
       20      Abdul Alimo Ibrahimo Issufo                     MINT/SENSAP              abalissufo@yahoo.com.br
       21      Ernesto Mafumo                                  MIC                      carsolino64@gmail.com
       22      Jaime Mavila                                    MIC                      jmavila03@yahoo.com.br
       23      Francisco Manhica                               MINEC                    chicomanhica@gmail.com
       24      Atanásio Manhique                               INAM
       25      Mussa Mustafa                                   INAM
       26      Acacio Tembe                                    INAM                     acacio-t@inam.gov.mz
       27      Zefanias Chitsungo                              MOPH/DNHU
       28      Custódio Meque                                  MOPH/ANE                 cmeque@anegov.mz
       29      Rute Nhamucho                                   DNA                      rnhamucho@dnaguas.gov.mz
       30      José Malanço                                    DNA                      zemalano@yahoo.com.br
       31      Luísa da Conceição                              DNA
       32      André Zibia                                     DNA
       33      Delário José Sengo                              ARA-SUL                  dsengo@ara-sul.co.mz
       34      Sofia Ilale                                     ICS                      ilale_sofia@hotmail.com
       35      Clementina Zime                                 GABINFO                  celmentinazime2002@yahoo.com.br



31	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
                                                  Government
     Name                                                                        Email Contact
                                                  Organization
     United Agencies and International Partner Organizations
36   Jennifer Topping                             UN                             jennifer.topping@one.un.org
37   Titus Kuuyour                                UNDP                           titus.kuuyour@undp.org
38   Manuela Muianga                              UNDP                           manuela.muianga@undp.org
39   Fernando Ferreiro                            UN-HABITAT                     fernando.ferreiro@unhabitat.org
40   Tito Bonde                                   UNICEF                         tbonde@unicef.org
41   Stuart Simpson                               IOM                            ssimpson@iom.int
42   Abdou Moha                                   WHO
43   Bela Matias                                  European Union                 bela.matias@eeas.europa.eu
44   Geert Haghebaert                             European Union                 geert.haghebaert@eeas.europa.eu
45   Erik Salas                                   GIZ                            erik.salas@giz.de
     NGOs, national and international
46   Mirko Dotta                                  KULIMA
47   Alvaro Juliao Matine                         KULIMA                         alvaromatine@yahoo.com
48   Margarida Simbine                            Care International
49   Luísa Sheila Chambal                         CEDES                          sheilachambala@gmail.com
50   Horácio Valoi                                CEDES/Muxungwe
51   Claudio Jamal                                WORLD VISION
     Red Cross
52   Marla Dava                                   CVM                            marladava05@gmail.com
     Local Risk Management Committees (CLGRC)
53   Francisco Muchanga                           Member CLGRC
54   Anastacia Marta Nhate                        Member CLGRC
55   Atalia Cossa                                 Member CLGRC
56   Lucia Joao                                   Member CLGRC
     Residents of relocated communities
57   Alexandre Luis                               Resident - Ferroviario
58   Atalia Josia                                 Resident - Ferroviario
59   Filomena Mabota                              Community Leader




                                                  Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   32
               Name                                            Title

               World Bank reviewers and contributors
       60      Isabel Soares                                   Sr Operations Officer
       61      Cheikh A.T. Sagna                               Sr Social Development Specialist
       62      Paulo Sithoe                                    Environment Specialist
       63      Kulwinder Rao                                   Sr Highway Engineer
       64      Ross Hughes                                     Sr Climate Change Specialist
       65      Jean-Baptiste Migraine                          DRM Specialist
       66      Louise Croneborg                                Water Resources Management Specialist
               Case Study Preparation Team
               Paulo Zucula                                    Consultant
               Roberto White                                   Sr DRM Specialist
               Eunice Mucache                                  DRM Specialist
               Reiko Niimi                                     Case Study Team Leader




33	   Mozambique | Recovery from Recurrent Floods 2000-2013	
