                                                        WPS7939


Policy Research Working Paper                          7939




     The Impact of Fiscal Policy on Inequality
              and Poverty in Chile
                             Sandra Martínez-Aguilar
                                   Alan Fuchs
                              Eduardo Ortiz-Juarez
                               Giselle Del Carmen




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7939


  Abstract
 This paper applies a comprehensive tax-benefit incidence                           are poverty-increasing but exert a counterintuitive, yet
 analysis to estimate the distributional effects of fiscal policy                   feasible equalizing effect known as Lambert’s conundrum.
 in Chile in 2013. Four results are indicative of an overall                        Third, social spending on tertiary education is slightly
 positive net effect of fiscal interventions on poverty and                         equalizing but it is not pro-poor, contrary to the effects
 inequality. First, subsidies exert a positive, yet modest effect                   of social spending on basic and secondary education and
 on poverty and inequality, whereas direct transfers are pro-                       health, which are not only equalizing but also pro-poor.
 gressive, equalizing, and reduce the poverty headcount by                          Finally, the net effect of Chile’s tax/transfer system leaves
 4 to 5 percentage points, depending on the poverty line                            fewer individuals impoverished relative to the number of
 used. Second, although social contributions are unequaliz-                         fiscal gainers, and the magnitude of monetary fiscal gains
 ing and poverty-increasing, direct taxes on personal income                        is significantly higher than that of fiscal impoverishment.
 are equalizing and poverty-neutral, whereas indirect taxes




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank
  to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at afuchs@worldbank.org, gdelcarmen@worldbank.org, sandra.martinez@ceqinstitute.org, and eduardo.ortiz@kcl.ac.uk.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
     The Impact of Fiscal Policy on Inequality and Poverty in Chile

        Sandra Martínez-Aguilar, Alan Fuchs, Eduardo Ortiz-Juarez, and Giselle Del Carmen

                        CEQ Working Paper No. 46, CEQ Institute and World Bank




JEL Codes: D31, I32
Keywords: Fiscal Policy and Inequality, Income Inequality, Poverty, Social Assistance, Taxation


  Sandra Martínez-Aguilar (sandra.martinez@ceqinstitute.org) is the Director of the Data Centre at the Commitment to
Equity (CEQ) Institute; Alan Fuchs (afuchs@worldbank.org) is Senior Economist in the Poverty and Equity Global
Practice at the World Bank; Eduardo Ortiz-Juarez (eduardo.ortiz@kcl.ac.uk) is Doctoral Student in the Department of
International Development at King’s College London, and Research Associate at the CEQ Institute; and, Giselle Del
Carmen (gdelcarmen@worldbank.org) is Consultant at the World Bank. This paper is part of a collaboration between the
World Bank and the CEQ Institute at Tulane University to implement its diagnostic tool, the Commitment to Equity
Assessment (CEQ), to middle and low income countries. Launched in 2008, the CEQ project is an initiative of the Center
for Inter-American Policy and Research (CIPR) and the Department of Economics, Tulane University, the Center for
Global Development and the Inter-American Dialogue. We are very grateful to Nora Lustig, consultant to the CEQ
Assessment for Chile, for her valuable advice and insights from the very beginning and throughout the project, for solving
many methodological issues, and for her helpful comments to an earlier draft of this paper. We are also grateful to Alberto
Arenas de Mesa, former Minister of Finance of Chile, for providing detailed comments to the results shown in this paper;
Gustavo Cabezas, economist at UNDP Chile, for his valuable help in estimating the indirect taxes; and Maynor Cabrera,
Technical Coordinator at the CEQ Institute, for his quality oversight to the results presented. We would also like to thank
Oscar Calvo-Gonzalez, Lidia Ceriani, Gabriela Inchauste and Alberto Rodríguez from the World Bank who provided
comments that benefited greatly this paper. The findings, interpretations, conclusions, errors and omissions outlined here
are entirely the author’s own responsibility and may not represent those of the institutions with which the authors are
associated.
1. INTRODUCTION

Since the early 2000s, Chile adopted an integral approach to social policy to gradually incorporate a
set of multi-sectorial programs and interventions that sought to serve as a buffer to negative shocks.
The introduction in 2002 of Chile Solidario as a strategy to overcome extreme poverty, the health reform
of 2004 that created the Plan AUGE/GES to reduce horizontal inequalities in the access to health
care,1 the social security reform of 2008 that introduced a non-contributory component of the pension
system (Pensiones Solidarias), the creation of the subsystem for comprehensive early childhood
protection (Chile Crece Contigo), and the launch of the subsystem of social protection and opportunities
(Ingreso Ético Familiar)2 have shaped a social protection system with a life-cycle perspective, combining
universal and targeted coverage for specific groups with certain degrees of vulnerability. Through 295
social programs; 130 actions related to scholarships, pensions and subsidies; and a budget of around
10 percent of the GDP by end-2015, Chile’s social policy delivers direct and in-kind transfers, family
allowances, non-contributory pensions, and other types of social spending, including psychosocial
support, technical advice, training, and credit and funding for productive projects.
The significance given to social policy is evidenced by the increase of per capita public social
expenditure during the last decade, which occurred at an annual rate of 6.8 percent in real terms.3
During this period, the incidence of income-based poverty in Chile has significantly declined.4 The
headcount for extreme poverty reduced from 12.6 percent in 2006 to 3.5 percent in 2015, equivalent
to an average decline of 1 percentage point yearly, whereas the incidence of moderate poverty changed
from 29.1 to 11.7 percent for an annual average decline of 1.9 percentage points. In the case of income
inequality, changes in the Gini coefficient show a declining trend, although they were not statistically
significant between 2006 (0.499) and 2013 (0.491), and it was until 2015 that inequality registered a
significant reduction (0.482).5
In such context, this paper applies a comprehensive tax-benefit incidence analysis to estimate the
effects that public social spending, hand in hand with the tax system, exert on poverty and inequality
indicators in Chile using household-level data and administrative records for 2013. Specifically, the
analysis presented in the next sections evaluates the concentration and incidence of several fiscal
instruments in Chile —including direct and indirect taxes, contributory and non-contributory
pensions, direct transfers, indirect subsidies, and in-kind government transfers in the form of health
and education— to address five questions. First, who bears the tax burden and receives the benefits
from social spending? Second, are fiscal interventions in Chile equalizing? Third, are they poverty-

1 The Plan AUGE (Universal Access to Explicit Guarantees), now called GES (Explicit Guarantees in Health), guarantees

the coverage of 80 diseases by the public National Health Fund (FONASA) and the private health system (ISAPRE).
2 This program was introduced to replace and extend the benefits of Chile Solidario.
3 This rate of change was calculated using the OECD social expenditure database (OECD, 2016a).
4 In 2015, a multi-dimensional poverty measure was officially introduced to assess non-monetary deprivations of

households. This measure considers four equally-weighted dimensions, each measured through three indicators: education
(school attendance, years of schooling and underachievement), health (child malnutrition, access to the health system, and
medical care), labor and social security (access to social security, employment status, and retirement), and housing
(overcrowding, dwelling conditions and access to basic services).
5 Official figures on poverty incidence and income inequality are taken from Ministerio de Desarrollo Social (2016).




                                                                                                                        2
reducing? Fourth, does Chile’s fiscal system either hurt or benefit the poor, and in what magnitude?
And finally, how do Chile’s redistributive effects compare to other countries?
The contribution of this paper to the empirical fiscal incidence literature and public debate in Chile is
threefold. Firstly, it focuses on the redistributive effects of fiscal policy using a standardized approach
that allows the results to be compared across countries using the same methodology. For that purpose,
the effects are computed not only at the national level and among the poor according to national
official standards, but also across predefined income groups by international standards, namely poor,
vulnerable, middle class, and wealthy individuals.6 Secondly, the paper presents results for innovative
measures related to income-based poverty and inequality, namely “fiscal impoverishment” and “fiscal
gains to the poor” (Higgins and Lustig, 2016), and “marginal contributions” to poverty and inequality
(Enami, Lustig and Aranda, 2017). Finally, the paper offers evidence of a counterintuitive but possible
(and frequently overlooked) result: Chile’s fiscal system features regressive, yet equalizing indirect
taxes. This conundrum in the redistributive effects of indirect taxes in Chile highlights that sound and
robust fiscal incidence analyses should assess the redistributive impacts of fiscal interventions as part
of a whole system, and not as isolated tools which in turn could lead to misleading policy conclusions.
The remaining part of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief description of
Chile’s social spending and tax systems and the main interventions included in the incidence analysis.
Section 3 describes the methodology, the data sources exploited and the assumptions made in
estimating the benefits received and the taxes paid by individuals. Section 4 presents the main results
and, finally, the concluding remarks are presented in Section 5.

2. A PRIMER ON SOCIAL SPENDING AND TAXES IN CHILE

In 2013, the year for which the incidence analysis is carried out, public social spending defined as the
sum of social protection, education, health and housing accounted for 10.7 percent of the country’s
GDP, and for 13.7 percent if contributory pensions are included in the definition, as is often done
(Table 1). Education, health and social assistance are the three core concepts of social spending
analyzed in this and 27 other assessments applying the same fiscal incidence methodology. The three
concepts account, respectively, for 4.3, 3.8 and 1.6 percent of Chile’s GDP, which comparatively are
around the average levels of the other 27 countries, but well below the comparable averages for the
OECD: 5.3, 6.2 and 4.4 percent, respectively (Lustig, 2017a). Contributory pensions have a special
treatment in the analysis, which is a matter on which there is no agreement in the fiscal incidence
literature. Contributory pensions can be treated either as a government transfer, or as deferred income
—i.e., treated as part of the market income. The analysis for Chile takes a neutral stance on such
treatment by carrying out the fiscal incidence analysis for both scenarios. The results using either
option, however, do not affect the conclusions derived because of the small size of the pay-as-you-go
system, and this paper presents the analysis considering contributory pensions as deferred income.
The first concept of social spending comprises all public expenditure on all levels of education,
including government spending on both public and private educational institutions. Expenditure on

6   For a definition of these income groups, see the end of Section 3.

                                                                                                         3
health considers all public spending on primary, secondary and tertiary health care of the three systems:
the National Health Fund (FONASA),7 and the health care for the armed forces (CAPREDENA) and
the police (DIPRECA).

                          Table 1: Structure of Chile’s government spending, 2013

                                                                                % of total                          Included
                         Government spending                                                      % of GDP
                                                                               expenditure                        in analysis
     Total expenditure                                                           100.00%            21.65%
     Social spending                                                              63.14%            13.67%
        Social protection                                                         21.10%             4.57%
           Social assistance, of which:                                            7.59%             1.64%
               Conditional/unconditional cash transfers                            1.96%             0.42%            Yes
               Non-contributory pensions                                           4.05%             0.88%            Yes
               Near-cash transfers                                                 1.47%             0.32%            Yes
               Other                                                               0.11%             0.02%            No
           Social security, of which:                                             13.51%             2.93%
               Old-age pensions                                                   10.15%             2.20%            Yes
               Bonos de reconocimiento                                             3.36%             0.73%            No
        Education, of which:                                                      19.80%             4.29%
               Pre-school                                                          2.38%             0.51%            Yes
               Primary                                                             7.05%             1.53%            Yes
               Secondary                                                           4.03%             0.87%            Yes
               Adults                                                              0.31%             0.07%            Yes
               Diferencial                                                         1.23%             0.27%            Yes
               Tertiary                                                            4.11%             0.89%            Yes
               Non-separable by level                                              0.69%             0.15%            Yes
        Health, of which:                                                         17.59%             3.81%
               Primary FONASA                                                      3.36%             0.73%            Yes
               Secondary/tertiary FONASA, MLE, FF.AA.                             10.32%             2.23%            Yes
               Sectoral investment                                                 0.81%             0.18%            Yes
               Supply of the national health system                                0.04%             0.01%            Yes
               Other                                                               3.06%             0.66%            No
        Housing and urban services of which:                                       4.65%             1.01%            No
     Subsidies, of which:                                                          2.26%             0.49%
               Energy                                                              0.00%             0.00%            No
               Water                                                               0.20%             0.04%            Yes
               Gas in the Magallanes region                                        0.09%             0.02%            Yes
               Public transportation                                               1.96%             0.42%            Yes
     Infrastructure, of which:                                                     1.46%             0.32%
               Water and sanitation                                                0.55%             0.12%             No
               Rural roads                                                         0.92%             0.20%             No
     Defense spending                                                              4.72%             1.02%             No
     Other spending                                                               28.41%             6.15%             No
Source: Author’s elaboration based on the 2013 executed budget published by Chile’s Budget Office (Dirección de Presupuestos,
DIPRES). Notes: Other spending includes, for instance, legislative spending, or expenditures on culture and sports. MLE = Modalidad
Libre Elección (free-choice modality). FF.AA. = armed forces. The figures shown do not necessarily coincide with those published by
multilateral organizations due to differences in concepts and definitions.



7   This considers the two modalities of FONASA: institutional and free-choice

                                                                                                                                 4
The third concept, social assistance, is composed of unconditional and conditional cash transfers, non-
contributory pensions, and near-cash transfers. Cash transfers include the cash benefits from Chile’s
flagship program (Chile Solidario/Ingreso Ético Familiar), the family allowances scheme of the subsystem
for comprehensive early childhood protection (Chile Crece Contigo), non-contributory pensions
(Pensiones Solidarias), and other allowances and special scholarships.8 Near-cash transfers include
complementary support for food and school texts, clothes and supplies.9 An additional concept of
public spending that is taken into account, but not as part of social spending, is that of subsidies,
particularly for water, public transportation and gas in the Magallanes region, which account for 0.49
percent of the GDP. The water subsidy is targeted to low-income families who face difficulties to pay
for running water services; that for public transportation is a generalized subsidy, benefiting all the
user population; and that for gas is applied to all families living in the aforementioned region of the
country.
Regarding Chile’s income structure, in 2013 total government revenues represented 21 percent of the
GDP, of which tax revenues accounted for about 80 percent (or 16.7 percent of the country’s GDP)
with a relatively higher dependence on indirect taxes on sales of goods and services (9.8 percent), than
on direct taxes on income (6.6 percent)10 (Table 2). For direct taxes, the incidence analysis considers
only those on personal income: i) Second Category Tax (SCT), which is a monthly tax levied on
income derived from dependent employment, such as salaries, contributory pensions and other
remuneration; and ii) Complementary Global Tax (CGT), which is levied on annual total income
obtained by an individual and any SCT paid or First Category Tax (FCT)11 related to dividends received
is creditable against it. The rates for both SCT and CGT range from 0 to 40 percent.
For indirect taxes, the analysis includes: i) the value added tax (VAT), which is levied at a rate of 19%
on sales of goods and services; ii) special taxes on non-alcoholic and alcoholic beverages, which are
charged in addition to the VAT and on the same tax base as that for VAT with varying rates depending
on the alcohol content; iii) excise taxes levied on tobacco, which are charged on the value of the sale
to the final consumer with varying rates depending on the product —i.e., cigars, processed tobacco,

8 The following allowances of the flagship cash transfers program —related to social protection, child health, school
attendance, school achievement, and female work— are considered in the analysis: Bono de protección social y egreso, Bono base
familiar, Bono por control del niño sano, Bono por asistencia escolar, Bono por logro escolar, and Bono al trabajo de la mujer. In the case of
Chile Crece Contigo, the following child, maternity, disability, and mental disability allowances are included: Subsidio familiar
al menor o recién nacido, Subsidio de asistencia maternal, Subsidio familiar a la madre, Subsidio familiar por invalidez, and Subsidio
discapacidad mental. Cash transfers for old-age and disabled population (Pensiones Solidarias) include: Pensión Basica Solidaria de
Vejez e Invalidez, Aporte Previsional Solidario de Vejez e Invalidez, and Pensiones de Leyes Especiales de Reparación. Other benefits in
cash include: Bono bodas de oro, Bono de invierno, Bono marzo, Asignación Familiar, Subsidio empleo joven, Aporte estatal Fondo de
Censatía Solidario, Descuento Cotizaciones de Salud, Beca Indígena, Beca Retención Escolar, and Beca Presidente de la República.
9 The near-cash transfers included in the analysis are: Progama Nacional de Alimentación Complementaria, Progama

Nacional de Alimentación Complementaria para el Adulto Mayor, Programa de Alimentación Escolar, Yo elijo mi PC, and
Útiles Escolares.
10 Chile’s tax burden of 16.7 percent of GDP, as reported by administrative data, does not necessarily coincide with the

figures published by multilateral organizations due to differences in concepts and definitions. Using revenue statistics of
the OECD (2016b), the tax burden in Chile in 2013 is placed close to the Latin American average, but well below (by
about 12 percentage points) the tax burden of Argentina, Brazil and the OECD average.
11 The FCT is levied on income from capital and from enterprises that undertake commercial, industrial, and other

activities. The FCT paid by an enterprise can be used as a credit against the CGT to which its owners, shareholders,
partners or managers are liable when they receive dividends.

                                                                                                                                            5
and cigarettes—; and iv) excise taxes on fuels, with a base determined by the amount of fuel expressed
in cubic meters. Finally, social contributions from employees to health care, unemployment insurance,
and contributory pensions are also included in the analysis. Contributions to health include FONASA,
and the health systems of the armed forces (CAPREDENA) and police (DIPRECA).

                         Table 2: Structure of Chile’s government revenues, 2013

 Government revenues, contributions to social security                                                      Included in
                                                                           % of total    % of GDP
                             and grants                                                                       analysis
Total                                                                       100.0%          21.0%
Revenues                                                                     92.9%          19.5%
  Tax revenues                                                               79.6%          16.7%
      Direct taxes, of which:                                                31.5%           6.6%
         Personal income tax                                                  6.3%           1.3%                Yes
         Corporate income tax                                                17.6%           3.7%                No
         Adicional                                                            5.4%           1.1%                No
         Others                                                               2.2%           0.5%                No
      Indirect taxes, of which:                                              46.7%           9.8%
         VAT                                                                 37.8%           7.9%                Yes
         Sales tax (alcoholic/non-alcoholic beverages)                        0.9%           0.2%                Yes
         Sales tax (luxury goods, cars and others)                            0.1%           0.0%                No
         Excise taxes                                                         6.9%           1.4%                Yes
         Foreign trade taxes                                                  1.1%           0.2%                No
      Others                                                                  1.5%           0.3%                No
      Non-tax accounts                                                       -0.1%           0.0%                No
  Non-tax revenues                                                           13.3%           2.8%                No
Contributions to social security                                              6.8%           1.4%
         From employees                                                       6.6%           1.4%                Yes
         From employers                                                       0.2%           0.0%                No
Grants                                                                        0.2%           0.1%                No
Source: Author’s elaboration based on Direccion de Presupuestos (2014) and the 2009-2015 data on annual tax revenue published by
Chile’s Internal Revenue Service (Servicio de Impuestos Internos, SII).

3. METHODOLOGY, DATA AND ASSUMPTIONS

The analysis follows the so-called CEQ methodology (Lustig and Higgins, 2013; Lustig, 2017b) to
assess the distributional impact of taxes, transfers and subsidies across income groups in Chile in 2013
based on household-level data and administrative records on taxes and social spending. Basically, the
methodology consists of defining income concepts first, and then allocating taxes, social
contributions, subsidies and public social spending to individuals included in the household survey in
a consistent and methodologically sound way, so that it is possible to compare incomes and income-
based measures of wellbeing before and after taxes and public transfers.
The methodology comprises two standard scenarios depending on how contributory pensions are
treated: as deferred income or as government transfers. In the analysis for Chile, each of both scenarios
can be constructed by using two definitions of income that are employed in the estimation of official
figures of income inequality and income-based poverty. The measurement of inequality in Chile uses

                                                                                                                              6
a monetary income definition, which is composed of wages and salaries (monetary and in-kind), earnings
from self-employment, self-provision of goods produced by the household, rents, interest, dividends,
retirements, pensions, private transfers, and public monetary transfers. In the case of poverty, the
measurement is based on a total income definition, which is equivalent to monetary income plus imputed
rent. It is important to highlight that the methodology for measuring income changed in 2013 and
that such new approach is the one employed in this paper. Specifically, household income is no longer
adjusted to national accounts, and the new estimation of the imputed rent considers not only owner-
occupied dwellings, but also dwellings which were donated, given as work benefit, or dwellings in
usufruct.12
This paper exploits the 2013 National Socioeconomic Characterization Survey (CASEN) carried out
by the Ministry of Social Development, which is a nationally representative sample collecting detailed
information on household incomes, as well as on individual and dwelling characteristics. This survey
is employed as the primary source of data in the incidence analysis as it is the official data set to
measure the levels of poverty and income inequality in Chile. Since the CASEN does not collect
information on household spending, the Family Budget Survey (EPF) 2011-2012 is employed as a
secondary source to estimate indirect taxes on household consumption. This survey was carried out
by the National Institute of Statistics and is aimed at identifying the structure and characteristics of
final consumption of urban households in the regional capitals of the country. In addition, the analysis
exploits official data on government revenues and expenditures from the 2013 executed budgets
reports published by the Ministry of Finance’s Budget Office, the Ministry of Social Development,
the National Institute of Statistics, and the National Audit Office.
In order to assess the distributional effects of fiscal interventions, the core building block of the fiscal
incidence analysis is the definition and construction of the income concepts using the previous data
sources (Figure 1). The allocation of fiscal interventions to individuals in the CASEN, depending on
the income concept, is based on the following methods: direct identification, when the survey contains
information on who receives (pays) benefits (taxes), as well as the amount received (paid); imputation,
when the survey informs who receives (pays) benefits (taxes), but the amount received (paid) is
retrieved from administrative records or program (tax) rules; simulation, when neither direct
identification nor imputation can be used, so that the beneficiaries (taxpayers) and the amount received
(paid) is simulated based on the program (tax) rules; and imputation based on secondary sources.13
The income reported in the CASEN is the income after direct taxes and social contributions, which
is equivalent to the net market income concept —composed of wages and salaries from the formal and
informal sectors, income from capital, private transfers such as remittances and alimonies, pensions,
and imputed rent— and therefore the baseline for constructing the other income concepts. In order
to construct market income, a “reverse engineering” process from net market income is implemented
by simulating and adding direct taxes and social contributions based on fiscal rules.


12 The official methodology for the measurement of poverty also changed. The new method incorporated new poverty

lines based on updated values of both basic-food and basic non-food baskets, equated the value of the poverty lines
between urban and rural areas, and adjusted the poverty lines based on equivalence scales.
13 For a detailed description of these and other allocation methods, see Higgins and Lustig (2017).


                                                                                                                 7
                 Figure 1: Definition of income concepts in Chile’s incidence analysis

                                                                     Market income

                                                   - Income from work (monetary and in-kind)
                                                   - Income from capital
                                                   - Self-provision of goods
                                                   - Private transfers
                                                   - Private pensions
                                                   - Remittances and alimony
                                                   - Imputed rent

                                                                                    +   Contributory pensions


                                                           Market income plus pensions

              Direct taxes and contributions
        - Personal income tax                                        -
        - Contributions to health
        - Contributions to unemployment insurance

                                                                   Net market income

                                                                                               Direct transfers
                                                                                   +    - Cash transfers
                                                                                        - Near-cash transfers

                                                                   Disposable income

                                                                                              Indirect subsidies
                                                                                    +    - Public transportation
                   Indirect taxes
                                                                                         - Water
 - Value added tax                                                  -                    - Gas in the Magallanes region
 - Sales tax: alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages
 - Excise taxes: tobacco and fuel


                                                                   Consumable income

                                                                                              In-kind transfers
                                                                                    +     Monetized value of public
                                                                     -                   and subsidized education, and
                        Public education and health
                           copayment and fees                                                    public health




                                                                         Final income

Source: Author’s elaboration based on Higgins and Lustig (2017).



                                                                                                                          8
For direct taxes paid by each individual, taxes on salaries and remunerations (Second Category Tax,
SCT) and taxes on other personal income (Complementary Global Tax, CGT) are allocated using
simulation. This method applies the statutory rate and discount of each taxable income bracket defined
by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to the taxable income reported by each individual in the
CASEN. The taxable income for salaried workers is gross income minus bonuses for Christmas and
national festivities and social security contributions, while for independent workers who report issuing
invoices or receipts the taxable income is 70 percent of total annual gross income. For all the
individuals, all rents before taxes are added up to calculate the CGT. Finally, given that the CASEN
contains information of who receives income from profits withdrawal as well as the amount received,
the tax paid on business income (First Category Tax, FCT) is calculated and used as a tax credit to the
CGT. It is important to highlight that the following concepts are not included in the taxable income:
tips, per diems, in-kind income, and auto-consumption. In addition, it is assumed that incomes from
rental of non-agricultural properties,14 vacation rentals, and self-employment in the informal sector do
not pay income taxes. In the case of social contributions, the CASEN identifies who contributes to
health care and to what system, and the amount of the contribution is allocated using simulation based
on the level of income before taxes, the stipulated rates of each system, and the maximum and
minimum taxable limits.
The construction of the market income plus pensions concept requires to add contributory pensions to
market income. In Chile different contributory pension systems coexist: an individual capitalization
system, and two pay-as-you-go schemes, namely the police and armed forces system and the old
pension system of the former Cajas de Previsión Social. The individual capitalization is a system with
compulsory, forced savings, and it is part of the market income concept —since the pension is the
product of the individual’s savings—, while the two pay-as-you-go systems can be treated either as
deferred income or as government transfer —since the share contributed by both the individual and
the government is unknown. For the market income plus pensions concept, contributory pensions
from the two pay-as-you-go schemes are treated as deferred income, and the allocation method is
direct identification.
The disposable income concept is constructed by adding direct cash and near-cash transfers to net market
income. For all cash transfers the allocation method is direct identification, while for all near-cash
transfers the allocation method is imputation since although the CASEN identifies who receives the
benefit, the amount is taken from administrative accounts.15 The addition of subsidies and the discount
of indirect taxes to/from disposable income yields the consumable income concept. In the first case, the
analysis considers subsidies to water consumption, public transportation, and gas for the Magallanes
Region. The allocation method for water subsidies is direct identification, whereas public
transportation and gas subsidies are allocated using simulation. For each of the two latter subsidies,
the total executed expenditure is divided by the total targeted population and the result is then scaled

14 Either properties under the Decree-Law No. 2, or for the use of the owner and her/his family, or whose rents are less
than 11 percent of the property valuation.
15 In the case of the scholarships Beca Indígena, Beca Retención Escolar, and Beca Presidente de la República, although they are

considered as cash transfers, the allocation method is imputation.


                                                                                                                              9
down to prevent overestimation bias.16 Regarding indirect taxes, it is assumed that they are paid entirely
by the consumers, and their estimation is based on the EPF which is used to calculate, by consumption
decile, the shares of consumption spent on indirect taxes. Since these shares must be imputed to each
individual’s disposable income in the corresponding consumption decile, it is necessary to rank
individuals in the CASEN by consumption decile which requires both the CASEN and EPF surveys
to interlock.
The estimation of indirect taxes in the EPF and the survey-to-survey imputation follows the hot-deck
procedure used by Larrañaga et al. (2012) in their tax-benefit microsimulation model for Chile. In
order to avoid a potential overestimation of the actual VAT rate paid and to be consistent with the
CEQ methodology, a distinct feature in the treatment of the VAT between that microsimulation
model and the incidence analysis presented in this paper is that the latter does not use the statutory
rate (19 percent), but the effective rate (14.3 percent) which is based on the estimate of evasion (24.5
percent) in 2013.17 For the estimation of the VAT, the analysis considers fiscal exemptions, being the
most important those on health, education, insurance and financial operations, gambling, and cultural
services. It also considers special sale taxes such as those on alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages,
and excise taxes such as those on tobacco and fuel.
The last income concept, final income, is constructed by adding the monetized value of in-kind transfers
on education and health and by subtracting the corresponding copayments and fees for the use of
such services to/from consumable income. For both education and health, the allocation method is
imputation. In the first case, the CASEN allows to identify who attends an educational institution, the
educational level attended, and the financing scheme of the institution —i.e., public, subsidized or
private—, so that it is possible to impute the average cost of education disaggregated by level of
education, financing scheme and, in the case of tertiary education, if the benefit is either received by
the institution or the student. If the student is the recipient, the imputation is disaggregated by benefit,
scholarship or credit, with the latter considering only the fee paid for the credits bought by the
government under the Crédito con garantía estatal scheme (credit guaranteed scheme). In the case of
health, the CASEN identifies who is affiliated to FONASA, DIPRECA or CAPREDENA systems,
so that the analysis imputes the average cost based on the use of health services.
The assessment presented in this paper offers the most comprehensive tax-benefit incidence analysis
available for Chile to date, and allows for the results to be comparable with other developing countries
applying the same methodology. Yet, the results presented are point-in-time and do not account for
behavioral, general equilibrium, or lifecycle effects, therefore overlooking the long-term effects of
fiscal policy on wellbeing indicators. In addition, the analysis acknowledges the potential presence of
measurement errors due to under-reporting of certain income categories and under-sampling of the
top incomes in the household surveys.
The evidence presented in the next section, as mentioned before, corresponds to the scenario that
considers contributory pensions as deferred income instead of as government transfer, and for

16For a detailed description of the scaling down procedure, see Higgins and Lustig (2017).
17The magnitude of VAT evasion was estimated by Chile’s Internal Revenue Service (Servicio de Impuestos Internos,
2015).

                                                                                                              10
comparability purposes with other countries the analysis uses the total income definition, instead of
the monetary income definition, to account for the imputed rent. In pursuance of a better
understanding of the incidence of fiscal policy in Chile, the following income groups are defined: poor,
as those individuals with per capita income below the $4 a day poverty line —distinguishing within
this group the “ultra-poor” (living with less than $1.25/day), the “extreme poor” (living on $1.25-
2.5/day), and the “moderate poor” (living on $2.5-4/day)—; vulnerable, as those with per capita income
between $4 and $10 a day; middle class, as those living on $10-50/day; and wealthy, as those with per
capita income above $50/day.18 The analysis also considers the incidence on the extreme and moderate
poor as defined using the official poverty lines in Chile, as well as on income deciles.

4. MAIN RESULTS

4.1 Redistributive effects of Chile’s fiscal system
Are fiscal interventions in Chile equalizing? Figure 2 shows that income inequality in Chile, as
measured by the Gini coefficient, declines from 0.494 to 0.467 when moving from market income
plus pensions to disposable income19 —i.e., after the intervention of direct taxes, social contributions
to health and unemployment insurance, and direct transfers—.

                       Figure 2: Effects of fiscal interventions on income inequality
                                                (Gini coefficients)
                        0.55



                        0.50
                                     0.494
                                                          0.487

                        0.45                                                  0.467               0.464



                                                                                                                   0.420
                        0.40



                        0.35



                        0.30
                               Market income plus   Net market income   Disposable income   Consumable income   Final income
                                   pensions


Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016).

18 The poverty line of $1.25/day is the standard used by the World Bank to measure the incidence of poverty globally; its

value corresponds to the average of the poverty lines of some of the poorest countries in the world. The $2.5/day and
$4/day poverty lines are equivalent to the conditional mean of the national extreme and moderate poverty lines,
respectively, across Latin American countries (conditional on GDP per capita). The thresholds to define the vulnerable,
middle class, and upper class groups are those proposed by Lopez-Calva and Ortiz-Juarez (2014). All these figures are
expressed in 2005 PPP prices.
19 The Gini coefficients shown in Figure 2 are different from the official estimates because the latter uses the monetary

income definition which excludes the imputed rent, whereas this paper uses the total income definition to include it
therefore allowing for cross-country comparisons. If the imputed rent is excluded from the analysis, for instance, the Gini
coefficient for disposable income would be 0.490 instead of 0.467, which is virtually the same value as that reported by
the Ministry of Social Development (2016): 0.491.


                                                                                                                               11
When analyzed independently, social contributions to health and unemployment insurance are found
to be regressive with respect to market income plus pensions, with a Kakwani’s progressivity index of
-0.17, whereas both direct taxes and direct transfers are progressive with a Kakwani index of 0.45 and
0.82, respectively20. This is not a surprising result given the design of the two latter interventions. As
Figure 3 shows, the lion’s share of total direct taxes (89 percent) is paid by the wealthy (composed by
6.7 percent of Chile’s population), and the remaining 11 percent is paid almost entirely by the middle-
class group that accounts for more than half of the country’s population. The share of direct taxes
paid is negligible (0.02 percent) for the third of the population identified as vulnerable, whereas the
7.5 percent of the poor population likely do not pay this kind of taxes.21 Regarding the concentration
of direct transfers —i.e., who receives the benefits—, the same Figure 3 shows that almost two-thirds
of the total amount is received by the poor (18.4 percent) and the vulnerable (44.6 percent), whereas
the middle-class accounts for most of the remaining share (35.3 percent).

     Figure 3: Concentration of total direct taxes paid on personal income and total direct
                             transfers received, by income group
                                                                          100%
                                                                                                  Wealthy
                          Share of total direct taxes paid by group (%)




                                                                                        Share of total transfers: 1.7%
                                                                                         Share of direct taxes: 89.0%
                                                                          80%               Size of group: 6.7%



                                                                          60%
                                                                                                                                Middle class
                                                                                                                        Share of total transfers: 35.3%
                                                                          40%                                            Share of direct taxes: 11.0%
                                                                                                                            Size of group: 53.8%
                                                                                                                                                                         Vulnerable
                                                                                                                                                                Share of total transfers: 44.6%
                                                                                                Total poor
                                                                                                                                                                  Share of direct taxes: 0.0%
                                                                          20%         Share of total transfers: 18.4%
                                                                                                                                                                    Size of group: 32.1%
                                                                                       Share of direct taxes: 0.0%
                                                                                           Size of group: 7.5%

                                                                           0%



                                                                          -20%
                       -10%                                                      0%           10%               20%                  30%                  40%            50%               60%
                                                                                            Share of total direct transferts received by group (%)


Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016). Notes: The “Total poor” group includes the share of
the population living in ultra (0.8 percent), extreme (2 percent) and moderate (4.7 percent) poverty, based on the total market income
plus pensions concept. The income thresholds to define the groups are the following: less than $1.25/day for the ultra-poor, $1.25-
2.5/day for the extreme poor, $2.5-4/day for the moderate poor, $4-10/day for the vulnerable, $10-50/day for the middle class, and
above $50/day for the wealthy. The size of the bubbles is relative to the size of each group as measured with total market income plus
pensions.


The Kakwani index, however, cannot tell if these and other fiscal interventions make the whole fiscal
system more (un)equal,22 because the effect of a tax or transfer is not independent from the effect of

20 The Kakawani index for all fiscal interventions analyzed is shown in the appendix Table A1.
21 If the concentration of direct taxes is analyzed by income deciles instead of income groups, the results are strongly
consistent with the findings by Engel, Galetovic and Raddatz (1999), and Castelletti (2013).
22 When taxes or transfers are seen as single, independent interventions the Kakwani index is sufficient to unambiguously

establish that a progressive (regressive) tax or transfer is equalizing (unequalizing). In a multi tax/transfer setting, however,
this direct relationship does not necessarily hold (Lambert, 2001). The Kakwani (1977) index for taxes is defined as the


                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
other interventions. Therefore, in order to answer the initial question marginal contributions are used,
which are equivalent to calculate the difference in inequality without and with a specific tax or
transfer.23 Taking disposable income as the relevant end income concept, the marginal contributions
of most of the previous fiscal interventions are equalizing, with the only exception of social
contributions to health and unemployment insurance that show an unequalizing effect. Specifically,
direct taxes and non-contributory pensions have the largest impact on the decline in inequality, with
a marginal contribution of about 0.01 Gini points (Figure 4.A).

           Figure 4: Marginal contributions of fiscal interventions to income inequality
                                           (Gini points)

                                                          A. When disposable income is the end income concept

                                          Direct taxes                                                                                           0.011


                             Noncotributory pensions                                                                                      0.010


                     All direct taxes and contributions                                                                    0.007


                                Other direct transfers                                                         0.005


                                        Chile solidario                                                0.003


                                 Ingreso ético familiar                              0.001


                               All social contributions        -0.003


                                                     -0.004        -0.002   0.000        0.002         0.004   0.006       0.008        0.010       0.012

                                                      B. When consumable income is the end income concept

                                          Direct taxes                                                                                          0.0119

                     All direct taxes and contributions                                                                        0.0081

                           All taxes and contributions                                                                      0.0076

                                Other direct transfers                                                            0.0061

                                 All indirect subsidies                                          0.0028

                      Subsidy to public transportation                                        0.0022

                                 Ingreso ético familiar                              0.0009

                           Subsidy to drinkable water                               0.0006

                                     All indirect taxes                         0.0002

                                          Gas subsidy                          0.0000

                               All social contributions       -0.0036

                                                     -0.004        -0.002   0.000        0.002         0.004   0.006       0.008        0.010       0.012


Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016).


difference between the concentration coefficient of a tax and the Gini coefficient of pre-tax income. The index for transfers
is defined as the difference between the Gini coefficient of pre-transfer income and the concentration coefficient of a
transfer.
23 The marginal contribution of a tax (transfer) to inequality is calculated by taking the difference between the Gini

coefficient of the relevant end income concept without the tax (transfer) and the Gini coefficient of the relevant end
income concept with the tax (transfer). Because of path dependency, the sum of the marginal contributions of each fiscal
intervention will not be equal to the total change in inequality (Enami, Lustig and Aranda, 2017).

                                                                                                                                                            13
Moving from disposable income to consumable income further reduces the Gini coefficient to 0.464
(Figure 2), which is indicative of a remarkable finding: the net effect of adding indirect subsidies and
subtracting indirect taxes to/from disposable income is surprisingly equalizing. As Figure 4.B shows,
this is not only due to the positive marginal contribution of indirect subsidies to the inequality
reduction, but also because indirect taxes have a slightly positive effect despite their regressivity, as
indicated by a Kakwani index of -0.03. The latter result is referred in the literature as the Lambert’s
Conundrum (Lambert, 2001), which states that “If taxes are regressive in relation to the original income but
progressive with respect to the less unequally distributed post-transfers (and subsidies) income, regressive taxes exert an
equalizing effect over and above the effect of progressive transfers” (Enami, Lustig, and Aranda, 2017).24
As noted, indirect taxes in Chile are regressive with respect to market income plus pensions (the
original income), but they are progressive with respect to disposable income (the less unequally
distributed post-transfers income), as indicated by a Kakwani index of 0.09. Indirect taxes, therefore,
exert an equalizing effect over and above the effect of progressive direct taxes and direct transfers.
This finding evidences that the redistributive impact of fiscal interventions must be assessed by
considering the whole system and not as isolated tools, which in turn could lead to misleading policy
conclusions.25 Overall, when taking consumable income as the end concept, only social contributions
and the subsidy to gas exhibit, respectively, a negative and neutral effect on inequality, whereas both
direct taxes and transfers account for the largest positive marginal contributions (Figure 4.B). The
overall equalizing effect of taxes and direct transfers is unambiguous as the Lorenz curve for
consumable income lies completely above the Lorenz curve for market income plus pensions (Figure
5).
                                                                                     Figure 5: Concentration and Lorenz curves
                                                                         100%
                       Cumulative share of income, taxes and transfers




                                                                         90%

                                                                         80%

                                                                         70%

                                                                         60%

                                                                         50%

                                                                         40%

                                                                         30%

                                                                         20%

                                                                         10%

                                                                          0%
                                                                                0%     10%            20%    30%      40%       50%        60%         70%       80%     90%   100%
                                                                                                                    Cumulative share of population

                                                                                     Lorenz curve for market income plus pensions   Direct taxes
                                                                                     Indirect taxes                                 Direct transfers
                                                                                     Subsidies                                      Lorenz curve for consumable income


Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016).



 Enami, Lustig and Aranda (2017) offer a detailed theoretical explanation regardig this counterintuitive result.
24

 Recently, Eduardo Engel found the same Lambert’s conundrum in the Chilean system using the same data exploited in
25

Engel, Galetovic and Raddatz (1999).

                                                                                                                                                                                      14
Finally, in-kind transfers in the form of education and health services have an even larger positive
effect on inequality when moving from consumable income to final income: the Gini coefficient
reduces to 0.420, equivalent to a 15 percent decline relative to market income plus pensions (Figure
2). The marginal contributions to inequality reach 0.032 Gini points for education, and 0.014 Gini
points for health, and the equalizing effect holds for all levels of education, as indicated by their
positive marginal contribution to inequality (Figure 6)26. The large effect of in-kind transfers on
inequality is not surprising given that Chile spends significantly more on education and health care
(roughly 8.1 percent of the GDP) than on direct transfers and pensions (1.6 percent of the GDP).
Yet, such result must be interpreted with caution because in-kind transfers are monetized at average
government cost, which does not necessarily reflect the actual value of the education and health
services provided and there are no adjustments for differences in quality across the distribution. The
method assumes that a poor person living in rural areas receives the same benefit as an urban middle-
class person, for instance.

               Figure 6: Marginal contributions of in-kind transfers to income inequality
                                              (Gini points)


                     All levels of education                                                                 0.032



                         Primary education                                   0.014



                                    Health                                   0.014



                      Secondary education                          0.008



                                 Pre-school                0.005



                         Tertiary education        0.003


                                           0.000     0.005           0.010   0.015   0.020   0.025   0.030           0.035


Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016).


While most fiscal interventions in Chile are found to be equalizing, a second fundamental question
then emerges: Are fiscal interventions also poverty-reducing? While as expected direct taxes and social
contributions increase the incidence of poverty (Figure 7.A) —which is mostly driven by social
contributions as the population in poverty likely does not pay direct taxes—, direct transfers more
than compensate this effect. Specifically, poverty headcounts decline by nearly 3 percentage points (or
around 40 percent) with respect to market income plus pensions for both the official extreme and
$4/day poverty lines, and by 4 percentage points (or 24 percent) for the official moderate poverty line.




26   A summary of the marginal contributions for all fiscal interventions analyzed is shown in the appendix Table A1.

                                                                                                                             15
While indirect taxes, as expected, increase the incidence of poverty when moving from disposable
income to consumable income, the effect is not large enough to nullify the gains from direct transfers
—and also from subsidies, which exhibit a positive marginal contribution to poverty (Figure 8)—,
therefore placing the consumable income-based poverty still below the incidence measured with
market income plus pensions: 1.8 percentage points (or 24 percent) below by using the $4/day poverty
line; 1.9 points (or 27 percent) below by using the official extreme line; and half a point (or 3 percent)
below by using the official moderate line.27 Moreover, after the intervention of taxes, subsidies and
direct transfers not only the incidence of poverty declines, but also the depth of poverty (intensity)
and the magnitude of inequality among the poor (severity) fall remarkably (Figure 7.B).

                                 Figure 7: Effects of fiscal interventions on poverty

                                                 A. Percentages of population in poverty, by income concept
                     18%

                     16%                                                17.0%
                                         16.4%
                                                                                                                                         15.9%
                     14%

                     12%
                                                                                                         12.5%
                     10%
                                         7.5%                            7.7%
                      8%
                                                                                                                                          5.7%
                      6%                 6.9%                            7.1%
                                                                                                          4.4%
                      4%                                                                                                                  5.0%
                                                                                                          3.9%
                      2%

                      0%
                            Market Income plus pensions         Net market income                  Disposable income              Consumable income
                                       $4/day poverty line           Extreme poverty line (official)          Moderate poverty line (official)

                                   B. Percent changes in poverty indices from market income plus pensions to
                                                              consumable income
                       0%
                                                                                                                       -3%
                     -10%


                     -20%
                                                                                                                                    -22%
                                -24%
                     -30%                                                  -27%

                                                                                                                                                  -36%
                     -40%
                                                 -41%
                                                                                         -45%
                     -50%
                                                             -51%
                                                                                                        -55%
                     -60%
                             Incidence      Intensity     Severity       Incidence     Intensity       Severity     Incidence     Intensity      Severity
                                       $4/day poverty line                  Extreme poverty line (official)            Moderate poverty line (official)

Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016). Notes: The indices measuring the incidence, intensity,
and severity of poverty correspond to the FGT family of poverty indices (Foster, Greer and Thorbecke, 1984). The incidence represents



27 The official extreme and moderate poverty rates in 2013 are, respectively, 4.5 and 14.4 percent, and these figures are

conceptually comparable with the poverty rates resulting from the disposable income concept in this paper: 3.9 and 12.5
percent, respectively. The differences occur because the methodology implemented in this paper includes the near-cash
transfers as part of direct transfers, whereas near-cash transfers are not considered in the income used by the Ministry of
Social Development in the estimation of national poverty rates.

                                                                                                                                                            16
the percentage of population under the poverty line; the intensity index, also known as the poverty gap, measures the shortfall from the
poverty line as a share of the same poverty line; and the severity index measures the magnitude of the inequality among the poor.


A breakdown of the fiscal system after the intervention of taxes, subsidies and direct transfers reveals
that the latter have the largest positive marginal contributions to the reduction of the incidence of
poverty: between 3.9 and 5.3 percentage points, depending on the poverty line used. In particular,
non-contributory pensions account for between 1.7 and 2.5 percentage points of the poverty decline,
whereas Chile Solidario and Ingreso ético familiar are responsible for 0.9 and 0.2 percentage points,
respectively (Figure 8). The contribution of indirect subsidies to the poverty decline is overall positive,
yet modest for public transport and water subsidies, and virtually neutral for gas subsidies in the
Magallanes region. Finally, and not surprisingly, indirect taxes exert an important adverse effect on the
incidence of poverty, although in a magnitude that it is significantly lower than that of the positive
contributions exerted by direct transfers.

                   Figure 8: Marginal contributions of fiscal interventions to poverty
                                            (Percentage points)

                             All direct transfers

                      Non-contributory pensions

                           Other direct transfers

                                  Chile Solidario

                            All indirect subsidies

                        Public transport subsidy

                           Ingreso ético familiar

                                   Water subsidy

                                     Gas subsidy

                                             VAT

                                All indirect taxes

                      All taxes and contributions

                                                     -4.5   -3.5      -2.5      -1.5     -0.5        0.5      1.5       2.5       3.5         4.5   5.5
                                      $4/day poverty line          Extreme poverty line (official)         Moderate poverty line (official)

Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016).

An underlying significance of previous results is that the net effect of fiscal interventions favors
upward economic mobility, especially among the poorest. Of the total ultra-poor, 39 percent move to
extreme poverty, 16 percent to moderate poverty, and 14 percent to vulnerability. Among those
initially identified as extreme poor, 45 percent experience upward mobility to moderate poverty and
24 percent to vulnerability, whereas 53 percent of the moderate poor exit poverty. Conversely, 2 and
6 percent of those initially identified as middle class and wealthy, respectively, experience downward
mobility (Table 3.A). A different way to appreciate the overall effect of fiscal policy is that if the
country’s population is reduced to 100 individuals, then: the number of people living with less than
$4/day declines from 8 to 4; that of vulnerable increases from 32 to 34; that of middle class also
increases, from 54 to 55; and that of the wealthy reduces from 7 to 6 individuals (Table 3.B).



                                                                                                                                                          17
Table 3: Fiscal mobility matrices from market income plus pensions to consumable income
                                                  B. Row percentage distribution of population
                                                                                 Consumable income
     Initial/ending income concept
                                                                       Moderate                   Middle
           and income groups               Ultra-poor Extreme poor                   Vulnerable                Wealthy     Total
                                                                          poor                      class
                           Ultra-poor             30%            39%          16%           14%           0%         0%       100%
      Market income
      plus pensions




                           Extreme poor            0%            31%          45%           24%           0%         0%       100%
                           Moderate poor           0%             0%          47%           53%           0%         0%       100%
                           Vulnerable              0%             0%            0%          93%           7%         0%       100%
                           Middle class            0%             0%            0%            2%         98%         0%       100%
                           Wealthy                 0%             0%            0%            0%          6%        94%       100%
                                                  A. Total percentage distribution of population
                                                                                 Consumable income
     Initial/ending income concept
                                                                       Moderate                   Middle
           and income groups               Ultra-poor Extreme poor                   Vulnerable                Wealthy     Total
                                                                          poor                      class
      Market income plus




                           Ultra-poor        0.2%           0.3%          0.1%          0.1%        0.0%        0.0%        0.8%
                           Extreme poor      0.0%           0.6%          0.9%          0.5%        0.0%        0.0%        2.0%
          pensions




                           Moderate poor     0.0%           0.0%          2.2%          2.5%        0.0%        0.0%        4.7%
                           Vulnerable        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         29.8%        2.4%        0.0%       32.2%
                           Middle class      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.9%       52.7%        0.0%       53.6%
                           Wealthy           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.4%        6.3%        6.6%
                           Total             0.2%           0.9%          3.3%         33.8%       55.5%        6.3%      100.0%

Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016).


Overall, the net effect of fiscal interventions in Chile is both equalizing and poverty-reducing, yet it is
unknown the extent to which such interventions make the pre-fiscal poor either poorer or better off.
In order to explore the extent to which a fiscal system like Chile’s hurts and benefits the poor, Higgins
and Lustig (2016) developed a set of innovative measures to capture the magnitude of the so-called
fiscal impoverishment (FI) and the fiscal gains to the poor (FGP). The authors define an individual as
fiscal impoverished if she/he is poor according to her/his post-fiscal income (i.e., after taxes and
transfers), and such income is lower than her/his pre-fiscal income (i.e., the amount paid in taxes is
higher than the amount received in transfers). On the other hand, an individual experiences fiscal gains
when she/he is poor according to her/his pre-fiscal income (i.e., before taxes and transfers) and such
income is lower than her/his post-fiscal income (i.e., the amount received in transfers is higher than
the amount paid in taxes). In addition to the headcounts, the monetary amounts of FI and FGP can
be computed. The first amount equals the sum of the fall in income for the pre-fiscal poor, plus the
difference between the poverty line and the income (i.e., the poverty gap) for those pre-fiscal non-
poor but post-fiscal poor. The second amount is calculated as the sum of the increase in income for
the pre-fiscal poor who remain poor after taxes and transfers, plus the pre-fiscal poverty gap for the
pre-fiscal poor who escaped poverty after taxes and transfers.
Using both the $4/day and official moderate poverty lines, Figure 9 draws both the FI and FGP
headcounts with respect to the country’s population over the x-axis, whereas the y-axis reflects the FI
headcount among the post-fiscal (consumable income) poor and the FGP headcount among the pre-
fiscal (market income plus pensions) poor —the size of the bubbles is relative to the total monetary
amounts of both FI and FGP—. A first result is that fewer individuals are impoverished in comparison
to the number of fiscal gainers after the intervention of taxes, subsidies and direct transfers. Using the
$4/day poverty line, 1.8 percent of Chile’s population (or 31.6 percent of the post-fiscal poor) are

                                                                                                                                   18
impoverished, whereas 6.1 percent of the total population (or 82 percent of the pre-fiscal poor) are
fiscal gainers. If the official moderate poverty line is employed instead, the proportion of impoverished
(7.5 percent of the total, or 47.1 percent of the post-fiscal poor) is lower than that of the fiscal gainers
(10.6 percent of the total, or 65.1 percent of the pre-fiscal poor). A second result is that the magnitude
of annual fiscal gains (274.3 million dollars) is almost 13 times larger than that of FI (21.2 million
dollars) when using the $4/day poverty line, whereas the ratio is slightly above 4 times when using the
official moderate poverty line (with 619.7 million dollars of FGP and 144.3 million dollars of FI).28

     Figure 9: Headcounts and amounts of fiscal impoverishment and fiscal gains to the poor
                     (Percentages of population and millions of dollars adjusted by PPP)
                                                                             100%
                     FI headcount among post-fiscal poor and FGP headcount




                                                                                         FGP $4/day poverty line
                                                                             90%              $274.3 million                                     FGP Moderate poverty line (official)
                                                                                                                                                          $619.7 million
                                                                             80%

                                                                             70%
                                    among pre-fiscal poor




                                                                             60%

                                                                             50%

                                                                             40%                                                           FI Moderate poverty line (official)
                                                                                          FI $4/day poverty line                                    $144.3 million
                                                                                               $21.2 million
                                                                             30%

                                                                             20%

                                                                             10%

                                                                              0%
                                                                                    0%   2%            4%           6%             8%              10%              12%             14%
                                                                                                    FI and FGP headcounts with respect to total population

                                                                                         FI $4/day poverty line             FI Moderate poverty line (official)
                                                                                         FGP $4/day poverty line            FGP Moderate poverty line (official)


Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016). Notes: The size of the bubbles is relative to the total
monetary amounts of FI and FGP. The amounts are annual and expressed in millions of dollars adjusted by PPP at 2005 prices. The
headcounts and amounts of FI and FGP for the official extreme poverty line are close to those for the $4/day poverty line and therefore
excluded from the graph in order to avoid an overlapping of the bubbles.


The previous analysis yields an additional interesting finding. The 7.5 percent of Chile’s population
experiencing fiscal impoverishment —equivalent to nearly 1.3 million individuals whose post-fiscal
income is lower than both the official moderate poverty line and their pre-fiscal income— lives in
0.37 million households out of which the 69 percent are not recipients of any of the main direct
transfers analyzed, including Chile Solidario, Ingreso Ético Familiar or non-contributory pensions. This is
of significance as 84 percent of the fiscal impoverished are members of households identified as poor
according to the official definition.



28When using the $4/day poverty line, these annual amounts are equivalent in Chilean pesos to roughly 137,700 million
for fiscal gains and around 10,660 million for FI. For the official moderate poverty line the amounts are nearly 311,300
and 72,470 million of Chilean pesos, respectively. The headcounts and amounts of FI and FGP for the official extreme
poverty line are relatively similar to those for the $4/day poverty line. The proportion of impoverished reaches 1.6 percent
of the total population (or 31.2 percent of the post-fiscal poor), whereas that of fiscal gainers reaches 5.7 percent of the
total population (or 82.9 percent of the pre-fiscal poor). Regarding the amounts, annual fiscal gains are 296.7 million dollars
(or roughly 149,000 million Chilean pesos) and annual FI 19.2 million dollars (or nearly 9,600 million Chilean pesos).

                                                                                                                                                                                          19
A last, fundamental question to resolve is who benefits more from Chile’s social spending through in-
kind transfers of education and health services. Figure 10.A shows that the distribution of total social
spending on education and health tends to fall with market income plus pensions —that is, the share
of total benefits received is higher the poorer the households—. The first decile, composed by the
poor, receives 13.6 percent of total spending, whereas the tenth decile, composed mostly by wealthy
individuals, receives just above 5 percent. Moreover, half of total spending is distributed among the
bottom 40 percent of Chile’s distribution, which is composed entirely by poor and vulnerable
individuals.29 That pattern holds when total spending is disaggregated by component, with the only
exception being the social spending on tertiary education, which seems disproportionally distributed
among the upper deciles.

 Figure 10: Distribution of total social spending on education and health, and concentration
                    and incidence of social spending on tertiary education
                          (Percentages by deciles of market income plus pensions)
                                                                                  A. Distribution of total social spending on education and health (%)
                                                         16%


                                                         14% 13.6%
                                                                          12.8%
                                                                                       11.9%
                                                         12%                                          11.2%
                                                                                                                     10.5%
                                                                                                                                     9.9%
                                                         10%
                         Distribution (%)




                                                                                                                                                   9.0%     8.9%

                                                         8%                                                                                                             7.1%

                                                         6%                                                                                                                       5.1%


                                                         4%


                                                         2%


                                                         0%
                                                               1           2             3              4               5            6             7            8        9             10
                                                                                                            Deciles of market income plus pensions

                                                                                               Pre-school      Primary   Secondary      Tertiary   Health

                                                                           B. Concentration and incidence of social spending on tertiary education (%)
                                                         16%
                                                                                                                                                                               14.8%

                                                         14%
                       Concentration and incidence (%)




                                                         12%


                                                         10%


                                                         8%
                                                                   6.7%

                                                         6%
                                                                   4.8%

                                                         4%


                                                         2%
                                                                                                                                                                               0.4%
                                                         0%
                                                                     1            2            3            4           5           6           7           8       9           10
                                                                                                            Deciles of market income plus pensions

                                                                                                               Concentration     Incidence


Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016). Notes: The sum of the areas measured in the panel A
equals 100 percent.

29 The values of the ultra-poor ($1.25/day), extreme ($2.5/day), and moderate ($4/day) poverty lines lie, respectively, at

the first, third, and eight percentiles of the income distribution. The value of the $10/day threshold dividing the vulnerable
and the middle class lies at the 40th percentile, whereas the $50/day line dividing the middle-class and the wealthy lies at
the 94th percentile.

                                                                                                                                                                                            20
In fact, when looking at its concentration, almost 15 percent of the total spending on tertiary education
in Chile goes to the tenth decile, which is twice the share received by the bottom 10 percent of the
population: 6.7 percent (Figure 10.B). In terms of its incidence, when social spending on tertiary
education is analyzed as share of income in each decile, such share is higher for the first decile (4.8
percent) than for the tenth decile (0.4 percent), a result that is consistent with the positive marginal
contribution to inequality (0.003) found previously, indicating that this component of social spending
exerts a slightly equalizing effect.
While social spending on tertiary education is slightly equalizing, this intervention is not pro-poor as
indicated by its positive concentration coefficient (Figure 11). In fact, most of the interventions
through public spending analyzed in this paper are equalizing (positive marginal contributions).
Among them, the most pro-poor (negative concentration coefficients) are direct transfers followed by
primary education, pre-school and secondary education. The water subsidy and social spending on
health are also somewhat pro-poor. In the case of the subsidy to public transportation it is slightly
equalizing but not pro-poor, whereas the subsidy to gas exerts a neutral effect on inequality (zero
marginal contribution) and it is also not pro-poor30 —the latter is not surprising given that the gas
subsidy uses a geographical targeting and it does not consider the poverty status of the population—.

     Figure 11: Concentration coefficients of social spending and public spending on subsidies

                     Gas subsidy (Magallanes region)                                                                                              0.316

                                  Tertiary education                                                                             0.125

                       Public transportation subsidy                                                                  0.019

                               All indirect subsidies                                                     -0.003

                                              Health                                             -0.099

                                      Water subsidy                                     -0.198

                               Secondary education                                 -0.215

                                          Pre-school                             -0.246

                                  Primary education                            -0.270

                               Other direct transfers                         -0.282

                         Non-contributory pensions                        -0.305

                                  All direct transfers                 -0.331

                               Ingreso ético familiar        -0.464

                                     Chile Solidario     -0.503

                                                     -0.60    -0.50   -0.40     -0.30       -0.20    -0.10     0.00       0.10      0.20   0.30       0.40


Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016).

4.2 Fiscal redistribution in Chile: A comparative perspective
The redistributive effect of direct transfers, measured as the percent change in the Gini coefficient
from market income plus pensions to disposable income, is particularly larger in Chile (5.4 percent)
than in other Latin American countries with a comparable fiscal incidence analysis: it is well above the
average, and between 2.3 and 4 times larger than the effect found in Dominican Republic, Guatemala,
and the Andean countries. A salient result is that although spending on direct transfers as a share of

30   The concentration coefficients for all fiscal interventions analyzed is shown in the appendix Table A1.

                                                                                                                                                             21
GDP is lower in Chile (1.6 percent) than in Bolivia (2 percent), the redistributive gains are as much as
2.7 times larger in the former. Moreover, Chile achieves the same redistributive gains than Brazil (5.5
percent) with a significantly lower volume of direct transfers relative to GDP (Figure 12). Yet, Chile’s
redistributive effect of direct transfers is well below the effect observed in Uruguay (7.3 percent), and
in all Eastern European countries shown in Figure 13 for which the comparison is possible.

   Figure 12: Redistributive effects and social spending on direct transfers in selected Latin
                                       American countries
                                         Colombia      Bolivia                 Guatemala Dom. Rep. Costa Rica       Mexico                                 Uruguay
                                          (2010)       (2009)    Peru (2009)    (2011)    (2013)    (2010)          (2010)    Chile (2013)Brazil (2009)     (2009)     Average
                                   0%                                                                                                                                            4.5%

                                   -1%                                                                                                                                           4.0%
                                                                                                                                               4.2%




                                                                                                                                                                                        Direct transfers (share of GDP)
                                          -1.4%                                                                                                                                  3.5%
                                   -2%
           Redistributive effect




                                                        -2.0%      -2.0%
                                                                                  -2.3%       -2.3%                                                                              3.0%
                                   -3%
                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5%
                                   -4%                                                                   -3.7%                                                         -3.6%
                                                                                                                                   1.6%                     2.3%                 2.0%
                                   -5%                  2.0%                                                        -4.5%
                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5%
                                                                                                                                   -5.4%      -5.5%                     1.4%
                                   -6%
                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0%
                                                                                                             1.2%
                                   -7%                                                                               1.0%
                                                                                               0.8%                                                                              0.5%
                                          0.5%                      0.4%          0.4%                                                                      -7.3%
                                   -8%                                                                                                                                           0.0%
                                                  Percent change in Gini (from market income plus pensions to disposable income)           Direct transfers (share of GDP)


Source: Author’s elaboration based on the following works: Bolivia (Paz Arauco et al., 2014); Brazil (Higgins and Pereira, 2014); Chile
(Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez, 2016); Colombia (Melendez and Martinez, 2015); Costa Rica (Sauma and Trejos, 2014); Dominican
Republic (Aristy-Escuder et al., 2016); Guatemala (Cabrera and Moran, 2016); Mexico (Scott, 2014); Peru (Jaramillo, 2014); and Uruguay
(Bucheli et al., 2014). Notes: The year for which the country analysis was conducted is shown in parentheses in each bar of the graph.
The average is the simple mean of the percent changes by country. The figures shown in the graph may slightly differ from those
originally published in the works cited due to recent updates of the CEQ methodology.

        Figure 13: Inequality dynamics in Chile and selected countries in Eastern Europe

                                                             Armenia (2011)         Chile (2013)        Georgia (2013)       Poland (2014)            Russia (2010)
                                           0.55


                                           0.50


                                           0.45


                                           0.40


                                           0.35


                                           0.30


                                           0.25


                                           0.20
                                                    Market income plus pensions          Disposable income          Consumable income                   Final income


Source: Author’s elaboration based on the following works: Armenia (Younger and Khachatryan, forthcoming); Chile (Martinez-Aguilar
and Ortiz-Juarez, 2016); Georgia (Cancho and Bondarenko, forthcoming); Poland (Goraus and Inchauste, 2016); and Russia (Lopez-
Calva et al., forthcoming). Note: The year for which the country analysis was conducted is shown in parentheses in each country label
of the graph.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          22
For instance, in Georgia, a country with a similar Gini coefficient for market income plus pensions
(0.483) as Chile’s (0.494), the redistributive effect reaches 18.4 percent after deducting (adding) direct
taxes (transfers) from/to disposable income, placing the Gini coefficient at 0.349. The magnitude of
the redistributive effect is also similar in Poland (17.1 percent), although this country exhibits a Gini
coefficient for market income plus pensions significantly lower (0.410). When social spending on
education and health is considered, the inequality-reducing effect in Chile (15 percent) —relative to
market income plus pensions— surpasses that of Armenia (11.4 percent) and levels that of the Russian
Federation (15.6 percent), but it remains well below the effect found in Georgia (19.3 percent) and
Poland (31.7 percent) (it is worth noting that when moving from disposable to consumable income
—i.e., when considering indirect taxes and subsidies— only Chile exhibits a decline in the Gini
coefficient, which is the result of the aforesaid Lambert’s conundrum).
Regarding the influence of direct transfers on poverty, Figure 14 shows that they can reduce the
incidence of poverty in Chile by 41.2 percent with respect to the market income plus pensions concept,
a change that is similar to that observed in Uruguay (42 percent) and threefold the regional average
(12.6 percent). The intervention of indirect taxes and subsidies in Chile halves the magnitude of such
reduction (24.2 percent), although it remains large enough to position Chile as the best performer
among the Latin American countries with a comparable assessment. In startling contrast, in countries
like Bolivia, Brazil, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic and Guatemala the effect of indirect taxes and
subsidies on poverty more than compensates the gains from direct transfers.

                              Figure 14: Poverty-reducing effects in selected Latin American countries
                                    Guatemala    Colombia                   Dom. Rep.    Bolivia    Mexico                      Costa Rica                 Uruguay
                                     (2011)       (2010)      Peru (2009)    (2013)      (2009)     (2010)      Brazil (2009)    (2010)    Chile (2013)     (2009)      Average
                             20%

                             10%                                                                                      8.1%
                                        4.1%                                                4.4%                                     2.8%
                                                                   0.4%         1.9%
                              0%
           Percent changes




                                    -0.4%       -2.1%
                                                        -2.3% -2.7%         -2.9%                       -3.5%                                                              -3.0%
                             -10%                                                       -5.6%      -6.2%
                                                                                                                -8.5%
                                                                                                                                -13.9%                               -12.6%
                             -20%
                                                                                                                                                               -21.8%
                                                                                                                                                 -24.2%
                             -30%

                             -40%
                                                                                                                                            -41.2%        -42.0%
                             -50%
                                                Market income plus pensions to disposable income       Market income plus pensions to consumable income


Source: Author’s elaboration based on the following works: Bolivia (Paz Arauco et al., 2014); Brazil (Higgins and Pereira, 2014); Chile
(Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez, 2016); Colombia (Melendez and Martinez, 2015); Costa Rica (Sauma and Trejos, 2014); Dominican
Republic (Aristy-Escuder et al., 2016); Guatemala (Cabrera and Moran, 2016); Mexico (Scott, 2014); Peru (Jaramillo, 2014); and Uruguay
(Bucheli et al., 2014). Notes: The incidence of poverty is measured according to the $4/day poverty line. The year for which the country
analysis was conducted is shown in parentheses in each bar of the graph. The average is the simple mean of the percent changes by
country. The figures shown in the graph may slightly differ from those originally published in the works cited due to recent updates of
the CEQ methodology.

5. SUMMING UP

The results from the fiscal incidence analysis presented in this paper indicate, in general, that fiscal
interventions in Chile exert a positive net effect in reducing poverty and inequality, and favor upward

                                                                                                                                                                                   23
economic mobility, especially among the poorest. In particular, subsidies to public transportation and
water exert a positive, yet modest effect on poverty and inequality, whereas the effects of gas subsidy
are mostly neutral. Direct transfers are progressive (i.e., the benefits as share of pre-fiscal income
decline with income), as well as equalizing and poverty-decreasing (i.e., direct transfers show positive
marginal contributions to both inequality and poverty). In terms of their effect on poverty, for
instance, direct transfers reduce the incidence by 4-5 percentage points, depending on the poverty line
used, with non-contributory pensions and the flagship cash transfer scheme (Chile Solidario/Ingreso Ético
Familiar) accounting for the lion’s share of such reduction. Direct transfers are also pro-poor, as
indicated by their negative concentration coefficient (i.e., per capita benefits from direct transfers
decline with income).
On the other hand, direct taxes on personal income are found to be equalizing and poverty-neutral;
social contributions are unequalizing and poverty-increasing; and indirect taxes are poverty-increasing,
but they exert a slight equalizing effect. This counterintuitive result (the so-called Lambert’s
conundrum) is feasible because indirect taxes, although regressive relative to pre-fiscal income (market
income plus pensions), are found to be progressive with respect to the less unequally distributed post-
transfers income (disposable income). In other words, indirect taxes exert an equalizing effect over
and above the effect exerted by progressive direct taxes and direct transfers. As discussed by Enami,
Lustig and Aranda (2017), the latter is not equivalent to ascertain that regressive taxes can be fine as
long as the net effect of the whole fiscal system is equalizing, but rather that such net effect with a
regressive tax, relative to pre-fiscal income, can be more equalizing than without the tax.
Regarding in-kind transfers in the form of education and health, all the interventions are equalizing,
being social spending on primary and secondary education and health the ones with the largest effect
on inequality. The latter is not surprising given that Chile spends more on education and health (8.1
percent of the country’s GDP) than in direct transfers (1.6 percent). Yet, such result must be
interpreted with caution because in-kind transfers are monetized at average government cost, which
not necessarily reflects the actual value of the education and health services provided and there are no
adjustments for differences in quality across the distribution. It is important to highlight that although
social spending on tertiary education is slightly equalizing, this intervention is not pro-poor as
indicated by its positive concentration coefficient. Conversely, social spending on basic (pre-school
and primary) and secondary education and health is not only equalizing but also pro-poor (negative
concentration coefficients).
Four additional results are worth noting. Firstly, after the intervention of taxes, subsidies and direct
transfers not only the incidence of poverty reduces, but also the depth of poverty and the magnitude
of inequality among the poor fall remarkably. Secondly, when using the official moderate poverty line
the net effect of the whole fiscal system leaves fewer individuals impoverished (7.5 percent of Chile’s
population, or 47.1 percent of the post-fiscal poor) in comparison to the number of fiscal gainers (10.6
percent of the total, or 65.1 percent of the pre-fiscal poor), and the magnitude of monetary fiscal gains
is as much as 4 times larger than that of fiscal impoverishment. Thirdly, the 7.5 percent of Chile’s
population experiencing fiscal impoverishment lives in 0.37 million households out of which the 69
percent are not recipients of any of the main direct transfers analyzed, which is of significance as 84

                                                                                                       24
percent of the fiscal impoverished are members of households identified as poor according to the
official definition. This result is indicative of the additional efforts required to improve the targeting
and expand the coverage of direct transfers among the poor population, in particular because direct
transfers have a significant large effect in reducing inequality and poverty.
Finally, when put into a regional perspective, the redistributive effect of direct transfers (i.e., the
decline in inequality from pre-fiscal income to post-transfers income) is particularly larger in Chile
than in other Latin American countries with a comparable fiscal incidence analysis. A remarkably result
is that with 1.6 percent of the GDP on direct transfers, the redistributive gains in Chile are as much
as 2.7 times larger than in Bolivia and virtually the same as in Brazil, where direct transfers account
for 2 and 5.5 percent of the GDP, respectively. In terms of the effect on poverty, as measured by the
$4/day poverty line, direct transfers in Chile reduce the incidence by 41.2 percent with respect to pre-
fiscal income, placing the country as a top performer in the region.
As part of its efforts to address persistently high levels of income inequality, the Government of Chile
enacted a comprehensive tax reform in 2014 aimed at generating additional tax revenues (amounting
to around 3 percent of the GDP) to finance social spending, specially on education; improving
neutrality and equity of the tax system; improving the efficiency of tax incentives on savings and
investment; and reducing tax evasion and avoidance (Arenas de Mesa, 2016). Even though the effect
of such reform is not quantified in this paper, further spending on education could potentially
contribute to income inequality decline in the medium and long-term. Moreover, an ex ante evaluation
of the reform using the 2013 fiscal records suggested that the tax reform would likely increase the
effective tax burden for the top 1 percent of the income distribution by 6 percentage points (equivalent
to an increase from 2.4 to 3.5 percent of the GDP, with 80 percent of the latter figure being paid by
the top 0.1 percent), while for most of the population the tax burden is expected to remain roughly
constant, making the tax system, eventually, more progressive (World Bank, 2016).




                                                                                                       25
REFERENCES

Arenas de Mesa, Alberto. 2016. Sostenibilidad fiscal y reformas tributarias en América Latina. Santiago:
        Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe (CEPAL).
Aristy-Escuder, Jaime, Maynor Cabrera, Blanca Moreno-Dodson, and Miguel Sanchez-Martin. 2016.
        “Fiscal Policy and Redistribution in the Dominican Republic”. CEQ Working Paper No. 47,
        CEQ Institute.
Bucheli, Marisa, Nora Lustig, Maximo Rossi, and Florencia Amabile. 2014. “Social Spending, Taxes
        and Income Redistribution in Uruguay.” Public Finance Review 42 (3): 413-433.
Cabrera, Maynor, and Hilcias E. Moran. 2016. “CEQ Master Workbook. Guatemala.” CEQ Institute,
        ICEFI and IFAD.
Cancho, Cesar, and Elena Bondarenko. Forthcoming. “The Distributional Impact of Fiscal Policy in
        Georgia.” In The Distributional Impact of Fiscal Policy: Experience from Developing Countries, edited
        by Gabriela Inchauste and Nora Lustig. Washington DC: World Bank.
Castelletti, Barbara. 2013. “How Redistributive is Fiscal Policy in Latin America?: The Case of Chile
        and Mexico.” OECD Development Centre Working Papers, No. 318, OECD.
Dirección de Presupuestos. 2014. Estadísticas de las Finanzas Públicas 2004-2013. Santiago: Ministerio de
        Hacienda.
Enami, Ali, Nora Lustig, and Rodrigo Aranda. 2017. “Analytic Foundations: Measuring the
        Redistributive Impact of Taxes and Transfers.” In Commitment to Equity Handbook: A Guide to
        Estimating the Impact of Fiscal Policy on Inequality and Poverty, edited by Nora Lustig. Washington
        DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Engel, Eduardo M. R. A., Alexander Galetovic, and Claudio E. Raddatz. 1999. “Taxes and Income
        Distribution in Chile: Some Unpleasant Redistributive Arithmetic.” Journal of Development
        Economics 59 (1): 155-192.
Foster, James, Joel Greer, and Erik Thorbecke. 1984. “A Class of Decomposable Poverty Measures.”
        Econometrica 3 (52): 761-766.
Goraus, Karolina, and Gabriela Inchauste. 2016. “The Distributional Impact of Taxes and Transfers
        in Poland.” Policy Research Working Paper 7787, World Bank.
Higgins, Sean, and Claudiney Pereira. 2014. “The Effects of Brazil’s Taxation and Social Spending on
        the Distribution of Household Income.” Public Finance Review 42 (3): 346-367.
Higgins, Sean, and Nora Lustig. 2017. “Allocating Taxes and Transfers and Constructing Income
        Concepts.” In Commitment to Equity Handbook. A Guide to Estimating the Impact of Fiscal Policy on
        Inequality and Poverty, edited by Nora Lustig. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Higgins, Sean, and Nora Lustig. 2016. “Can a Poverty-Reducing and Progressive Tax and Transfer
        System Hurt the Poor?” Journal of Development Economics 122: 63-75.
Jaramillo, Miguel. 2014. “The Incidence of Social Spending and Taxes in Peru.” Public Finance Review
        42 (3): 391-412.
Kakwani, Nanak C. 1977. “Measurement of Tax Progressivity: An International Comparison.”
        Economic Journal 87 (345): 71-80.
Lambert, Peter. 2001. The Distribution and Redistribution of Income. 3rd edition. Manchester: Manchester
        University Press.
Larrañaga, Osvaldo, Jenny Encina, and Gustavo Cabezas. 2012. “A Microsimulation Model of
        Distribution for Chile.” In Fiscal Inclusive Development: Microsimulation Models for Latin America,
        edited by Carlos M. Urzua. Mexico: IDRC-UNDP-ITESM.
Lopez-Calva, Luis F., and Eduardo Ortiz-Juarez. 2014. “A Vulnerability Approach to the Definition
        of the Middle Class.” Journal of Economic Inequality 12 (1): 23-47.


                                                                                                          26
Lopez-Calva, Luis F., Nora Lustig, Mikhail Matytsin, and Daria Popova. Forthcoming. “Who Benefits
        from Fiscal Redistribution in Russia?” In The Distributional Impact of Fiscal Policy: Experience from
        Developing Countries, edited by Gabriela Inchauste and Nora Lustig. Washington DC: World
        Bank.
Lustig, Nora. 2017a. “Fiscal Policy, Income Redistribution and Poverty Reduction in Low and Middle
        Income Countries.” In Commitment to Equity Handbook. A Guide to Estimating the Impact of Fiscal
        Policy on Inequality and Poverty, edited by Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
        Press.
Lustig, Nora. 2017b. Commitment to Equity Handbook. A Guide to Estimating the Impact of Fiscal Policy on
        Inequality and Poverty. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press and CEQ Institute, Tulane
        University.
Lustig, Nora, and Sean Higgins. 2013. “Estimating the Incidence of Social Spending, Subsidies and
        Taxes. Handbook.” CEQ Working Paper No. 1, CEQ Institute.
Lustig, Nora, and Sean Higgins. 2017. “The CEQ Assessment: Measuring the Impact of Fiscal Policy
        on Inequality and Poverty.” In Commitment to Equity Handbook. A Guide to Estimating the Impact
        of Fiscal Policy on Inequality and Poverty, edited by Nora Lustig. Washington DC: Brookings
        Institution Press.
Martinez-Aguilar, Sandra, and Eduardo Ortiz-Juarez. 2016. “CEQ Master Workbook. Chile.” CEQ
        Institute and World Bank.
Melendez, Marcela, and Valentina Martinez. 2015. “CEQ Master Workbook. Colombia.” CEQ
        Institute and Inter-American Development Bank.
Ministerio de Desarrollo Social. 2016. Informe de Desarrollo Social 2016. Santiago: Gobierno de Chile.
OECD. 2016a. “Social Expenditure: Aggregated Data”. OECD Social Expenditure Statistics.
OECD. 2016b. “Revenue Statistics: Comparative Tables.” OECD Tax Statistics.
Paz Arauco, Veronica, George Gray Molina, Wilson Jimenez Pozo, and Ernesto Yañez Aguilar. 2014.
        “Explaining Low Redistributive Impact in Bolivia.” Public Finance Review 42 (3): 326-345.
Sauma, Pablo, and Juan Diego Trejos. 2014. “Social Public Spending, Taxes, Redistribution of Income,
        and Poverty in Costa Rica.” CEQ Working Paper No. 18, CEQ Institute.
Scott, John. 2014. “Redistributive Impact and Efficiency of Mexico’s Fiscal System.” Public Finance
        Review 42 (3): 368-390.
Servicio de Impuestos Internos. 2015. “Serie de evasión de IVA 2003-2015. Base MIP 2008.”
        Subdirección de Gestión Estratégica y Estudios Tributarios SII.
World Bank. 2016. “Chile. Distributional Effects for the 2014 Tax Reform.” Working Paper 104099,
        World Bank.
Younger, Stephen D., and Artsvi Khachatryan. Forthcoming. “Fiscal Incidence in Armenia.” In The
        Distributional Impact of Fiscal Policy: Experience from Developing Countries, edited by Gabriela
        Inchauste and Nora Lustig. Washington DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                          27
APPENDIX

     Table A1: Marginal contributions to inequality by end income concept, concentration
                 coefficients and Kakwani indexes for all fiscal interventions

                                                   Marginal
                                                                                     Concentration
                                               contributions to                                                Kakwani index
                                                                                      coefficients
                                                  inequality
When disposable income is the end income concept
Direct taxes                                          0.011                                0.946                      0.452
Noncotributory pensions                               0.010                               -0.305                      0.799
All direct taxes and contributions                    0.007                                0.637                      0.143
Other direct transfers                                0.005                               -0.282                      0.775
Chile Solidario                                       0.003                               -0.503                      0.997
Ingreso Ético Familiar                                0.001                               -0.464                      0.958
All social contributions                             -0.003                                0.327                     -0.166
When consumable income is the end income concept
Direct taxes                                          0.012                                0.946                      0.452
All direct taxes and contributions                    0.008                                0.637                      0.143
All taxes and contributions                           0.008                                0.518                      0.025
Other direct transfers                                0.006                               -0.282                      0.775
All indirect subsidies                                0.003                               -0.003                      0.497
Subsidy to public transportation                      0.002                                0.019                      0.475
Ingreso Ético Familiar                                0.001                               -0.464                      0.958
Subsidy to drinkable water                            0.001                               -0.198                      0.692
All indirect taxes                                    0.000                                0.466                     -0.027
Gas subsidy                                           0.000                                0.316                      0.177
All social contributions                             -0.004                                0.327                     -0.166
Chile Solidario                                        n.a.                               -0.503                      0.997
Noncotributory pensions                                n.a.                               -0.305                      0.799
When final income is the end income concept
All education                                                   0.032                     -0.171                      0.664
Primary education                                               0.014                     -0.270                      0.763
Health                                                          0.014                     -0.099                      0.593
All direct taxes                                                0.012                      0.946                      0.452
All direct taxes and social contributions                       0.009                      0.637                      0.143
Secondary education                                             0.008                     -0.215                      0.708
Pre-school                                                      0.005                     -0.246                      0.739
All indirect taxes                                              0.004                      0.466                     -0.027
Tertiary education                                              0.003                      0.125                      0.369
All indirect subsidies                                          0.002                     -0.003                      0.497
All direct transfers                                             n.a.                     -0.331                     0.824
Source: Author’s elaboration based on Martinez-Aguilar and Ortiz-Juarez (2016). Notes: The values of the concentration coefficient and
Kakwani index for each fiscal intervention are the same regardless of the end income concept because such coefficients and indexes are
calculated with respect to the market income plus pensions concept. The “n.a.” label represents the cases where the Gini coefficient is
not calculated without the corresponding fiscal intervention because without it the income of some households becomes negative.




                                                                                                                                   28
