                                                 WPS7941


Policy Research Working Paper                   7941




       Reforming Village-Level Governance
             via Horizontal Pressure
          Evidence from an Experiment in Zimbabwe

                               Kate Baldwin
                             Shylock Muyengwa
                              Eric Mvukiyehe




Development Research Group
Impact Evaluation Team
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7941


  Abstract
  How can patrimonial local-level governance be reformed?                            on the framework governing village leadership, and one in
  Debates on this topic have focused largely on the possibility                      which civil society leaders were trained alongside village
  of reform via pressure from above (superordinate leaders) or                       heads. The results suggest that horizontal pressure from civil
  below (citizens). This paper tests whether horizontal pres-                        society leaders increased village heads’ knowledge of and
  sures from civil society leaders can reform local governance                       compliance with regulated procedures, improved their man-
  in a context where neither of these mechanisms operates                            agement of issues and raised citizens’ trust in their leadership.
  effectively. The study analyzes an experimental intervention                       A quantitative and qualitative analysis of the mechanisms
  in Zimbabwe intended to reduce abuse of power by village                           through which the trained civil society leaders had these
  heads. Analytic leverage comes from the fact that the 270                          effects suggests they accomplished reform by directly apply-
  study villages were randomly assigned to two variants of the                       ing social pressure on village heads to abide by regulations.
  intervention, one in which only village heads were trained




  This paper is a product of the Impact Evaluation Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the
  world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at emvukiyehe@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
    Reforming Village-Level Governance via Horizontal Pressure:
            Evidence from an Experiment in Zimbabwe
                      Kate Baldwin, Shylock Muyengwa and Eric Mvukiyehe∗




         Keywords: Traditional institutions, horizontal accountability, village-level governance, for-
      eign assistance, Zimbabwe.

         JEL Classiﬁcation: H7


   ∗ Baldwin  is Assistant Professor, Department of Political Science, Yale University. Muyengwa is PhD
Candidate, School of Natural Resources and Environment, University of Florida. Mvukiyehe is Economist
in the Development Research Group, Impact Evaluation Unit, The World Bank. We are grateful to our im-
plementing partners in Zimbabwe for their participation in the experiment and the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID) for providing funding through their Evaluating Democracy and Gov-
ernance Effectiveness (EDGE) Initiative. Thanks to MacKenzie Saunyama, Lauren Young, Sarah Elven and
Srujith Lingala for excellent research assistance and to Target Research for coordinating our surveys. We
have received valued feedback from Rob Blair, Gwyneth McClendon, Kristin Michelitch and audiences at
the Boston-Area Working Group on African Political Economy (B-WGAPE), Brown University, Columbia
University, the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Northwestern University, Yale Univer-
sity, Washington University in St. Louis, the African Studies Association Annual Meeting and the Midwest
Political Science Association Annual Meeting.
1    Introduction

In many countries of the world, village-level political leaders remain the main government structures with

which citizens interact. However, the quality of village-level governance is very uneven, remaining patrimo-

nial and personalistic in many places. For example, village heads in Indonesia, village maliks in Afghanistan

and panchayat leaders in India often make decisions based on their own interests and biases, begging the

question of how best to reform these structures to reduce cronyism and corruption (Olken, 2010; Murtaza-

shvili, 2016; Veron et al., 2006).

    Much of the debate on this topic has focused on the possibility of reform via pressure from above, in-

volving sanctioning by higher-level leaders to whom these leaders report, or pressure from below, especially

through popular elections for village-level leaders (Grossman, 2014; Tendler, 1997). But these two mech-

anisms for reforming local governments may not always be available or effective, especially when village

leaders have high socio-economic status in their community independent of their bureaucratic appointment

or electoral legitimacy. Furthermore, although the policy community has favored community monitoring

interventions that promote reform from below, investing hundreds of millions of dollars into them (Molina

et al., 2013), a growing body of evidence suggests that these interventions have limited effects on governance

(Banerjee et al., 2010, 2015; Lieberman, Posner and Tsai, 2014; Olken, 2007). In view of the mixed suc-

cess of community monitoring interventions on governance, we consider the effectiveness of an alternative

strategy which promotes horizontal pressure from existing civil society leaders.

    Our theoretical framework builds on a long tradition of emphasizing the importance of civil society

leaders for checking the inﬂuence of government and improving development outcomes (Putnam, Leonardi

and Nanetti, 1994; De Tocqueville, 1956). We use the term civil society leaders broadly to refer to individu-

als who have status by virtue of their leadership of a community-based group, regardless of how democratic

the purposes or goals of the group are. This non-normative deﬁnition follows a tradition of deﬁning civil

society as a force that can be mobilized for a variety of ends (Krishna, 2007; Berman, 1997). The effective-

ness of horizontal pressures from existing leaders in reforming village-level governance is thus a plausible

but empirically uncertain proposition.

    We test the efﬁcacy of using civil society leaders to hold village-level leaders to account in Zimbabwe,



                                                      2
a context where citizens often express grievances against local leaders but top-down and bottom-up mech-

anisms for reform are weak. We study the effectiveness of horizontal pressure for reforming village-level

governance by examining the differential effects of two variants of a randomized capacity-building inter-

vention for village leaders, run by an international NGO in collaboration with local partners in 270 villages.

In both arms of the intervention, the village head received training on rules, regulations and best practices

pertaining to village-level governance in Zimbabwe. Our analytical leverage comes from the fact that in

one arm only, another local civil society leader was trained alongside the village head and also learned the

rules, regulations and best practices he (or, in rare instances, she) was supposed to follow in his (or her)

decision-making.

    Our empirical ﬁndings reveal that horizontal pressure from civil society leaders can improve the quality

of governance at the local level. Speciﬁcally, the inclusion of a civil society leader in the training sessions

increased village head’s knowledge of and compliance with regulated procedures, improved their manage-

ment of local issues and raised trust in their leadership among citizens compared to a control condition

in which only the village head was trained. This ﬁnding suggests that civil society leaders can serve as a

mechanism of change even in the absence of complementary pressures from above or below. Furthermore,

we draw on ancillary quantitative and qualitative evidence to probe the mechanisms through which civil

society leaders had this effect. The results of these analyses suggest that civil society leaders caused change

not through competition with village heads but through direct social pressure and, to some extent, increased

human resource capacity.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section two provides a brief overview of the empirical literature linking

community monitoring interventions to governance reform, highlighting in particular inadequate attention to

horizontal pressure, and points to a number of mechanisms linking horizontal pressures to local-level gover-

nance outcomes. Section three provides a brief background to village level governance in Zimbabwe, while

section four discusses the intervention under study and our identiﬁcation strategy. Section ﬁve discusses our

measurement strategy and data collection and section six discusses our main ﬁndings. Section seven probes

a number of potential mechanisms discussed in the theoretical section and section eight concludes.




                                                      3
2     Theoretical framework

2.1     Local-Government Reform

Local government around the world is often characterized as highly patrimonial in that local leaders make

decisions based on their personal whims, and citizens’ access to resources is conditional on their personal

relationships with these leaders (Weber, 1922). The results are cronyism and corruption that harm the

interests of the majority of local citizens. Most of the scholarly debates on the best path to reforming

patrimonial local governments have focused on the merits of top-down versus bottom-up reform.

      In favor of top-down reforms, scholars have shown that reform-minded higher-level governments can

sometimes be very effective in reducing cronyism and clientelism in local-level politics (Malesky, Nguyen

and Tran, 2014; Tendler, 1997). In cases where higher-level political leaders have both the incentive to

reform local politics and the capacity to sanction local leaders who do not adhere to reforms, top-down

reforms may be very effective. However, in cases where higher-level politicians lack the political will to

implement reforms, this path to reform is a non-starter. In addition, even if higher-level politicians have

the political will to implement reforms, this mechanism is also dependent on adequate capacity to monitor

the actions of local leaders and sufﬁcient control over their career prospects to motivate reform. In cases

where the central state is weak and/or local leaders have independent sources of legitimacy based on their

own political, economic or social standing within their communities, sanctioning from the higher-ups may

be inadequate.

      Alternatively, reform may be possible via pressures from below. In particular, when local-level leaders

are popularly elected, citizens have a tool for sanctioning politicians who engage in corruption or cronyism

(Grossman, 2014; Martinez-Bravo et al., 2014). However, in the absence of elections for local leaders,

the prospects for reform from below are more nebulous. In some circumstances, citizens may be able to

apply non-electoral pressure on local leaders to govern well. For example, Tsai (2007) argues that citizens

can apply moral pressure on local leaders when they are embedded in encompassing community networks,

and Baldwin (2016) notes that citizens can use economic sanctions against leaders who depend on citizen

contributions for their material upkeep. However, in other instances, the power differentials between citizens

and local leaders and the collective action dilemma faced by communities in holding them to account are


                                                      4
insurmountable.

      Yet, a third model of reform, via the empowerment of civil society leaders, is also possible. This model

is distinct from the bottom-up model in that it depends on local leaders, rather than citizens themselves, to

encourage political leaders to reform their behavior. As a result, horizontal pressure has a separate logic and

may be effective in improving governance even in situations where bottom-up pressure is weak.


2.2        Community Monitoring Interventions

In recent years, international institutions have devoted signiﬁcant resources to fostering bottom-up reform.

In particular, they have invested huge amounts in community monitoring interventions, programs intended

to facilitate the ability of communities to pressure policymaking bodies and service delivery organizations

without fundamentally increasing citizens’ power to discipline them.1 Information campaigns, scorecards,

social audits and capacity building for oversight institutions have all become common in developing coun-

tries (Mansuri and Rao, 2012; Molina et al., 2013).

      On balance, the evidence that community monitoring interventions improve local service provision is

mixed. Banerjee, Deaton and Duﬂo (2004) ﬁnd that civilian engagement and monitoring in rural Rajasthan

was not associated with improved health provision or outcomes. Cilliers et al. (2016) test two monitoring

schemes–one in which the headteacher was required to report on teachers’ attendance and another in which

they were required to report on teachers’ attendance in exchange for bonus payments–and ﬁnd that neither

intervention was associated with improvements in teachers’ attendance. Similarly, Lieberman, Posner and

Tsai (2014) ﬁnd little evidence that community report cards improved educational outcomes in Kenya.

      Other studies point to positive effects of community monitoring. For instance, in the education sector

in Kenya, Duﬂo, Hanna and Ryan (2012) ﬁnd that when communities selected, monitored, and assessed

the performance of primary school teachers, educational performance improved. Likewise, in a randomized

ﬁeld experiment in Uganda that involved community-based monitoring of public primary health providers,

Bjorkman and Svensson (2009) ﬁnd that disseminating information about local health facilities and encour-

aging civilian engagement/oversight signiﬁcantly improved the quality of healthcare delivery and health

outcomes in treatment areas. A study by Aker, Ksoll et al. (2015) investigated the effects of mobile moni-
      1
          Molina et al. (2013) reports on the large budgets of a number of NGOs and initiatives in this sector.


                                                           5
toring of teacher effort and student outcomes in Niger, ﬁnding that the intervention substantially improved

students’ performance.

    The mixed evidence in favor of community monitoring interventions is not surprising from the per-

spective of many theories of civic participation. One problem is that many political actions are subject to

collective action dilemmas. Each citizen may avoid taking action, preferring that other citizens bear the

costs entailed in doing so (Olson, 1965). A second problem is the power differentials between citizens and

powerholders. The average citizen may not have access to the ear of the targeted leader, or may not be-

lieve he or she has the power to inﬂuence them (Gamson, 1968). Indeed, Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson

(2014) suggest that these types of power differentials make civil society organizations in Sierra Leone tools

of traditional leaders. Especially in contexts in which the targets of community monitoring interventions are

not hired or elected by citizens, there are numerous ways the causal chain between increased monitoring by

citizens and better behavior by leaders could break down (Lieberman, Posner and Tsai, 2014).2

    How then can these obstacles be overcome? One variant on community monitoring that could provide

an answer is “horizontal pressure” from established civil society leaders. Instead of providing training

and information to citizens with the goal of having them hold targeted leaders to account, organizations

could provide training and information to other community leaders. This has not been widely promoted

as a mechanism for improving accountability, probably due to reasonable concerns that leaders could have

distinct interests from the citizenry as a whole (Olson, 1982) and the potential for collusion among leaders

at the expense of citizens (Gottlieb, 2015; Mattingly, 2016). But other considerations weigh in favor of

horizontal pressures. In particular, civil society leaders often have actions available to them that most citizens

do not. As a result, they may be able to motivate reforms through mechanisms distinct from bottom-up

pressure, as elaborated in the next section.3
   2
      For further discussion of the challenges of transparency initiatives in settings without electoral account-
ability, see Kosack and Fung (2014) and Malesky, Shuler and Tran (2012).
    3
      Interestingly, two recent training interventions for committee members, rather than community mem-
bers more generally, show promising results, especially when complemented with increased linkages to key
decision makers (Barr et al., 2012; Pradhan et al., 2014).




                                                        6
                                            Leadership
                                            Competition




                Empowered                   Increased Monitoring          Improved
                Civil Society           •    Direct social pressure       Local Governance
                                        •    Fire alarm triggering
                Leaders                 •    Community mobilization       Outcomes




                                            Capacity upgrading




               Figure 1: Mechanisms through which horizontal pressures could cause reform


2.3     Horizontal Pressures for Reform

There are a number of different mechanisms through which the empowerment of civil society leaders could

result in local governance reform. Speciﬁcally, civil society leaders could cause village leaders to reform

their behavior as a result of: (1) leadership competition (2) capacity upgrading or (3) increased monitoring.

These channels are displayed in ﬁgure 1 and elaborated below.


2.3.1    Leadership competition

Competition from other civil society leaders to serve as the most important intermediary between citizens

and the outside world may be sufﬁcient to reduce cronyism and corruption by local leaders. Even absent

electoral competition for key political posts, market competition may induce better behavior from leaders.

When community members have an outside option for helping to ﬁx their problems, established leaders

may need to start offering them better terms. A number of empirical studies point to the relevance of this

mechanism. For instance, Krishna (2007) ﬁnds that competition from a new generation of local “ﬁxers”

                                                           7
motivates better governance from established leaders in northern India. However, in contrast, Acemoglu,

Reed and Robinson (2014) ﬁnd that traditional leaders in chiefdoms with more ruling families (i.e., more

elite competition) enjoyed less legitimacy and lower levels of social capital than chiefdoms with fewer ruling

families.


2.3.2   Capacity upgrading

Human capital deﬁciencies are also frequently a key constraint on public sector performance in many de-

veloping countries, especially at the local level where there has traditionally been a shortage of staff skills

in specialized areas of governance (World Bank, 2000). Thus, training community leaders to fulﬁll gover-

nance functions may improve outcomes by bridging this capacity gap. If the key constraint on reforming

local governance is not the incentives of local political leaders but their capacity, the empowerment of other

civil society leaders may provide the skills and resources necessary to enact reforms. By acting as an addi-

tional human resource at the local level, civil society leaders may be able to improve local governance.


2.3.3   Increased monitoring

Finally, civil society leaders may induce reforms by monitoring village leaders. Increased monitoring by vil-

lage leaders may induce changes in behavior three ways, corresponding to three types of sanctions: (i) civil

society leaders may apply direct pressure upon political leaders, using their own status vis-a-vis politicians

to threaten social sanctions for poor behavior (ii) civil society leaders may serve as ﬁre alarms that allow

higher level politicians to sanction bad behavior by local leaders; or (iii) civil society leaders may mobilize

the community as a whole to pressure local leaders to reform their actions.

    Civil society leaders may be able to directly pressure political leaders to change their behavior due to the

desire of politicians to remain in good social standing in their eyes. Social incentives and social recognition

have been found to be important motivators of public ofﬁcials in a variety of contexts (Levi and Sachs, 2009;

Ashraf, Bandiera and Jack, 2014; Ahmed et al., 2012). Furthermore, compared to citizens, who typically

face power differentials and collective action problems in monitoring and sanctioning political leaders, civil

society leaders may be better positioned to employ social sanctions (Tendler, 1997, p. 66-69).

    In addition, civil society leaders may operate as a ﬁre alarm to alert higher level authorities to poor


                                                       8
village-level governance (McCubbins and Schwartz, 1984). The idea of ﬁre alarm, which ﬁts with the stan-

dard shirking model, presumes that the principal has difﬁculty observing the agent’s efforts due to costly

monitoring. Compared to higher level authorities, local civil society leaders may be able to observe the

behaviors of village heads more easily. In contexts in which civil society leaders can communicate trans-

gressions to superordinate political leaders who will then sanction bad behavior, this may motivate local

leaders to improve their actions.4 In this way, monitoring by civil society leaders may feed into top-down

pressures for reform.

    Finally, civil society leaders can also coordinate sanctions from the community as a whole. In communi-

ties facing large collective action dilemmas with regard to both observing transgressions by local leaders and

then mobilizing to hold them accountable, civil society leaders can play a critical facilitating role (Popkin,

1979). In this way, civil society leaders can activate bottom-up pressures.

    It should be noted that most of these mechanisms depend on civil society leaders having incentives to

implement reforms. Especially given our non-normative deﬁnition of civil society leaders, this is likely

to vary among places and among different civil society leaders. In contexts where leaders do not have

adequate incentives to push for reforms, they may collude with or be co-opted by government (Mattingly,

2016). However, in many places, the diversity of interests among village elites will create a constituency for

reform within this group (Tendler, 1997).

    Our primary goal in this paper is to test the effectiveness of mobilizing village-level civil society leaders

to press for local government reform, assuming that any such effects could occur through either one (or

a combination) of the afore-discussed channels. Although we present preliminary evidence on the mech-

anisms through which civil society leaders inﬂuence local governance, we cannot deﬁnitively adjudicate

between mechanisms, and indeed, it is quite likely that more than one mechanism is at work.
   4
     In this regard, community leaders may be playing the same theoretical role as the cheap mobile moni-
toring in the Niger experiment by Aker, Ksoll et al. (2015), which was shown to contribute to adult education
outcomes. However, the Cilliers et al. (2016) study on locally monitored performance of teachers in Ugan-
dan primary schools suggests that monitoring by itself may be inadequate to induce desired behaviors. In
their study, effects on teacher attendance were the result of monitoring combined with ﬁnancial incentives,
rather than monitoring alone.




                                                       9
3       Village-Level Governance in Zimbabwe

Village governance in Zimbabwe has been resistant to pressures from either above or below. Villages are

led by village heads; local leaders who allocate land, run village courts and help to broker a wide range of

development programs, including food aid distribution. There are an estimated 24,000 village heads across

Zimbabwe (Zamchiya, 2011). These leaders remain the most important point of contact for most rural

villagers (Ncube, 2011), but they are frequently accused of bias and abuse of power.

    The possibility for bottom-up reform is limited due to the fact that these leaders are not subject to regular

election. The vast majority of these leaders inherit their positions from within their village’s founding

family and rule for life.5 Community members have little formal recourse against village heads who govern

poorly, although they may be able to apply social or moral pressure under some circumstances. Importantly,

Shona village heads have traditionally worked with a handful of senior kinsmen to hear disputes and make

decisions, and these councils of advisers historically provided a check on their decision-making.(Bourdillon,

1976, p. 79).

    The possibility for effective top-down reform has been constrained by central government’s capacity and

incentives. At independence in 1980, the Zimbabwean government was committed to reigning in patrimonial

village-level governance. However, as the state became more politicized, this may have further complicated

the central government’s interactions with village heads.6 At that time, lack of capacity made it difﬁcult for

the central government to check the power of village-level leaders.

    Speciﬁcally, in the 1980s, the Zimbabwean government tried to reduce the inﬂuence of village-level

traditional leaders by stripping them of powers. It set up 6-member elected village-level development com-

mittees – VIDCOs – which were intended to check the power of village heads and push forward legal and

agricultural reforms. Interestingly, two of the six members of VIDCOs were supposed to be chosen by civil

society organizations to represent women and youths (Munro, 1998, p.243). However, in most rural com-
    5
      Our survey asked the current village head when and why the previously village head was removed from
ofﬁce. The vast majority of village heads ruled until they died or were bed-ridden by illness; only 5 percent
of village heads had been removed for reasons related to performance or community divisions. Similarly,
94 percent of the village heads in our sample said they did not fear being demoted by anyone, including
community members and government ofﬁcials.
    6
      The government of national unity formed following the contentious 2009 elections made little differ-
ence to this general trend.


                                                      10
munities, the government proved unable to reduce the power of village heads (Alexander, 1996, p.187). The

Report of Land Tenure Commission, published in 1994, concluded that village heads remained much more

powerful than VIDCOs and continued to perform wide-ranging functions (Ncube, 2011, p.94). Another

study noted that where VIDCOs were successful, it was because they served as advisers to rather than rivals

to the village head (Munro, 1998, p.270).

    Since the mid-1990s, the government has focused on trying to regulate village heads, rather than creating

parallel institutional structures. Village heads now have ofﬁcial recognition and receive small salaries of

$25 per month from the state. They have ofﬁcial duties per Zimbabwean law, including collecting levies and

taxes, maintaining an up-to-date population register, and allocating land. There are regulations regarding

the procedures through which they are supposed to make decisions and how to treat villagers. However,

village heads continue to have much more de facto power than they do under the law, and they frequently do

not follow regulated procedures. Indeed, many village heads have retained a measure of independence from

both formal legal regulations and informal partisan pressures to support Zimbabwe’s ruling party. Village

heads are much more divided in their political loyalties than higher-level traditional leaders, who have been

more thoroughly co-opted by state patronage.7

    The main complaints against village heads are that they abuse their power by allowing their personal

interests and biases to enter into their decision-making. In particular, they do not follow regulations requiring

broader consultation before making decisions and they are frequently accused of self-interested behavior

and favoritism, especially, in Zimbabwe’s polarized political system, along partisan lines.8 Village heads

are often accused of favoring their co-partisans in food distribution and court cases. Importantly, many but

not all of these complaints are against village heads afﬁliated with the ruling party; village heads afﬁliated
   7
      An underground pro-democracy organization in Zimbabwe, Sokwanele, attempted to collect compre-
hensive information on the political afﬁliations of traditional leaders in three constituencies in Manicaland
that experienced violence during the 2008 elections. In their sample, 89 percent of higher-level traditional
leaders (chiefs and headmen) were supporters of the ruling party, 0 percent were supported the main op-
position, with the remaining 11 percent considered politically “neutral”; in contrast, 69 percent of village
heads were supporters of the ruling party and 31 percent of the main opposition. See Sokwanele (2011).
When we asked the village heads in our survey an open-ended question about whether they felt close to any
“masangano”, a Shona term for organization that connotes both political and non-political organizations,
44 percent of village heads in our sample said that they felt close to the ruling party, 13 percent said that
they felt close to an opposition party and 43 percent did not offer a political response, either because they
did not feel politically afﬁliated or because they self-censored in response to the question.
    8
      For more on the politicization of all spheres of life in Zimbabwe, see LeBas (2006).


                                                       11
with opposition parties are also regularly accused of partisanship.9

    An interview with the local church leader in one of our study villages clearly demonstrates the perils of

village heads having unchecked power:

    “[The village head’s] way of dispute management was frightening offenders and people were afraid to

bring issues to the dare [village head’s court]. He had advisers at the dare but he hardly consulted them or the

villagers when resolving cases. He had the ultimate decision-making powers and used political statements to

intimidate people on the dare. The disadvantage of this process was that it was only the village head with all

the unregulated power to pass resolutions without the people’s contributions. There were biased resolutions

done on political lines.”10

    This anecdote describes how village heads can fail to follow procedures that could potentially check

their power, and how – in the Zimbabwean context – this is associated with favoritism along partisan lines.

To assess how broadly village heads fail to follow regulations intended to increase consultation and curb bias,

we consider village heads’ adherence to ﬁve regulated procedures in our study control villages. According

to Zimbabwean regulations, village heads are supposed to consult other village institutions prior to making

certain decisions, including the local resource management council and the local women’s council, they are

supposed to include women in decision-making, they are supposed to make their court’s decisions available

to the public, and they are not allowed to accept payments from citizens when hearing cases. However, as

table 1 indicates, most village heads reported that they did not follow regulated procedures prior to exposure

to the intervention at the center of this study. In particular, we observe low levels of consultation with

other village institutions and women in particular, and a high tendency to take illegal payments for hearing

disputes. Village heads did well only in the area of making court decisions publicly available.

    We also draw on household survey data from our control villages to consider whether there is systematic

evidence that village heads are (or are perceived to be) biased against villagers who share different political

opinions in the distribution of food aid and the resolution of court cases. Respondents are coded as having

different political opinions from the village head based on their responses to a direct question about this.11
   9
      See Sokwanele (2011, p. 11).
  10
      Interview with community leader in village 31729.
   11
      Speciﬁcally, respondents were asked whether they agreed or disagreed with the statement “My own
political views are very similar to those of the village head.” Unfortunately, even though the district author-
ities initially approved a questionnaire containing this question, we were asked to remove it two-thirds of the


                                                      12
               Table 1: Village Heads’ Adherence to Regulated Procedures (Control Group)

                                                                  Mean in Control Group        N

               Consultation of resource management council                0.389               126
               Consultation of women’s council                            0.226               124
               Proportion of female dare members                          0.262               125
               Access to records                                          0.645               124
               No payments                                                0.336               119
               Table reports means of each variable in the villages that did not receive
               any training in year 1.




In table 2, we observe that the amount of bias in favor of the village head’s co-partisans is actually relatively

small (and statistically insigniﬁcant) in the case of food aid distribution – people who said they had different

political views from their village head were only ﬁve percentage points less likely to receive food aid than

people who said they had the same political views as their village head.      12   However, we ﬁnd substantial

perceived bias in the case of court decisions; people with different political views from their village head

were 20 percentage points less likely to believe that most of the village court’s decisions were fair and 8

percentage points less likely to take the most common local disputes – disputes over the destruction of crops

by livestock – to them for resolution.

    Thus, the widespread bias in village heads’ decision-making gives many citizens grievances against

them. The question of how to reform village-level governance is tricky because of the low potential for

top-down reform and the weak mechanisms in place for achieving change from the bottom up. Instead, the

intervention described in the next section draws on the tradition of senior community members providing

advice to village heads as a potential mechanism of reform.
way through surveying, so we do not have data on this question for one-third of respondents. Fortunately,
because the survey was proceeding geographically and we randomized by geographic blocks, the sample is
still well balanced across experimental arms. In table 8 of the appendix, we consider how the villages for
which we have political data differ from the villages for which we do not.
   12
      Interestingly, these results are not simply the result of the village head’s personal biases being over-
whelmed by biases against opposition supporters. There is even less evidence that supporters of the ruling
party are favored in the distribution of food aid in our study villages, as indicated in the results in table 2
of the appendix. Much of the food aid in these villages comes from international organizations, which may
explain the limited bias.


                                                       13
                    Table 2: Biases in Village-Level Decision Making (Control Group)

                                      Different Political View   Same Political View     Difference     N

    Received Food Aid Last Year                0.420                     0.466              0.046      632
                                              (0.036)                   (0.024)            (0.043)
    Believe Most Decisions by                  0.439                     0.634            0.200***     619
    Village Head’s Court Fair                 (0.036)                   (0.023)            (0.043)
    Took Case to Village Head’s                0.396                     0.472             0.076*      453
    Court if Had Dispute                      (0.032)                   (0.025)            (0.042)
    The ﬁrst two columns report means with standard errors below in parentheses. The third
    column reports the differences between column two and column three, with the standard
    error of the difference reported in parentheses below. Only villages that did not receive
    any training in year 1 are included in the calculations.




4    Intervention and Research Design

We study the effectiveness of horizontal pressure in reforming village-level governance in Zimbabwe by

comparing two variants of a training intervention for village heads. An international NGO working in rural

Manicaland noted that many village heads in the region were not following regulations or recognizing best

practices when making decisions and they worried that this was both increasing the bias of their decisions

and decreasing the legitimacy of their leadership. The concern was that any bias in the village head’s

decision-making is problematic both insofar as it violates norms regarding impartiality but also because it

decreases their ability to manage village problems. For example, if village heads provide food aid on the

basis of partisanship rather than objective need, it reduces their effectiveness in addressing food security

issues. If village heads adjudicate cases in a biased manner, it may reduce the effectiveness of their courts in

resolving local disputes. More generally, village heads who are more biased and less efﬁcacious in managing

village problems may have their legitimacy reduced, thereby leading to a vicious cycle in which citizens’

poor perceptions of them make it difﬁcult for them to resolve village issues (Levi, 1988; Levi and Sachs,

2009; Levi, Sachs and Tyler, 2009).

    As a result, the international NGO worked with a local NGO to develop a series of training sessions

that would inform village heads of the regulations governing their activities and “best practices” in conﬂict


                                                        14
management techniques. The training sessions were divided into two three-day modules, with about a three-

month gap in between the two sessions. In one variant of the training session, only the village head attended.

But, due to concerns that simply informing village heads of the laws regulating their activities would not be

sufﬁcient to change their behavior, there was also a second variant of the training sessions in which another

community leader was trained alongside the village head on the rules constraining them. By comparing

the effectiveness of these two variants, we can parse the effects of civil society leader involvement from the

effects of training the village head. This effect is estimated contingent on the village head also being trained,

as it was not deemed feasible to have a third variant of the intervention in which only the community leader

was trained.

    Crucially, both the timing and the variant of the training to which villages were exposed were randomly

assigned. Speciﬁcally, we randomly selected the villages that would be trained in the ﬁrst year of the

analysis, and those that would not be trained until year 2. Then, within the villages selected for training

in year 1, we randomly determined in which villages only the village head would be trained and in which

villages both the village head and a community leader would be trained. At the end of the ﬁrst year of

training, the year 2 villages served as the comparison group to determine the effectiveness of each training

variant.

    In total, 270 villages were included in the randomized roll-out of the intervention. The roll-out of the

two interventions across villages is described in table 3. Randomization was done by blocks of villages in

the same ward and on the same land classiﬁcation to improve the likelihood of achieving balance across

the experimental group. Balance statistics, which are compiled in Table 1 of the appendix, indicate good

balance across treatment arms.

    Compliance with treatment assignment was very high. Fully 96 percent of the village heads assigned

to the “village head only” training attended the sessions, 98 percent of the village heads assigned to the

“village head plus civil society leader” training attended, and only 1 percent of the village heads assigned to

the “no training” variant attended training sessions. Similarly, 97 percent of civil society leaders assigned to

the “village head plus civil society leader” training attended sessions, and civil society leaders from just 4

percent of the villages assigned to the “village head only” training and 1 percent of the villages assigned to

“no training” attended training sessions.


                                                       15
                                      Table 3: Roll-Out of Intervention

                                                             Number of Villages

                                No training in year 1               136

                                Training for VH only                69

                                Training for VH + CL                65




    The civil society leaders invited to attend the sessions were required to be from the “non-traditional”

sector, and included village health workers, representatives of farmers’ groups, church leaders, represen-

tatives of NGOs and school development committee members.13 These same sets of leaders have often

been represented on VIDCOs and tasked with implementing reforms via that institution (Munro, 1998, p.

308-314, 340-324). The expectation was that these leaders would provide a constituency for reform because

they had less stake in the traditional system than the village head. Indeed, table 4 compares data from our

surveys of village heads and our surveys of a representative sample of civil society leaders in these villages

to show that – on average – civil society leaders are more pro-reform than village heads.14

    Speciﬁcally, the top panel of table 4 shows that civil society leaders are often from demographic groups

who would beneﬁt from the reform of village-level governance. For example, a majority of civil society

leaders in these village are female. In addition, they are younger and less likely to be visible supporters of

the ruling party than the village head (as measured by whether they had a sign displayed outside their home

during our interviews, which were shortly after the 2013 elections). At the same time, the proﬁle of the

average civil society leader suggests low power differentials between them and the village head. They are

signiﬁcantly more educated than village heads, and they report higher levels of income and wealth. These

ﬁndings suggest civil society leaders often have both an interest in and the ability to check the village head’s

power. We also ﬁnd that 57 percent of all civil society leaders have a family relationship to the village head.
  13
      The exact breakdown of the civil society leaders who were selected to participate in the sessions is
indicated in table 6 of the appendix.
   14
      We exclude dare members, who were included in the survey but not eligible for the training, from the
sample of civil society leaders described in this table.



                                                        16
In many contexts this would suggest a favored relationship between these two leaders. However, in the

villages we study 50 percent of all households were related to the village head.

     The bottom panel of table 4 further considers whether civil society leaders can realistically be viewed

as a mechanism for checking the power of village heads by comparing the attitudes and legal knowledge of

village heads and civil society leaders prior to the intervention (by looking at the statistics for control villages

only). Importantly, a slight majority of civil society leaders favored checks on the power of the village head’s

court. In addition, civil society leaders express signiﬁcantly higher levels of support for individual rights

than village heads.15 Knowledge of the laws and procedures regulating village governance is approximately

equal between village heads and civil society leaders.

     This evidence suggests that the average civil society leader in these villages has both the incentive and

the ability to check the power of village heads. However, it is noteworthy that the NGO depended on the

village head to identify civil society leaders living in his or her village, and to select which one to invite. Our

expectation was that this would reduce the probably of ﬁnding differential effects across the two training

variants insofar as village heads should choose to invite civil society leaders over whom they have more

inﬂuence. In table 6 in the appendix, we compare the traits of the trained civil society leaders to our random

sample. We ﬁnd village heads were more likely to invite female leaders and NGO ofﬁcers to accompany

them and less likely to invite religious leaders; these patterns are interesting insofar as they suggest village

heads chose people who likely had an interest in reform but perhaps had weaker independent power bases.



5        Data Collection and Measurement of Key Variables

We conducted surveys of village heads, a randomly selected civil society leader, and a random sample of

eight households in each of the villages in the study three months following the completion of the training

sessions, in late August and early September 2013. We contracted a local survey ﬁrm to conduct the survey

after training from the research team. We were able to conduct household surveys in each of the 270 villages

and to interview the village head in 91 percent of them. We also interviewed a randomly selected civil society

leader in 96 percent of villages. Most questions on the questionnaires were closed-ended and retrospectively
    15
   The differences in support for individual rights and beliefs about whether the dare should have more
power are both statistically signiﬁcant at the 95 percent conﬁdence level.


                                                        17
         Table 4: Comparing Village Heads to Civil Society Leaders

                                         Village Head   Civil Society Leader

Demographics, Economic Status and Partisanship (All Villages)

Female                                       0.07                0.58
                                            (0.25)              (0.49)
Average Age (Years)                          64.1                51.7
                                            (15.7)              (14.2)
Sign for Ruling Party                        0.30                0.16
                                            (0.46)              (0.37)
Finished Primary Education                   0.69                0.86
                                            (0.46)              (0.35)
Average Income ($)                           959.7            1023.7
                                           (1537.5)          (1806.8)
Average Cattle Wealth                        2.98               4.30
                                            (3.69)            (28.45)
Related to Village Head                                          0.57
                                                                (0.50)

Knowledge and Opinions (Control Villages Only)

Dare Should Have More Power                  0.73                0.47
(0-1)                                       (0.45)              (0.50)
Average Support for Individual Rights        2.86                2.98
(1-4)                                       (0.40)              (0.41)
Average Knowledge of Law                     0.66                0.69
(0-1)                                       (0.23)              (0.21)
Table reports means with standard deviations below in parentheses.
The means in the top panel aggregate data from 247 village heads
and 196 community leaders across all villages. The means in the bottom
panel aggregate data from 128 village heads and 95 community leaders in
the control villages.




                                    18
self-reported.

    In Zimbabwe, individuals’ political opinions are often a very sensitive issue and members of the public

are often reluctant to express these openly (Bratton, 2011; LeBas, 2006). As a result, the study was de-

signed and implemented to ensure multiple levels of protection for respondents. For example, to protect

respondents, we collected identifying information on separate cover sheets that could not be linked back to

the main surveys in the ﬁeld. To maintain conﬁdentiality of village heads and villages as a whole, we used

codes for different communities, which were ﬁlled out in advance before teams entered the ﬁeld to avoid

sending the codebook into the ﬁeld. In addition, we used prompts not recorded on the survey instrument and

alphabetic and numeric codes to record responses to sensitive questions.

    We are interested in the effects of the intervention on a sequence of outcomes. First, we study the

effectiveness of the intervention in reforming the processes governing decision-making at the village level,

making it less based on the personal preferences of the village head and more respectful of legal regulations

and individual rights. In addition, we study whether the intervention made village-level leaders fairer and

more effective in managing local problems, and whether they increased their legitimacy.

    To measure local governance reforms, we measure the knowledge of village heads of legal regulations,

the support village heads express for individual rights, and their adherence to regulated procedures. We

measured knowledge by asking village heads six questions about the regulations governing their activities;

the measure used in our analysis is the proportion of questions they answered correctly. We measured

the attitudes of village heads toward individual rights by asking them about their level of agreement with

statements in support of three speciﬁc rights on a four-point scale. Finally, we measure village head’s

adherence to recommended procedures by asking them a series of questions about whether they consulted

other organizations in the village (speciﬁcally, the resource management council and the council of women),

the proportion of their court made up of women, whether they took payments for hearing cases and whether

they made records of their court decisions publicly available. Due to concerns that those who attended the

training sessions may have been more likely to know the desired outcomes to these questions and report

that they were following them even if they were not, we also asked community leaders about the procedures

followed by their village head. Some community leaders do not have detailed or up-to-date information on

the village head’s procedures, so this second measure is less subject to demand effects but more noisy.


                                                     19
    To measure the fairness and effectiveness of village heads in managing local problems, we consider

village-level outcomes in two issue areas where they are typically involved: the distribution of food aid

and the handling of land and livestock disputes.16 The most prevalent type of bias that features in village

head’s decision-making in Zimbabwe is bias against political opponents. As table 2 showed, individuals

who report having different political opinions from their village head are signiﬁcantly less likely to view

the village head’s court to be a neutral mechanism for resolving disputes. In contrast, we do not observe

similar divisions of opinion across gender lines or ethnic lines.17 As a result, we measure whether the two

interventions reduced bias by looking at their effects on household survey respondents who reported having

different political views from their village head.18 We measure bias in food aid distribution by examining

the likelihood of people with different political views from the village head receiving food aid, a measure

of bias in real outcomes. We examine perceived bias in dispute resolution, measured as the likelihood of

people with different political views from the village head viewing most decisions by the village head’s

court as fair.19

    We also measure the efﬁcacy of the village head in solving problems in both these areas. We measure

the effectiveness of village processes in reducing food insecurity by measuring the effect of households’

measured need on their likelihood of receiving maize food aid in the past year, where our measure of need is

based on whether respondents in the household survey reported they had enough grain to feed their family

after either harvesting it or buying it on the market.20 In villages where the village head is more effective

in using available food aid to reduce food insecurity, we expect that the need of a household will be a more
  16
      Because the involvement of the village head in these issue areas is the result of strategic processes, we
cannot exclude the subset of cases in which they are not involved in estimating our effects.
   17
      These results are reported in tables 3 and 4 of the appendix.
   18
      For the purposes of this study, we treat difference in reported political views as an exogenous covari-
ate; although it is theoretically possible that people could have changed their response to this question in
response to the intervention, we have empirically assessed whether individuals who give this response differ
across the arms of the experiment, and we have found no evidence that this is the case. These results are
reported in table 7 of the appendix.
   19
      If the village head actually reduces bias against political opponents, individuals who share the village
head’s views will likely start to receive less favorable treatment. For this reason, we measure the likelihood
of receiving food aid and believing court cases to be fair on the village head’s political opponents only.
Note that we cannot identify the effect of the intervention on whether the decisions of the village head’s
courts are actually more biased against political opponents; this outcome can only be measured over people
who have disputes and also choose to take them to the village head, and the characteristics of this subset of
people might be affected by the intervention.
   20
      We provide further details on this measure in section 6 of the appendix.

                                                      20
important factor in determining who receives food aid; therefore we estimate the effect of this variable under

different treatment arms. We measure the efﬁcacy of the village head in managing disputes by measuring

the likelihood of respondents in their village stating that they had an unsatisfactorily resolved land or crop

destruction dispute in the past year. When examining the village head’s efﬁcacy in managing disputes, we

estimate the effect of each variant of the intervention on the likelihood of having unsatisfactorily resolved

disputes across all respondents. We do not restrict our analysis to respondents who report having disputes

in the past year, because the efﬁciency of the village-level dispute resolution processes could conceivably

change whether disputes emerge in the ﬁrst place.

    Finally, we measure the amount of legitimacy that citizens accord to village heads, following Tyler

(2006, p. 375)’s deﬁnition of legitimacy as the belief that institutions or authorities are “appropriate, proper,

and just” which thereby leads citizens that hold these beliefs to feel obliged to obey their rules and require-

ments. Empirically, we measure these aspects of legitimacy by asking citizens questions related to their

evaluations of the village head’s authority and their compliance with village-level institutions. Speciﬁcally,

to get at the evaluative component, we asked respondents about the trustworthiness of their village head and

the quality of their own relationship with the village head. To get at levels of compliance, we asked citizens

about the disposition of villagers in general to obey the village head and their own willingness to comply

with the village head’s institutions.

    For the most part, we report outcomes on easily interpretable scales, such as the percentage of test

questions answered correctly or the proportion of respondents with unresolved disputes. However, in cases

where we combine multiple variables measured on different scales to capture one of the outcomes of interest,

we create mean effects indices, following the approach pioneered by Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007). The

full list of outcomes we consider, how we measured each outcome, and the survey instruments used to

measure them are listed in table 5. The main analysis in this study was pre-registered with Evidence in

Governance and Politics (EGAP), and we note any departures from the pre-registered analysis in section 8

of the appendix.




                                                       21
                               Table 5: Outcomes and Measurement


Outcome                  Measurement                                      Scale            Survey

VH’s knowledge of laws   Proportion of questions answered                 0-1              VH Survey
and regulations          correctly about laws and regulations
                         governing village head’s decision-
                         making (i.e. are there are restrictions
                         on the disputes committed within
                         their geographic jurisdiction over
                         which traditional leaders can preside?)

VH’s support for         Average stated support for three                 1-4              VH Survey
individual rights        individual rights (right to speak in defense
                         at court hearings, inheritence rights, and
                         right to protections from arbitrary authority)

VH’s adherence to        Index measuring whether the VH                   Standardized     VH Survey
procedures               adheres to ﬁve procedures (consultation          index (mean=0,   (and CL Survey)
                         of RMC, consultation of women’s council,         s.d. = 1)
                         % women on court, no court fees, public
                         court records)

Bias in VH’s decisions   Proportion of respondents with different         0-1              HH Survey
                         political views who received food aid
                         Proportion of respondents with different         0-1              HH Survey
                         political views who perceived most court
                         decisions to be fair

Efﬁcacy of management    Effect of need on receipt of food aid            OLS regression   HH Survey
of problems by VH                                                         coefﬁcient

                         Proportion of respondents with unresolved        0-1              HH Survey
                         land or livestock disputes

Legitimacy of VH         Index measuring evaluations of VH                Standardized     HH Survey
                         (trustworthiness, quality of relationship)       index (mean=0,
                         and compliance with VH (perceptions of           s.d.=1)
                         disposition to obey within village,
                         compliance with VH’s court)




                                                 22
6        Main Results

We estimate the effects of horizontal pressure from civil society leaders by comparing the effects of the

variant of the intervention that included civil society leaders to the effects of the variant of the intervention

that did not include them. In other words, it is the difference in the effects of the two interventions that is the

quantity of greatest interest to us. In tables 6, 7, 9 and 10 below, we estimate the effects of each intervention

and their differential effects using the following equation:



                                         y = β0 + β1 V H + β2 CL + αj +                                           (1)

where VH is a dummy variable indicating whether the village head was assigned to be trained in either

variant of the intervention, CL is a dummy variable indicating whether the community leader was also

assigned to be trained, and αj are strata ﬁxed effects for the strata used in the lottery.21 For outcomes

measured at the individual level, we replace y with yi and          with   i,   and the standard errors are clustered

at the village level. The effect of the training intervention for the village head alone is β1 , the effect of the

training intervention for the village head and a community leader is β1 + β2 , and the additional effect of the

civil society leader is β2 . The tables below present the mean outcomes in villages not exposed to any variant

of the intervention followed by all three of these effects.

     Table 6 considers whether the inclusion of civil society leaders led to improvements in the village head’s

knowledge, adherence to procedures, and attitudes toward rights. Interestingly, training the village head

alone resulted in little change in any of these outcomes. Village heads did not even have improved knowledge

of the regulations governing their activities three months after the training sessions had been completed.

Village heads reported following only one of ﬁve procedures emphasized during the training sessions with

signiﬁcantly greater frequency following the training sessions (the consultation of the resource management

council), and the effect of the training on adherence to two procedures (consultation of the women’s council

and access to records) was negative. As a result, the overall effect of training the village head alone on our

procedural index is close to zero. The training for the village head alone also had little effect on their stated

support for individual rights.
    21
         Table 8 uses a slightly different estimation strategy, described in detail below.


                                                          23
                      Table 6: Changes in Knowledge, Rights and Processes of VH


                                         Control Mean      Effect of VH   Effect of VH     CL Effect   N
                                         (and St. Dev.)      Training     + CL Training

Knowledge test score (0-1)                    0.661           -0.004         0.071**        0.075*     245
                                             (0.231)          (0.03)         (0.035)        (0.041)

Support for rights (1-4)                      2.859           -0.004          -0.014         -0.010    247
                                             (0.402)         (0.061)          (0.065)       (0.075)

Procedures (Mean effects index)                0.0            0.106          0.581***      0.475**     247
                                              (1.0)          (0.157)          (0.168)      (0.194)
Consultation of resource management           0.389          0.169**         0.179**         0.010     241
council (0/1)                                (0.489)         (0.077)         (0.082)        (0.095)
Consultation of women’s council (0/1)         0.226           -0.069         0.151**       0.220***    238
                                             (0.420)         (0.066)         (0.072)        (0.082)
Proportion of women on dare (0-1)             0.262           0.025           0.053*         0.027     236
                                             (0.019)         (0.027)          (0.030)       (0.034)
Do not charge fee (0/1)                       0.336           0.05.8         0.160**         0.102     233
                                             (0.474)         (0.075)         (0.080)        (0.092)
Access to records (0/1)                       0.645           -0.102          0.005          0.107     239
                                             (0.480)         (0.071)         (0.076)        (0.088)
Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the
90, 95 and 99 percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




                                                      24
    In contrast, the variant of the intervention in which a civil society leader was trained alongside the village

head signiﬁcantly improved both the knowledge of the village head and their adherence to procedures. It

improved the village head’s score on the knowledge questions by seven percentage points, an effect that

is statistically signiﬁcant at the 95 percent conﬁdence interval. It also resulted in better adherence to four

of ﬁve procedures; the overall effect of training both the village head and the community leader on our

procedural index is large – more than half a standard deviation – and statistically signiﬁcant at the 99

percent conﬁdence level. However, the village head’s expressed attitudes towards individual rights were not

signiﬁcantly improved by the variant of the intervention that included a civil society leader.

    Given our interest in the effectiveness of horizontal pressure on village-level reforms, the effect of great-

est theoretical interest to us is the differential effect caused by including a community leader in the training.

Table 6 shows this resulted in greater knowledge acquisition (an eight percentage point improvement in

their knowledge score, which is statistically signiﬁcant at the 90 percent level). In addition, it caused a large

improvement in adherence to procedures (an improvement of half a standard deviation in our index, which

is statistically signiﬁcant at the 95 percent conﬁdence level). The latter ﬁnding is unlikely to be the result

of demand effects (changes in learning the correct answer, rather than changes in adherence to procedures)

because we ﬁnd largely similar effects (though only signiﬁcant at the 90 percent level) when using the vari-

able constructed from the community leader’s responses, rather than the village head’s responses.22 This

indicates that that the training of civil society leaders resulted in village heads both being more aware of

regulations and in being more likely to follow them.

    But did the empowerment of civil society leaders simply improve procedural adherence or did it also

change the outcomes of village-level governance? In particular, we are interested in whether horizontal pres-

sure from civil society leaders can reduce the ability of village heads to make decisions based on personal

biases and thereby improve their efﬁcacy in managing problems in two areas where they are particularly

inﬂuential: food aid and dispute resolution.

    Table 7 shows the effects of both variants of the training and the additional effect of training a community

leader on the likelihood of individuals with different political views from their village head reporting their

household received food aid and perceiving most of the village head’s court decisions to be fair. In both
  22
       The results are reported in table 10 of the appendix.


                                                       25
instances, there is little effect of training the village head alone. The effect of training a community leader

alongside a village head is larger, improving the likelihood of receiving food aid by 15 percentage points and

the likelihood of perceiving a decision as as fair by 11 percentage points, both effects that are statistically

signiﬁcant at the 90 percent conﬁdence level; however, the additional effect of training a community leader

is not quite statistically signiﬁcant in either instance.

                                       Table 7: Bias in Decision Making



                                               Control Mean     Effect of VH   Effect of VH      CL Effect         N
                                               (and St. Dev.)     Training     + CL Training

 Whether received food aid given                    0.420          0.011           0.145*           0.134      363
 different political views (0/1)                   (0.496)        (0.065)          (0.078)         (0.089)
 Whether perceived most court decisions             0.439          0.001           0.114*           0.105      360
 fair given different political views (0/1)        (0.497)        (0.071)          (0.060)         (0.076)
 Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the
 90, 95 and 99 percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




    Next we consider whether horizontal pressure improved the village head’s efﬁcacy in managing food

security in his or her village. We measure this by examining how large the effect of households’ need for

food is on their likelihood of receiving food across different arms of the intervention. To do this, we estimate

interaction effects between each arm of the treatment and households’ need using the following equation:



            yi = β0 + β1 V H + β2 CL + γ0 needi + γ1 V H ∗ needi + γ2 CL ∗ needi + αj +           i          (2)

where needi is a dummy variable indicating whether the household reported having sufﬁcient food from

their own harvest and market purchases, the standard errors are clustered at the village level, and the effects

of interest are γ1 , γ1 + γ2 and γ2 . Table 8 shows that need does not play a signiﬁcantly or substantively

larger role in determining who receives food aid in villages where only the village head was trained. It plays

a much larger positive role in communities in which both the village head and a civil society leader were

trained, although the interaction effect is not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels in this instance


                                                        26
either. The additional effect of training a civil society leader on the role of need in determining who receives

food aid is positive but statistically insigniﬁcant.

                                     Table 8: Efﬁcacy of Food Aid Distribution


                        Effect of Need       Effect of Need           Effect of Need        Effect of Need    N
                       (Control Group)     due to VH Training    due to VH + CL Training      due to CL
 Effect of need on          -0.014               -0.012                    0.081                0.094        2119
 receipt of food aid       (0.033)              (0.060)                   (0.058)              (0.070)
 Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the
 90, 95 and 99 percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




    In table 9, we consider whether the training of civil society leaders improved the village head’s efﬁcacy

in managing disputes, estimating the effects of interest using equation 1. Speciﬁcally, we examine how likely

a household is to have had a land or livestock dispute in the past year that they consider unsatisfactorily

resolved; these are the two most common types of civil disputes in this area of Zimbabwe. Interestingly, we

ﬁnd that households are slightly more likely to have an unsatisfactorily resolved land or livestock dispute

in villages in which only the village head received training, an effect that is substantively fairly large –

a 28 percent increase – but not statistically signiﬁcant. In contrast, households are less likely to have an

unsatisfactorily resolved land or livestock disputes in villages in which both the village head and another

civil society leader were trained, an effect that is substantively even larger – a 32 percent decrease – though

also statistically insigniﬁcant. Together, this means the additional effect of training a community leader on

reducing the proportion of households with unresolved disputes is large – a 59 percent decrease – which is

statistically signiﬁcant at the 95 percent conﬁdence level.

    Taken together, the evidence in tables 7, 8 and 9 suggest that the inclusion of a civil society leader in

the training sessions caused real improvements in village-level governance. The variant of the intervention

that included a community leader appears to have reduced bias against individuals holding different political

views from the village head in both food aid distribution and dispute resolution, and the civil society leader

variant of the intervention causes signiﬁcantly better dispute management than the training variant including

only village heads. Although many of the results are on the margins of statistical signiﬁcance, together they


                                                          27
                                  Table 9: Efﬁcacy of Resolution of Disputes



                                           Control Mean        Effect of VH   Effect of VH      CL Effect      N
                                           (and St. Dev.)        Training     + CL Training

 Unresolved land or livestock dispute            0.053            0.015           -0.017         -0.032**     1913
                                                (0.224)          (0.012)          (0.011)         (0.014)
 Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the
 90, 95 and 99 percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




tell a consistent story.

    The ﬁnal outcome we consider is the village head’s perceived legitimacy among citizens. The effects

of the two variants of the intervention and the added effect of training a civil society leader on households’

views of their village head’s legitimacy are reported in table 10. We report the effects both on our overall

index of legitimacy and the four sub-components of this index. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the effect of train-

ing the village head alone on our overall index of the village head’s legitimacy is negative but statistically

insigniﬁcant. The negative direction of the effect is driven by the fact that households reported worse rela-

tionships with the village head in these villages; training for the village head alone appears to have made

citizens as a whole slightly more suspicious of the village head. In contrast, the effect of training the village

head and a civil society leader on the overall index of a village head’s legitimacy is positive but statistically

insigniﬁcant. The additional effect of training a civil society leader on the overall index is positive and statis-

tically signiﬁcant at the 90 percent conﬁdence level. Speciﬁcally, the positive effect appears to be operating

mainly through the dimension of legitimacy related to trust, suggesting including civil society leaders in

training increases trust in the village head.

    Considering these results as a whole, we conclude that civil society leaders helped advance village-level

governance reforms. They increased adherence to regulations designed to increase consultation and reduce

corruption, they caused improvements in the outcomes of village-level governance, and they may even have

increased the perceived legitimacy of the village head among community members. Given the difﬁculty

of designing interventions that are effective in reforming local governance, these are important ﬁndings.


                                                          28
                                Table 10: Perceived Legitimacy of Village Head



                                                     Mean Control     Effect of VH    Effect of VH    CL Effect    N
                                                                        Training      + CL Training
 Legitimacy of VH (Mean effects index)                    0.00            -0.070             0.048     0.118*     2154
                                                         (1.00)          (0.061)            (0.056)    (0.067)
 How much trust VH to take right action (1-4)            3.547            -0.047             0.037     0.085*     2130
                                                        (0.728)          (0.042)            (0.043)    (0.049)
 Rating of relationship with VH (0-10)                   8.153          -0.288**             -0.085     0.202     1975
                                                        (2.127)          (0.138)            (0.122)    (0.152)
 How much think people in the village inﬂuenced          3.186            0.015              0.050      0.034     2114
 by the VH’s opinions (1-4)                             (0.817)          (0.046)            (0.044)    (0.051)
 Whether people say they would take a livestock          0.726            0.005              0.020      0.015     2150
 dispute to the VH’s court if they had one (0/1)        (0.446)          (0.029)            (0.025)    (0.032)
 Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the
 90, 95 and 99 percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




However, they beg the question of how civil society leaders had this impact. We turn to this in the next

section.



7     Mechanisms

The inclusion of civil society leaders in the training sessions for village heads could have resulted in reforms

to village governance through a variety of different mechanisms. In this section, we consider the evidence

in support of three mechanisms, ﬁrst outlined in ﬁgure 1. In particular, we examine whether civil society

leaders caused reform through (1) competition between the two sets of leaders, (2) capacity upgrading or (3)

increased monitoring. We probe the plausibility of each of these mechanisms using both quantitative and

qualitative evidence.


7.1   Quantitative evidence

First, we use our survey data to test observable implications of each mechanism, drawing on evidence from

our survey of village heads, households and especially civil society leaders. It is important to note that


                                                         29
the civil society leaders interviewed in our surveys are representative of community leaders within these

villages, but they are only rarely the leaders who were actually trained alongside the village head. In our

analysis, we focus on the effect of the intervention on all the independent civil society leaders included in

our sample, thereby capturing the extent of changes to this group of leaders in treated villages.23 The effect

of the intervention on civil society leaders as a group is both of theoretical interest in understanding the total

horizontal pressures on village heads, and it is an identiﬁable effect, in the sense that it is possible to measure

without knowing which civil society leader would have been selected for training had villages not assigned

to the civil society leader treatment arm instead been assigned to it. However, outcomes measured at this

level may not be sensitive enough to detect changes that affected only the trained civil society leader.24

    The ﬁrst mechanism through which civil society leaders could encourage reform is by competing with

the village head to offer services to villagers, thereby allowing villagers to select among them as service

providers and motivating both sets of leaders to offer better terms in order to keep clients. If competition

is the mechanism driving village-level reforms, we would expect to see an increase in civil society leaders

independently offering services in the same domains as the village head as a result of the training. In table 11,

we present data that suggests this did not generally occur. This top row shows other civil society leaders were

slightly less likely to be involved in distributing food aid in villages where a civil society leader was trained.

The second row shows that, across all treatment arms, household respondents rarely said they would take

land or livestock disputes to community leaders other than the village head for resolution, and the training

of a civil society leader had little additional effect. The bottom row shows that household respondents

were slightly less likely to contact civil society leaders other than the village head for assistance in villages

where a civil society leader was trained. Thus, civil society leaders do not appear to have improved local

governance by competing with the village head to provide services.

    The remaining two mechanisms – capacity upgrading and monitoring – are distinguished by the fact

that the ﬁrst involves only changing capacity to implement reforms the village head already favors and the

second also involves changing their incentives to implement reform. Both of these mechanisms share two

observable implications: the trained civil society leaders should have more information about village-level
  23
      In our survey of civil society leaders, we also sampled dare members. Because they were not eligible
to be the “civil society leader” included in the training, we exclude them from analyses in this section.
   24
      We estimate there were about 5 eligible civil society leaders per village.


                                                        30
                                       Table 11: Leadership Competition



                                                     Mean Control     Effect of VH     Effect of VH     CL Effect    N
                                                                        Training       + CL Training
 Whether community leaders involved in                    0.242           -0.008           -0.124        -0.116     195
 distributing food aid (0/1) (CL survey)                 (0.431)         (0.074)          (0.076)        (0.086)
 Whether HHs would take dispute (land/livestock)          0.025           -0.002           0.003          0.005     2154
 to CL for resolution (0/1) (HH survey)                  (0.156)         (0.007)          (0.009)        (0.008)
 Whether HHs ask CLs for assistance                       0.255           0.006            -0.033        -0.039     2151
 (0/1) (HH survey)                                       (0.436)         (0.026)          (0.029)        (0.030)
 Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99 percent
 conﬁdence levels respectively.




regulations and should interact more with village heads as a result of the intervention, in the ﬁrst instance

in order to help them implement reforms and in the second instance to monitor their behavior. Because our

data measures effects across civil society leaders as a whole in the study communities, not on the trained

civil society leaders speciﬁcally, we are underpowered with respect to identifying these effects. Even so,

table 12 shows that civil society leaders as a whole appear more informed of village regulations and more

likely to interact with the village head in villages subject to the civil society leader intervention.

    One unique observable implication of the human resource scarcity mechanism is that the effect of the

civil society leader intervention should have been particularly large in places that initially had particularly

low human resources. In table 13, we re-run the regressions in table 6 splitting the sample by villages with

high and low initial human resources as measured in turn by the education level of the village head, the

age of the village head and whether the village head’s dare consisted of more than four men. Interestingly,

the evidence suggests that, if anything, the effect of the intervention was higher in high human resource

communities. This is inconsistent with the human resource mechanism.

    The monitoring mechanism is distinguished from the human resource mechanism in that it involves

civil society leaders changing not just the capacity but the incentives of village heads to implement reform.

The ability of civil society leaders to affect change via monitoring depends on two things: (i) their ability to

observe and recognize transgressions by the village head, and (ii) their ability to levy sanctions on them. The


                                                         31
                Table 12: Civil Society Leader’s Information and Information Exchange



                                          Mean Control     Effect of VH    Effect of VH       CL Effect
                                                             Training      + CL Training

CL’s knowledge test score (0-1)                0.693           -0.018           0.064          0.082*     196
(CL survey)                                   (0.214)         (0.038)          (0.039)         (0.044)
No. of times exchange information              1.758           -0.268           0.433          0.701*     189
btwn CL and VH per week (CL survey)           (1.991)         (0.352)          (0.356)         (0.407)
Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99 percent
conﬁdence levels respectively.




                   Table 13: Civil Society Leader Effects by Human Resource Levels



                                    Knowledge of VH (0-1)            Procedural Compliance of VH (st. index)

Measure of human resource     CL Effect    CL Effect    Difference   CL Effect    CL Effect       Difference
level                         High HR      Low HR                    High HR      Low HR

Whether VH completed              0.072       0.076        0.004       0.793***      -0.137        -0.930**
primary education                (0.050)     (0.070)      (0.088)       (0.238)     (0.334)         (0.417)
Whether VH above 65               0.055       0.099        0.044        0.463*      0.490*           0.027
                                 (0.057)     (0.061)      (0.086)       (0.273)     (0.289)         (0.408)
VH has large court               0.126*       0.028        -0.098        0.722       0.263           -0.459
                                 (0.065)     (0.058)      (0.088)       (0.297)     (0.266)         (0.401)
Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99 percent
conﬁdence levels respectively.




                                                   32
intervention could increase monitoring pressures by increasing either of these variables; if the civil society

leader has the ability to sanction the village head, a change to the ﬁrst variable would be sufﬁcient to induce

change, and vice versa.

    Table 12 has already shown that civil society leaders were better able to identify the regulations gov-

erning the village head’s behavior and had more interaction with them as a result of the intervention. Next,

we consider whether the intervention also changed the ability of civil society leaders to trigger sanctions

against village heads. Civil society leaders could potentially trigger sanctions through three channels (1) by

using their own status vis-a-vis the village head to levy direct social pressure (2) by serving as a ﬁre alarm

activating sanctions from higher-level leaders or (3) by mobilizing the community as a whole to pressure

the village head. In table 14, we consider whether each of these channels was strengthened as a result of the

intervention.

    In the top panel of table 14, we consider whether the civil society leader variant of the intervention

increased the status of the civil society leader vis-a-vis the village head and therefore their ability to apply

direct social pressure for change. We have two measures of the status of civil society leaders – the likelihood

of the village head meeting civil society leaders at the civil society leaders’ homes (a proxy for the status

of the leaders compared to the village head) and whether civil society leaders perceived themselves to be

respected by all groups in their village (a measure of the status of the leaders in the community as a whole).

Again, we measure these changes across civil society leaders as a whole and so we are underpowered to

detect changes that affect the trained civil society leader only. Accepting this, the evidence in table 14

provides little support for the claim that the social standing of civil society leaders increased as a result of

being included in the training. In fact, the version of the training that excluded civil society leaders appears

to have increased the status of the village head vis-a-vis community leaders, and the inclusion of a civil

society leader only slightly mitigates this effect.

    In the middle panel of table 14, we consider whether the training of civil society leaders resulted in

the village head feeling more constrained by government and civil society leaders having higher levels of

communication with district administrators, the most powerful bureaucrat at the district level. Inconsistent

with the ﬁre alarm channel, we ﬁnd that the village head’s perceptions of their own independence from

government did not decrease as a result of civil society leaders’ inclusion, and the amount of information


                                                      33
exchanged between civil society leaders and the district administrator signiﬁcantly decreased when civil

society leaders were included in the sessions. Thus, civil society leaders may have been less able to activate

sanctions from above as a result of the intervention.25

      In the bottom panel of table 14, we consider whether the civil society leader variant of the intervention

increased the ability of civil society leaders to mobilize villagers to pressure the village head. If this were

the case, we would expect civil society leaders to play a bigger role in organizing community members as

a result of the intervention, and we might also expect villagers to have more information about the regula-

tions guiding village governance. Inconsistent with this sanctioning channel, the variant of the intervention

that included civil society leaders is associated with a substantively large, even if statistically insigniﬁcant,

reduction in organizational activity on the part of civil society leaders in the village. We also not ﬁnd any

evidence that the civil society leader variant of the intervention increased households’ knowledge of village

governance regulations.

      Thus, the evidence indicates the ability of civil society leaders to identify transgressions by the village

head increased as a result of the intervention, which by itself would be sufﬁcient to motivate reformed

behavior if civil society leaders were already in a position to trigger sanctions on village heads, whether

directly or indirectly. From the analysis above, it appears most likely that civil society leaders applied

direct social pressure to change behavior; these leaders typically already had high social standing in their

communities, even if we do not detect a measurable increase in status as a result of the intervention, and

their interactions with the village head increased as a result of the intervention. In contrast, the likelihood

of civil society leaders triggering pressure from above or below appears to have lessened as a result of the

intervention.


7.2     Qualitative Research

We also collected qualitative data from 10 villages for the purposes of better understanding mechanisms

of change. Because our main goal for this research was mechanism analysis, we selected 10 villages for

qualitative research that were “on the regression line” in the sense that there was little improvement in
  25
     We would expect civil society leaders to have higher levels of communication with superordinate polit-
ical leaders, at least until a new equilibrium is established, and recall that our survey was only three months
after the intervention ended.


                                                        34
                              Table 14: Monitoring and Sanctioning Processes



                                                  Mean Control     Effect of VH    Effect of VH      CL Effect
                                                                     Training      + CL Training
                               Civil Society Leader’s Status - Increased Direct Pressure
VH usually meets CL at CL’s home                       0.076         -0.075**           -0.060         0.015     191
(0/1) (CL survey)                                     (0.267)         (0.038)          (0.038)        (0.043)
CL’s perceptions of whether respected                  0.685           -0.048           0.001          0.046     193
by all in village (0/1) (CL survey)                   (0.467)         (0.083)          (0.085)        (0.097)

                                     Fire Alarm - Increased Pressure from Above
VH’s perceived independence from govt                  2.448           0.037            0.081          0.044     244
(1-4) (VH survey)                                     (0.996)         (0.149)          (0.159)        (0.182)
No. times per year exchange information                0.287          0.613**           -0.243       -0.857**    191
btwn CL and district administrator (CL survey)        (0.911)         (0.283)          (0.301)        (0.341)

                              Community Mobilization - Increased Pressure from Below
No. community meetings organized                       5.323           0.337            -1.511        -1.848     193
by CL (CL survey)                                     (7.643)         (1.231)          (1.262)        (1.430)
HH’s knowledge test score (0-1)                        0.597           -0.005           0.001          0.006     2151
(HH survey)                                           (0.228)         (0.014)          (0.013)        (0.016)
Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99 percent
conﬁdence levels respectively.




                                                        35
governance if only the village head was trained but there was a large improvement in governance if both

the village head and the community leader were trained (Lieberman, 2005).26 Once we had identiﬁed all

of the on-the-line cases, we selected all cases where a positive on-the-line case was paired with a negative

on-the-line case in the same geographic strata (deﬁned by wards and land classiﬁcation). This resulted in

the selection of four “village head only” villages and six “village head plus community leader” villages for

qualitative research, with these villages falling into four distinct geographic strata.

    In each of the ten villages, the qualitative research involved conducting interviews and focus groups.

First, we interviewed the village head alongside advisers of his or her choosing. Second, we conducted

two focus groups, one with a group of about 8 villagers organized by the village head, and one with the

random sample of 8 villagers included in the follow-up survey. In addition, in each village, we conducted

a one-on-one interview with the civil society leader included in the training sessions (or, in cases where no

civil society leader was trained, the civil society leader the village head said he would have liked to have

included in the training sessions if he had been given the opportunity).

    We use the qualitative evidence to consider three aspects of the dynamics of change relevant to ad-

judicating the mechanism: (1) Did the civil society leader become a competitor to or integrated into the

traditional village governance structure? (2) Did the civil society leaders simply change the capacity of the

village head to accomplish reforms they already favored or did they also change their incentives to imple-

ment reforms? (3) Did the civil society leader directly pressure the village head to accomplish change, or

did he or she levy pressure indirectly by informing higher leaders or mobilizing villagers?

    The qualitative evidence suggests that the civil society leader who was trained alongside the village

head often took on new responsibilities and powers after the training session, but these responsibilities

were through existing traditional institutions, not independent of them. In particular, the trained community

leaders often became advisers to the village head. Although we did not observe an increase in the status of

civil society leaders as a whole vis-a-vis village heads on the cruder measures included in the quantitative

survey, the qualitative evidence suggests there were important changes in how the village head viewed the
  26
     We focused on understanding the differences in the effects of training both the village head and a civil
society leader versus only training the village head both because these are the effects of greatest theoretical
interest and because the program had been rolled out in the year 2 villages by the time of the qualitative
research, making a comparison to the year 1 control villages impossible.



                                                       36
trained civil society leader. For example, when we asked village heads to invite their close advisers to

meet with us for discussion, 80 percent of the village heads who were trained alongside community leaders

subsequently included the trained community leader in this group, while only 25 percent of village heads

trained alone invited the person they subsequently said they would choose for inclusion in the training if

given the option.27 In addition, we found trained community leaders were often included in the village

head’s courts, but that they rarely took on independent activities in the village unless these tasks were

“delegated” by the village head;28 for example, trained community leaders were in several instances tasked

with adjudicating disputes when the village head was away from the village or otherwise preoccupied.29

This is inconsistent with civil society leaders acting either as competitors to the village head or independent

watchdogs, but it is consistent with either the human resources or the social pressure mechanism.

    The qualitative evidence also suggests civil society leaders changed both the capacity and the incentives

of village heads with regards to implementing reform. In interviews with the village heads, they described

the civil society leader primarily as reminding and advising them about regulations and best practices, sug-

gesting changes in capacity may have been particularly critical. For example, village heads described the

inclusion of the community leader as beneﬁcial because ‘I now have an aide who reminds, guides and in-

forms me of the best practices to lead the people,” “I am reminded of some crucial issues that I would have

forgotten since age is catching up with me,” and “Some issues that I did not understand, she helps clarify to

the people.”30 However, village heads might have emphasized the “reminder” role of civil society leaders

partly to save face, and interviews with civil society leaders suggest that there was often resistance by village

heads to implementing some reforms, especially the requirement that they stop taking payments for hearing

cases.31 A number of civil society leaders noted the importance of being persistent in getting village heads

to change their behavior, describing how they needed to “argue with” the village head to get him to make
  27
      There would be a 17 percent chance of getting this distribution of included community leaders across
the two arms of the treatment if the treatment effect were zero. Note that one of the village heads did not
get the instruction to bring advisers and is not included in these calculations.
   28
      Interview with village head in village 22909.
   29
      Interview with village head in village 31729; focus group in village 23510; focus group in village
21202.
   30
      Interview with village head in village 20515; interview with village head in village 23510; interview
with village head in village 21202.
   31
      Interview with civil society leader in village 20512; interview with civil society leader in village 20515;
interview with civil society leader in village 33026


                                                       37
changes, that “it took a while for him to do it”, and that he would “go down ﬁghting but ultimately give

in.”32 Thus, both increased social pressure to implement reforms and improved human resource capacity to

do so appear to be at work.

    Finally, the qualitative evidence suggests most of the pressure on the village head came directly from

the civil society leader, rather than from higher-level leaders or villagers. When trained civil society leaders

were asked what they could do if the village head was not making decisions in a proper manner, they all

emphasized that they would approach him directly.33 A number of them also noted that if their own inter-

vention was not sufﬁcient, they would mobilize other community leaders, especially elders and members

of the village court, to put pressure on the village head.34 Only in one instance did a trained civil society

leader say that he could escalate the matter to higher-level authority if necessary – he speciﬁcally men-

tioned higher-level traditional leaders and the police – and no one mentioned organizing the community as

a whole.35 Indeed, although some civil society leaders had organized community meetings for the purpose

of conveying what they had learned in the training sessions to the community as a whole, citizens in our

focus groups said that efforts to inform them about regulations had generally been inadequate.36 Thus, most

of the pressure on village heads to change their behavior was the result of direct pressure from civil society

leaders and other village elites.

    Together, this suggests social pressure from civil society leaders themselves was critical in encourag-

ing reformed behavior from village heads. Trained civil society leaders appear to have increased both the

capacity of village heads to implement reform and given them new incentives to change their behavior.
  32
      Interview with civil society leader in village 20515; interview with civil society leader in village 31729;
interview with civil society leader in village 33026
   33
      Interview with civil society leader in village 20515; interview with civil society leader in village 21202;
interview with civil society leader in village 21507; interview with civil society leader in village 22909;
interview with civil society leader in village 23510; interview with civil society leader in village 31729
   34
      Interview with civil society leader in village 20515; interview with civil society leader in village 20517.
   35
      Interview with civil society leader in village 31729.
   36
      Focus group village 20515; focus group village 21507.




                                                       38
8    Conclusion

This paper has examined the possibilities for using horizontal pressure from civil society leaders to reform

patrimonial village-level governance in Zimbabwe. The results suggest that empowering civil society leaders

can be an effective way to reform village-level governance. In this particular context, the training of civil

society leaders increased village heads’ compliance with procedures designed to increase consultation and

reduce corruption, and appears to have improved their management of local issues overall. Our analysis

of the mechanisms through which the trained community leaders had these effects suggests they checked

power through direct social pressure. Given the challenges of using top-down or bottom-up pressure to

reform local governance in many settings, the ﬁnding that horizontal social pressure from civil society

leaders can be singularly effective in motivating reform is important.

    On the one hand, these results can be viewed as highly consistent with a long tradition of countervailing

elites serving as checks on the power of rulers in Africa and beyond. For example, in pre-colonial Africa,

earth priests, queen mothers and traditional councilors played key roles in restraining the power of chiefs

(Baldwin, 2016; Mamdani, 1996).

    On the other hand, the results can be described as counterintuitive insofar as one might expect political

leaders to neutralize pressure from small numbers of elites by buying them off (Gottlieb, 2015; Mattingly,

2016). There are a number of reasons why village heads may not have been able to neutralize pressure for

reforms from civil society leaders by offering private payoffs in the case studied. First, many of the civil

society leaders in these villages had vested interests in the procedural reforms emphasized in the training

sessions: they were relatively young, female and lacking in partisan afﬁliations, and therefore stood to gain

personally from reforms to a system that beneﬁted elderly, male supporters of the ruling party. Second,

village heads were often less wealthy than civil society leaders, and so they may not have been able to offer

private payoffs sufﬁcient to neutralize pressures for procedural changes.

    The ability of civil society leaders to serve as a constituency for reform is likely to vary. Still, as Tendler

(1997) long ago noted, there is often sufﬁcient diversity of interests among community leaders for them to

serve as effective checks on one another’s power. In view of this, horizontal pressure from other leaders may

frequently be a promising avenue for motivating local governance reforms.



                                                       39
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed and James Robinson. 2014. “Chiefs: Economic Development and Elite

  Control of Civil Society in Sierra Leone.” Journal of Political Economy 122:319–368.

Ahmed, Nasiruddin, Raj Chetty, Mushﬁq Mobarak, Aminur Rahman and Monica Singhal. 2012. “Improving

  Tax Compliance in Developing Economies: Evidence from Bangladesh.”.

Aker, Jenny C, Christopher Ksoll et al. 2015. “Call Me Educated: Evidence from a Mobile Monitoring

  Experiment in Niger.”.

Alexander, J. 1996. Things fall apart, the centre can hold: processes of postwar political change in Zim-

  babwe’s rural areas. In Society in Zimbabwe’s Liberation War, ed. N. Bhebe and T. Ranger. Oxford:

  James Currey.

Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera and B Kelsey Jack. 2014. “No margin, no mission? A ﬁeld experiment on

  incentives for public service delivery.” Journal of Public Economics 120:1–17.

Baldwin, Kate. 2016. The Paradox of Traditional Chiefs in Democratic Africa. New York: Cambridge

  University Press.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Angus Deaton and Esther Duﬂo. 2004. “Health, health care, and economic development:

  Wealth, health, and health services in rural Rajasthan.” The American economic review 94(2):326.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Esther Duﬂo, Daniel Keniston and Nina Singh. 2015. “Improving Police Effective-

  ness:The Rajasthan Experiment.” MIT Working Paper.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Rukmini Banerji, Esther Duﬂo, Rachel Glennerster and Stuti Khemani. 2010. “Pitfalls

  of Participatory Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Education in India.” American

  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2:1–30.

Barr, Abigail, Lawrence Bategeka, Madina Guloba, Ibrahim Kasirye, Frederick Mugisha, Pieter Serneels

  and Andrew Zeitlin. 2012. “Management and Motivation in Ugandan Primary Schools: An Impact Eval-

  uation Report.” Partnership for Economic Policy Working Paper.


                                                   40
Berman, Sheri. 1997. “Civil society and the collapse of the Weimar Republic.” World politics 49(03):401–

  429.

Bjorkman, Martina and Jakob Svensson. 2009. “Power to the People: Evidence from a Randomized Field

  Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in Uganda.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124:735–

  769.

Bourdillon, Michael. 1976. The Shona Peoples: An Ethnography of the Contemporary Shona. Harare:

  Mambo Press.

Bratton, Michael. 2011. “Violence, Partnership and Transitional Justice in Zimbabwe.” The Journal of

  Modern African Studies 49:353–380.

Cilliers, Jacobus, Ibrahim Kasirye, Clare Leaver, Pieter Serneels and Andrew Zeitlin. 2016. “Pay for locally

  monitored performance?”.

De Tocqueville, Alexis. 1956. Democracy in America [1835]. na.

Duﬂo, Esther, Rema Hanna and Stephen P Ryan. 2012. “Incentives work: Getting teachers to come to

  school.” The American Economic Review pp. 1241–1278.

Gamson, William A. 1968. Power and discontent. Vol. 124 Dorsey Press Homewood, IL.

Gottlieb, Jessica. 2015. “The logic of party collusion in a democracy: Evidence from Mali.” World Politics

  67(01):1–36.

Grossman, Guy. 2014. “Do Selection Rules Affect Leader Responsiveness? Evidence from Rural Uganda.”

  Quarterly Journal of Political Science 9(1):1–44.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood

  Effects.” Econometrica 75:83–119.

Kosack, Stephen and Archon Fung. 2014. “Does transparency improve governance?” Annual review of

  political science 17:65–87.



                                                      41
Krishna, Anirudh. 2007. “How Does Social Capital Grow? A Seven-Year Study of Villages in India.”

  Journal of Politics 69(4):941–956.

LeBas, Adrienne. 2006. “Polarization as Craft: Party Formation and State Violence in Zimbabwe.” Com-

  parative Politics 38:419–438.

Levi, Margaret. 1988. Of Rule and Revenue. Berkeley: The University of California Press.

Levi, Margaret and Audrey Sachs. 2009. “Legitimating Beliefs: Concepts and Measures.” Regulation and

  Governance 3:311–333.

Levi, Margaret, Audrey Sachs and Tom Tyler. 2009. “Conceptualizing Legitimacy, Measuring Legitimating

  Beliefs.” American Behavioral Scientist 53:354–375.

Lieberman, Evan S. 2005. “Nested Analysis as a Mixed-Method Strategy for Comparative Research.” Amer-

  ican Political Science Review 99:435–452.

Lieberman, Evan S., Daniel N. Posner and Lily L. Tsai. 2014. “Does Information Lead to More Active

  Citizenship? Evidence from an Education Intervention in Rural Kenya.” World Development 60:69–83.

Malesky, Edmund J., Cuong Viet Nguyen and Anh Tran. 2014. “The Impact of Recentralization on Pub-

  lic Services: A Difference-in-Differences Analysis of the Abolition of Elected Councils in Vietnam.”

  American Political Science Review 108:144–168.

Malesky, Edmund J., Paul Shuler and Anh Tran. 2012. “The Adverse Effects of Sunshine: A Field Ex-

  periment on Legislative Transparency in an Authoritarian Assembly.” American Political Science Review

  106:762–786.

Mamdani, Mahmood. 1996. Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of Late Colonialism.

  Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Mansuri, Ghazala and Vijayendra Rao. 2012. Localizing development: does participation work? World

  Bank Publications.




                                                   42
Martinez-Bravo, Monica, Gerard Padro i Miquel, Nancy Qian and Yang Yao. 2014. “Political Reform in

  China: The Effect of Local Election.” Unpublished paper.

Mattingly, Daniel. 2016. “Elite Capture: How Institutions Weaken Political Accountability in China.” World

  Politics 68:XX–XX.

McCubbins, Mathew D. and Thomas Schwartz. 1984. “Congressional Oversight Overlooked: Police Patrols

  versus Fire Alarms.” Americal Journal of Political Science 28:165–179.

Molina, Ezequiel, Ana Pacheco, Leonardo Gasparini and Andres Rius. 2013. “Community Monitoring

  Interventions to Curb Corruption and Increase Access and Quality in Service Delivery in Low and Middle-

  income Countries: A Systematic Review.” Campbell Collaboration Protocol.

Munro, William A. 1998. The Moral Economy of the State: Conservation, Community Development, and

  State Making in Zimbabwe. Vol. 68 Ohio University Press.

Murtazashvili, Jennifer B. 2016. “Afghanistan: A Vicious Cycle of State Failure.” Governance 29:163–166.

Ncube, Godfrey Tabona. 2011. “Crisis of Communal Leadership: Post-Colonial local government reform

  and administrative conﬂict with traditional authorities and in the communal areas of Zimbabwe, 1980-

  2008.” African Journal of History and Culture 3:89–95.

Olken, Benjamin A. 2007. “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.”

  Journal of Political Economy 115:200–249.

Olken, Benjamin A. 2010. “Direct Democracy and Local Public Goods:Evidence from a Field Experiment

  in Indonesia.” American Political Science Review 104:243–267.

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge:

  Harvard University Press.

Olson, Mancur. 1982. The Rise and Decline of Nations: Economic Growth, Staglﬂation and Social Rigidi-

  ties. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.




                                                   43
Popkin, Samuel L. 1979. The rational peasant: The political economy of rural society in Vietnam. Univ of

  California Press.

Pradhan, Menno, Daniel Suryadarma, Amanda Beatty, Maisy Wong, Arya Gaduh, Armida Alisjahbana and

  Rima Prama Artha. 2014. “Improving Educational Quality through Enhancing Community Participa-

  tion: Results from a Randomized Field Experiment in Indonesia.” American Economic Journal: Applied

  Economics 6:105–126.

Putnam, Robert D, Robert Leonardi and Raffaella Y Nanetti. 1994. Making democracy work: Civic tradi-

  tions in modern Italy. Princeton university press.

Sokwanele. 2011. “The Anatomy of Terror.” Newsletter.

Tendler, Judith. 1997. Good Governance in the Tropics. Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Tsai, Lily. 2007. “Solidary Groups, Informal Accountability, and Local Public Goods Provision in Rural

  China.” American Political Science Review 101:355–372.

Tyler, Tom. 2006. “Psychological Perspectives on Legitimacy and Legitimation.” Annual Review of Psy-

  chology 57:375–400.

Veron, Rene, Glyn Williams, Stuart Corbridge and Manoj Srivastava. 2006. “Decentralized Corruption or

  Corrupt Decentralization? Community Monitoring of Poverty-Alleviation Schemes in Eastern India.”

  World Development 34:1922–1941.

Weber, Max. 1922. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. Berkley: University of

  California Press.

World Bank. 2000. Reforming Public Institutions and Strengthening Governance. World Bank.

Zamchiya, Phillan. 2011. “A Synopsis of Land and Agrarian Change in Chipinge District, Zimbabwe.” The

  Journal of Peasant Studies 38:1093–1122.




                                                       44
 Reforming Village-Level Governance via Horizontal Pressure
                         Appendix
                              , Shylock Muyengwa†and Eric Mvukiyehe‡
                  Kate Baldwin∗




∗ Assistant
          Professor, Department of Political Science, Yale University
† PhD Candidate, School of Natural Resources and Environment, University of Florida
‡ Economist, Development Impact Evaluation, The World Bank



                                               1
1     Balance Statistics

                                         Table 1: Balance Statistics
    Variable                         Training   No Training    p-value   VH Only   VH & CL   p-value

    Village characteristics
    Communal land                     0.71          0.71        0.92      0.72      0.69      0.74
    No. HHs                           163           171         0.61      148       181       0.19
    No. community groups               4.5           4.1        0.07       4.4       4.6      0.43
    VH characteristics
    Female VH                         0.05          0.09        0.27      0.05      0.05      0.85
    VH with prim. education           0.66          0.72        0.30      0.66      0.65      0.99
    Age of VH                          65            64         0.56       65        64       0.74
    Tenure of VH                       15            13         0.46       14        16       0.59
    VH with ZANU-PF sign              0.28          0.31        0.52      0.28      0.27      0.92
    HH characteristics
    Villagers with prim. education    0.80          0.81        0.70      0.80      0.81      0.49
    Age of villagers                   43            43         0.43       44        42       0.06
    Villagers born in village         0.47          0.49        0.47      0.48      0.46      0.58
    HH member in wage labor           0.31          0.30        0.85      0.30      0.31      0.86
    Own plots                         0.88          0.86        0.05      0.88      0.89      0.62
    Newspaper readers                 0.20          0.20        0.87      0.22      0.18      0.09
    Cattle wealth index                2.1           1.8        0.12       2.3       1.9      0.09
    Diff. political views from VH     0.30          0.27        0.30      0.27      0.27      0.97




                                                     2
2   Dimensions of Village Head Bias


                  Table 2: Pro-ZANU-PF Biases in Village-Level Decision Making

                                        Not ZANU-PF           ZANU-PF           Difference

       Received Food Aid Last Year           0.448              0.434             -0.014
                                            (0.023)            (0.038)            (0.044)
       Believe Most Decisions by             0.584              0.671            0.137***
       Village Head’s Court Fair            (0.023)            (0.036)            (0.036)
       Took Case to Village Head’s           0.439              0.451              0.012
       Court if Had Dispute                 (0.023)            (0.036)            (0.044)
       The ﬁrst two columns report means with standard errors below in parentheses. The third
       column reports the differences between column two and column three, with the standard
       error of the difference reported in parentheses below. Only villages that did not receive
       any training in year 1 are included in the calculations.




                      Table 3: Gender Biases in Village-Level Decision Making

                                           Female          Male           Difference

          Received Food Aid Last Year       0.405          0.346           -0.059**
                                           (0.021)        (0.021)           (0.030)
          Believe Most Decisions by         0.602          0.602             0.000
          Village Head’s Court Fair        (0.021)        (0.021)           (0.030)
          Took Case to Village Head’s       0.441          0.469             0.028
          Court if Had Dispute             (0.023)        (0.021)           (0.031)
          The ﬁrst two columns report means with standard errors below in parentheses.
          The third column reports the differences between column two and column three,
          with the standard error of the difference reported in parentheses below. Only
          villages that did not receive any training in year 1 are included in the calculations.




                                                      3
                     Table 4: Kinship Biases in Village-Level Decision Making

                                           Non-Related       Related        Difference

         Received Food Aid Last Year           0.360          0.385             0.025
                                              (0.022)        (0.021)           (0.030)
         Believe Most Decisions by             0.550          0.643            0.093***
         Village Head’s Court Fair            (0.023)        (0.021)            (0.030)
         Took Case to Village Head’s           0.431          0.470             0.039
         Court if Had Dispute                 (0.022)        (0.021)           (0.031)
         The ﬁrst two columns report means with standard errors below in parentheses.
         The third column reports the differences between column two and column three,
         with the standard error of the difference reported in parentheses below. Only
         villages that did not receive any training in year 1 are included in the calculations.




3   Disputes Taken to Village Heads


                           Table 5: Village Heads and Dispute Resolution

                                                 % HHs with       % taken to
                                                  dispute in         VH
                                                  past year

                           Land Disputes                18             74
                           Crop Destruction             49             77
                           Theft                        27             47
                           Witchcraft                   8              43
                           Domestic Violence            10             25
                           Marriage Disputes            14             16
                           Assault                      10             33




                                                   4
4   Community Leaders Included in Training


               Table 6: Comparison of Trained Civil Society Leaders to Sample


                                                           % Trained    % Surveyed

         Community Leader Type

         Caregiver/ Village Health Worker                      54           33
         Church Leader                                          8           19
         NGO Ofﬁcer/Focal Point                                6             0
         Farmers Group Representative                           9           17
         School Development Committee Member                    4            2
         Secretary/Treasurer/Member of Village Committee       19           15
         War Veteran                                            0            4
         Youth Chairperson                                      0            4
         Other                                                  1            6

         Community Leader Gender
         Male                                                  45           52
         Female                                                55           48




                                             5
5       Measuring Political Views

We measured whether respondents have different political views from their village heads by asking whether

they agreed or disagreed with the statement "My own political views are very similar to those of the vil-

lage head” as part of our follow-up survey. This was measured post-treatment and as a result there may

be concerns that the treatment changed the number or types of people who disagreed with this statement,

especially because the purpose of the intervention was to constrain the ability of the village head to make

politically biased decisions. However, in the context of Zimbabwe, where people’s partisan afﬁliations are

generally well known and very polarized (LeBas 2006), we think it unlikely that the intervention would

affect perceptions of the village head’s partisanship in the medium-term; rather, the goal was to affect the

village head’s behavior towards non-co-partisans. Indeed, the following table shows that the characteristics

of the respondents identifying as having different political views from their village head is similar across

treatment arms. Of 18 comparisons, just two are statistically signiﬁcant at the 90 percent conﬁdence level

and just one is statistically signiﬁcant at the 95 percent conﬁdence level; this is consistent with what we

would expect to see by chance in the absence of systematic differences between the comparison groups.

Particularly important is the fact that respondents who identify as having “different political views” from

their village heads do not have signiﬁcantly different levels of afﬁliation with ZANU-PF or the major oppo-

sition party, the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), across the treatment arms. Across the different

arms of the experiment, between 23 and 26 percent of them identify as ZANU-PF supporters and between

34 and 45 percent of them identify as MDC supporters.1

    Unfortunately, even though the district authorities initially approved a questionnaire containing this

question, we were asked to remove it two thirds of the way through surveying, so we do not have data on

this question for one third of respondents.We randomized the intervention by geographic blocks and were

proceeding geographically. The following table considers how the communities in which we were able to

ask this question differ from the communities in which we were not able to ask this question. Out of 15

comparisions, we ﬁnd two differences that are statistically signiﬁcant at the 95 percent conﬁdence level and

one difference that is statistically signiﬁcant at the 99 percent conﬁdence level, slightly more differences
    1
     The MDC split into two factions prior to the 2013 election. Respondents who identiﬁed with either
faction are coded as MDC members.


                                                     6
   Table 7: Characteristics of Respondents with Difference Political Views from VH by Treatment Arm

  Variable                         Training    No Training    p-value   VH Only     VH & CL     p-value

  Villagers with prim. education     0.87          0.89        0.64       0.89        0.86         0.53
  Age of villagers                    41            40         0.42        43          40         0.16
  Villagers born in village          0.49          0.52        0.61       0.47        0.52        0.46
  HH member in wage labor            0.37          0.31        0.24       0.32        0.42        0.15
  Own plots                          0.86          0.82        0.28       0.79        0.93       0.01**
  Newspaper readers                  0.18          0.25        0.10       0.17        0.19        0.78
  Cattle wealth index                 2.2           1.9        0.33        1.8         2.6        0.10*
  Support for ZANU-PF                0.26          0.23        0.43       0.26        0.26        0.98
  Support for MDC                    0.42          0.34        0.15       0.45        0.38        0.35
  N                                  645           640                    334         311
  % of all respondents               0.30          0.27        0.34       0.28        0.27        0.87



than can be attributable to chance. This suggests the sample for which we have political information is

different than the sample for which we do not. Speciﬁcally, it is made up of smaller, more recently settled

villages.




                                                    7
     Table 8: Differences in Communities with and without Political Data
Variable                         Political Data   No Political Data   p-value

Village characteristics
Communal land                        0.74               0.66            0.16
No. HHs                              185                142            0.01**
No. community groups                  4.3                4.3            0.97
VH characteristics
Female VH                            0.06               0.08            0.64
VH with prim. education              0.71               0.66            0.40
Age of VH                             65                 63             0.40
Tenure of VH                          15                 12             0.10
VH with ZANU-PF sign                 0.33               0.25            0.20
HH characteristics
Villagers with prim. education       0.81               0.80            0.50
Age of villagers                      43                 43             0.81
Villagers born in village            0.51               0.43          0.001***
HH member in wage labor              0.31               0.30             0.77
Own plots                            0.86               0.88             0.28
Newspaper readers                    0.20               0.21             0.49
Cattle wealth index                   1.9               2.0              0.68




                                      8
6   Measuring Need

We measure the need of households for food aid in the past year based on their responses to a series of

questions:

“In the last twelve months, did you harvest enough grain to feed your family without buying it on the

market?” “In the last twelve months, did you harvest enough grain to feed your family after buying it on the

market?”

    Households that did not have enough grain to feed their families through their own harvest and their

own market purchases are classiﬁed as “needy.” Table 9 shows the distribution of needy families across

treatment arms.

                                Table 9: Food Aid Need by Treatment Arm

             Variable    Training   No Training    p-value   VH Only     VH & CL      p-value

             Needy        0.655        0.644        0.663      0.640       0.689       0.092




                                                     9
7   Changes in Process as Reported by Community Leaders


                    Table 10: Changes in Process as Reported by Civil Society Leaders



                                                     Control Mean     Effect of VH    Effect of VH    CL Effect   N
                                                     (and St. Dev.)     Training      + CL Training

Procedures (Mean effects index)                           0.00           -0.022            0.284*      0.306*     257
                                                         (1.00)          (0.156)           (0.156)     (0.182)
Consultation of resource management council (%)           0.439           0.040             0.003       -0.037    223
                                                         (0.498)         (0.081)           (0.085)     (0.096)
Consultation of women’s council                           0.150           0.007             0.056       0.048     237
                                                         (0.359)         (0.060)           (0.061)     (0.071)
Proportion of women on dare                               0.303          -0.028             0.014       0.042     257
                                                         (0.205)         (0.030)           (0.030)     (0.035)
Do not charge fee                                         0.204           0.045            0.125*       0.079     213
                                                         (0.405)         (0.071)           (0.069)     (0.081)
Access to records                                         0.600          -0.030             0.051       0.081     234
                                                         (0.492)         (0.078)           (0.076)     (0.091)
Table displays standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the
90, 95 and 99 percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




                                                   10
8    Deviations from Pre-Analysis Plan

We registered a pre-analysis plan for our impact evaluation prior to receiving the data. This plan was based

on intensive discussions with the implementing partner about the outcomes they expected their programming

to achieve on governance by village heads and community-level conﬂict. In this paper, we focus on the

differential effects of the two variants of the intervention (one that included a community leader monitor and

one that did not) on governance outcomes; we plan to discuss the effects of the intervention on community-

level conﬂict more broadly in a separate paper. Within the category of “governance”, we registered four

outcomes – the village head’s knowledge of the law, the village head’s attitudes towards human rights, the

impartiality of the village head, and the village head’s legitimacy.

    In our paper, we also look at one additional outcome, the village head’s governance procedures. We

asked a series of questions about the processes by which the village head makes decisions and manages con-

ﬂict. We did not register them because the implementing partner did not emphasize them as a key outcome

of their program. This was an oversight on our part, as the training curriculum placed great emphasis on the

adoption of inclusive and transparent decision-making processes, and this is a theoretically important inter-

mediate step in reducing bias, especially in dispute resolution. The section on decision-making procedures

runs from D18-D24 of the village head survey. In all instances in which signiﬁcant numbers of village heads

were not adopting prescribed procedures or best practices prior to the intervention, we consider the effect of

the training sessions on the adoption of the procedure.

    We have also made a few adjustments to our measurement of the registered outcomes in cases where

we felt the registered measurements suffered from conceptual problems or were not consistent with the

measurement strategies employed by other scholars conducting research in this area. We discuss these

adjustments below, while noting that none of these shifts change the statistical signiﬁcance of the results.

    As speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan, we are interested mainly in the village head’s decision-making in

two areas – reducing food insecurity and dispute resolution. For both areas, we look at both (a) the amount

of bias in the village head’s decision-making in the area and (b) the effectiveness of the village head in

managing problems.




                                                      11
Food Aid Outcomes

Bias: Likelihood of people with different political views from the VH receiving food aid

Efﬁciency: Effect of measured need on the receipt of food aid



    Both of these analyses were pre-registered, but as part of our secondary analysis because we were con-

cerned about looking at the effect of the intervention only on certain societal sub-groups. Speciﬁcally, we

were concerned that the intervention could potentially change the types of people who reported having dif-

ferent political views from the village head and the types of people who have measured need before receiving

food aid. We have given these results greater weight in this paper because auxiliary analysis suggests the

intervention did not change the types of people falling in these sub-groups, and because other recent pa-

pers looking at the effects of monitoring and governance interventions on food aid have constructed similar

measures by societal sub-groups (Banerjee et al. 2015; Beath et al. 2015). In contrast, we do not discuss

one pre-registered analysis, which involved using a list experiment to measure perceptions of bias in food

aid distribution over the previous ﬁve years. In retrospect, it was not realistic to expect our follow-up study,

which happened less than a year after the intervention began, to affect this measure.



Dispute Resolution Outcomes

Bias: Likelihood of people with different political views from the VH viewing most decisions by the VH’s

court as fair

Efﬁciency: Likelihood of people having an unsatisfactorily resolved land or crop destruction dispute



    In the pre-registered analysis, we proposed looking at the likelihood of all people viewing the VH’s

decisions as fair. However, because a reduction in bias against groups that previously experienced discrim-

ination should result in a decrease in the favorable treatment accorded to the previously privileged group,

we have revised the analysis to focus on perceptions of fairness within the group suffering discrimination.

In our pre-analysis plan, we also proposed to look at the resolution of all types of disputes within a village.

However, in this paper, we focus only on land and crop disputes because these are the only two types of

disputes that a majority of households in Eastern Zimbabwe take to village heads for resolution if they have


                                                      12
them, and so they are the two measures of conﬂict most clearly related to the village head’s governance.

The focus on unresolved disputes is in line with strategies of measuring conﬂict reduction in recent studies

in political science (Blattman et al. 2014) and is a clearer measure of the village head’s ability to manage

conﬂict than the number of conﬂicts, especially in the short to medium-term.

The other sections of the analysis closely follow the pre-analysis plan, with the following slight departures:

(1) In the section on legitimacy, we initially proposed combining measures from the village head’s survey

(or his or her perceived legitimacy) and measures from the household survey. Ultimately, we decided that it

was conceptually clearer and theoretically more important to focus on community member’s perceptions of

their village head’s legitimacy.

(2) Rather than dichotomizing ordered outcome variables, we treat them as continuous outcomes, as is

becoming standard practice in econometrics.

(3) Although we initially proposed standardizing all measures and before combining them into indices, in

cases where many variables to be combined are on the same scale, we have instead sought ways to combine

them that are more easily interpretable (i.e. rather than standardizing and then summing and restandardizing

variables on the same scale, we have preferred to average or sum them as described in the text). In cases

where the variables to be combined are on different scales, we use the originally proposed method.

(4) We employ strata ﬁxed effects for the blocks over which the original randomization was done, as we

consider this to be best practice.

We also note that the analysis of mechanisms in the last section of the paper – based on both qualitative and

quantitative analysis – goes well beyond the originally speciﬁed analysis.



References

Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Jordan Kyle, Benjamin Olken and Sudarno Sumarto. 2015. “The Power of

Transparency: Information, Identiﬁcation Cards and Food Subsidy Programs in Indonesia.” NBER Working

Paper #20923.

    Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia and Ruben Enikolopov. 2015. “Do Elected Councils Improve Gover-

nance? Experimental Evidence on Local Institutions in Afghanistan.”



                                                     13
   Blattman, Christopher, Alexandra Hartman and Robert Blair. 2014. “How to Promote Order and Prop-

erty Rights under Weak Rule of Law? An Experiment in Changing Dispute Resolution Behavior through

Community Education.” American Political Science Review 108 (1): 100-120.




                                                14
