                                                        WPS7949


Policy Research Working Paper                          7949




                         Taxing the Good?
           Distortions, Misallocation, and Productivity
                      in Sub-Saharan Africa

                                 Xavier Cirera
                              Roberto N. Fattal Jaef
                               Hibret B. Maemir




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
  &
Development Research Group
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7949


  Abstract
 This paper uses comprehensive and comparable firm-level                            firms would increase manufacturing productivity by 31.4
 manufacturing census data from four Sub-Saharan Afri-                              percent in Côte d’Ivoire and as much as 162.7 percent in
 can countries to examine the extent, costs, and nature                             Kenya. The paper emphasizes the importance of the quality
 of within-industry resource misallocation across het-                              of the underlying data, by comparing the results against
 erogeneous firms. The paper finds evidence of severe                               those from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys. The com-
 misallocation in which resources are diverted away from                            parison finds that the survey-based results underestimate
 high-productivity firms toward low-productivity ones in                            the extent of misallocation vis-a-vis the census. Finally,
 all four countries, although the magnitude differs across                          the paper finds that the size of existing distortions is cor-
 countries. The paper shows that a hypothetical realloca-                           related with various measures of business environment, such
 tion of resources that equalizes marginal returns across                           as lack of access to finance, corruption, and regulations.




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group and the Development Research Group. It
  is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development
  policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.
  org. The authors may be contacted at xcirera@worldbank.org and rfattaljaef@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
 Taxing the Good? Distortions, Misallocation, and Productivity
                                       in Sub-Saharan Africa∗
              Xavier Cirera†            Roberto N. Fattal Jaef         ‡
                                                                               Hibret B. Maemir§




   JEL Classiﬁcation Code: O1, O4.
   Keywords: Total factor productivity; distortions; misallocation; business environment; Africa.




  ∗ We   would like to thank Luis Serven for valuable comments. We wish also like to thank Neil Rankin for generously
providing us the Ghanaian data. The authors acknowledge support from the World Bank Strategic Research Fund (SRP).
   † The World Bank, Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice, Washington, D.C. E-mail: xcirera@worldbank.org.
   ‡ Corresponding author: The World Bank, Development Research Group, Washington, D.C. E-mail: rfattaljaef@

worldbank.org.
   § The World Bank, Development Research Group, Washington, D.C. E-mail: hmaemir@worldbank.org.
1      Introduction
One of the most enduring challenges in the ﬁeld of economic growth and development is to understand
the sources of the large variation in economic well-being across countries. The current consensus in
the literature is that even though cross-country diﬀerences in physical and human capital stocks are
important factors explaining development gaps, aggregate productivity remains the predominant source.
In this paper, we provide a systematic study of one of the most promising avenues for accounting for total
factor productivity (TFP) gaps, those stemming from an ineﬃcient allocation of resources across ﬁrms in
one of the poorest yet least explored regions in the world: Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Combining novel
census-based ﬁrm-level manufacturing databases with a structural theory of misallocation, the paper
provides a characterization of the degree and nature of resource misallocation as well as a quantiﬁcation
                                                                  ote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, and
of the productivity losses associated with these ineﬃciencies in Cˆ
Kenya.
     Following the work of Hsieh and Klenow (2009), we measure allocative distortions in the data as
deviations from the output-maximizing prescription of equalizing marginal returns across comparable
production units. We summarize the information about the degree of misallocation by reporting statis-
tics about the joint distribution of productivity and distortions that we back-out from the data. In
particular, we report measures of dispersion in the deviation from the eﬃcient allocation and investigate
the correlation between these deviations with idiosyncratic characteristics of the ﬁrms, such us their
physical productivity and their age. We then undertake a counterfactual exercise to quantify the aggre-
gate manufacturing TFP gains that would result from a reversal of these distortions and a reallocation
of resources in accordance with the output maximizing rule.
     We ﬁnd evidence of large within-industry misallocation of resources in the four countries that we
study, with Kenya exhibiting the largest idiosyncratic distortions, followed by Ghana, Ethiopia, and
 ote d’Ivoire. As points of reference, the degree of misallocation measured by the dispersion in revenue
Cˆ
total factor productivity (TFPR) is on average larger than in India and China, and is similar to those of
                                                                                                ublica
the worst performing countries in Latin America in terms of allocative eﬃciency, such as the Rep´
Bolivariana de Venezuela and Colombia.1 Besides signiﬁcant dispersion, we ﬁnd a tight correlation
between the distribution of distortions, TFPR, and the distribution of physical productivities across
ﬁrms, TFPQ. Controlling for other ﬁrm characteristics, we estimate a regression coeﬃcient for the
relationship between the logarithm of TFPR and the logarithm of TFPQ to be between 0.42 and 0.53.
This statistic is an important determinant of the extent to which the estimated distribution of distortions
creates a decline in aggregate productivity in the economy. As shown in Restuccia and Rogerson
(2008), when resources are diverted away from high productivity ﬁrms to relatively unproductive ones,
distortions carry a larger drag on TFP. Our estimate shows that such perverse misallocation, the one
“taxing the good”, is evident in the four economies that we study.
     Taken together, these ﬁndings imply that, the distortion and productivity-dependence of the distri-
bution of distortions create a substantial decline in manufacturing productivity in the four countries.
Had resources been allocated according to the output-maximizing rule, productivity would have been
    1 The   magnitudes of TFPR dispersion in India are our own calculations based on the Prowess database. These values,
in turn, are very close to those reported by Hsieh and Klenow (2009) from which we take the dispersion in TFPR in
China. For Latin America, our reference is Busso et al. (2013).




                                                             2
                            ote d’Ivoire, 67% in Ethiopia, 76% in Ghana, and 162% in Kenya.
higher by at least 31 % in Cˆ
    Even though the method utilized to measure misallocation is fairly straightforward to apply, we
highlight the biases that can be incurred in the interpretation of the results from limitations in the
underlying datasets. To emphasize this point, we compare our results, obtained from Census-based
datasets, with those obtained from an alternative and readily available source, the World Bank’s Enter-
prise Surveys (ES). We start assessing the accuracy of the ES in terms of capturing the features of the
size distribution of ﬁrms relative to the Censuses. We show that except in Kenya, where the sample in
                                                                    ote d’Ivoire’s, Ghana’s and Ethiopia’s
the ES is taken straight from the Census, the size distribution in Cˆ
ES diverges from their census-based counterparts. In particular, the pattern is that the ES overestimates
the size of the highest percentiles in the ﬁrm size distribution. We then evaluate the implication of this
bias for the resulting measures of misallocation and the counterfactual gains in productivity from its
reversal. When weighting sectors according to sectoral value added shares in the Census, we ﬁnd that
the degree of productivity losses implied by misallocation in the ES are signiﬁcantly smaller. We see
this ﬁnding as raising a warning to the precipitate application of the methodology. Ensuring adequate
size and sectoral representation in the data stands as an important ingredient for the robustness of the
results.
    As a ﬁrst step in an attempt to connect the observed misallocation to concrete policies and distor-
tions, we explore two additional dimensions of the distribution of distortions: its decomposition into
capital/labor ratio wedges and revenue wedges, and its evolution over the ﬁrm’s life cycle.2 The ﬁrst
dimension is informative to identify whether it is the policies aﬀecting the functioning of ﬁnancial and
labor markets that are a more binding constraint for the economy, or if it is the case that policies
aﬀecting capital and labor equally, such as monopoly power and other product market frictions, are
more prevalent. We ﬁnd that output distortions are more strongly correlated with ﬁrms’ physical pro-
ductivities than capital-labor ratio distortions and, thus, are relatively more important in accounting
for that total gains from eﬃcient reallocation. In terms of the ﬁrms’ life-cycle pattern of growth and the
role distortions play in shaping it, we ﬁnd the growth of employment over time, conditional on survival,
is remarkably ﬂat. This is consistent with evidence documented by Hsieh and Klenow (2014) for India
and Mexico. We also ﬁnd that the ﬂat pattern of life-cycle growth is mostly accounted for by the
life-cycle evolution of physical productivity, with a minor role played by an age-dependent component
in the distribution of distortions.
    We conclude the paper with an econometric exercise aimed at further tightening the connection
between observed misallocation and actual policies and distortions that increase the cost of doing
business. Appealing to quantitative measures of the quality of the business environment captured in
the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, such as accessibility to credit or fees and payments to government
oﬃcials; and exploiting sub-national variation of these costs, we ﬁnd suggestive evidence that some of
these business environment indicators have a signiﬁcant correlation with the observed distortions that
we ﬁnd in the data. Nonetheless, the lack of variation in the data at the level of the ﬁrm as well as
many potential confounding factors in the identiﬁcation raise a word of caution in interpreting the size
and direction of our results. Our view, which is shared by similar attempts at connecting distortions to
   2 To   clarify the distinction between capital/labor and revenue wedges, the former refers to distortions that interfere
with the optimal capital to labor ratio in the ﬁrm, while the latter refers to distortions that aﬀect the entire scale of
operation of the ﬁrm without disrupting the ratio of capital to labor.



                                                              3
policies in the literature, is that although we do not have suﬃcient variation in the data to accurately
identify causality, the signiﬁcant correlation that exists suggests that costs of doing business are likely
to play an important role in explaining misallocation in these countries.


2     Related Literature
This study is related to a recent literature focusing on the importance of within-industry resource misal-
location in explaining cross-country productivity diﬀerence. At the macro level, the relative importance
of technology in explaining productivity diﬀerence has been a subject of much research. A key assump-
tion in much of this literature is that ﬁrms face a common technology in their production, assuming
away ﬁrm-level productivity diﬀerences. The assumption of identical ﬁrms is not a plausible reﬂection
of economic reality, as empirical evidence has shown that ﬁrms diﬀer substantially in their productivity
even within a narrowly deﬁned industrial group and such productivity diﬀerences are found to be more
pronounced in developing countries than in advanced economies.
    Motivated by these empirical facts, recent research has started to link heterogeneity in ﬁrm perfor-
mance within sectors to cross-country productivity gap at the macro level. Restuccia and Rogerson
(2008) provide the ﬁrst framework to examine the aggregate productivity eﬀects of resource misalloca-
tion in a standard neoclassical growth model with heterogeneous ﬁrms in the spirit of Melitz (2003).
More speciﬁcally, they consider distortions that generate a wedge in the prices faced by individual
ﬁrms but leave the aggregate relative prices and aggregate capital accumulation unchanged. Restuccia
and Rogerson (2008) termed these policies as idiosyncratic distortions to stress that frictions are ﬁrm-
speciﬁc. They emphasize that the productivity losses due to misalloction would be even more sizable if
the distortions are positively correlated with the level of productivity of ﬁrms. This is what Restuccia
and Rogerson (2008) referred to as “correlated idiosyncratic distortions”.
    Drawing on the seminal work of Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), a growing number of studies have
quantiﬁed the extent and costs of within-industry resource misallocations generated by idiosyncratic
distortions using various approaches. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) provide the ﬁrst empirical approach to
measure misallocation across ﬁrms within 4-digit industry groups in China and India. The underlying
assumption behind this approach is that if input and output markets are functioning well, the marginal
revenue products of inputs should be equal across ﬁrms. Thus the diﬀerence in marginal value of inputs
across ﬁrms indicates the presence of distortions that prevent the eﬃcient allocation of resources in an
industry, resulting in aggregate productivity losses. Subsequent research following the methodology of
Hsieh and Klenow (2009) conﬁrms the quantitative importance of misallocations for several countries.
Examples include Gustavo and Cristobal (2012) for Bolivia, Camacho and Conover (2010) for Colombia,
Oberﬁeld (2013) for Chile, Busso et al. (2013) for Latin American countries, and Kalemli-Ozcan and
Sorensen (2012) for African countries.
    Bartelsman et al. (2013) propose an alternative methodology by looking at the covariance between
within-industry ﬁrm-level productivity and ﬁrm-size. This approach relies on the assumption that ﬁrms’
productivity and size are positively and strongly correlated in less-distorted economies, since optimal
allocation requires resources to be allocated based on the productivity level. Thus in a more distorted
economy, productive ﬁrms have smaller market shares than the optimal. They document that the
within-industry covariance between ﬁrm size and productivity varies considerably across countries and


                                                    4
it is systematically related to the level of development across space and time. More precisely, they
found a stronger covariance between ﬁrm size and productivity in the United States than in Western
European and more pronouncedly in Eastern European countries.
    While the preceding papers have all focused on measuring the extent and cost of misallocation
without knowing a particular policy/institution that may have caused such frictions, a number of recent
papers have explicitly studied the consequences of speciﬁc policies or institutions. The theoretical
                                                                        ıa-Santana and Pijoan-Mas,
contributions include: size-dependent policies (Guner et al., 2008; Garc´
2014), credit-market imperfections (Midrigan and Xu, 2014), trade-related distortions (Melitz, 2003),
capital-adjustment costs (Asker et al., 2014) and imperfect-information (David et al., 2014). Restuccia
and Rogerson (2013) provide a good summary of this literature.
    In a more recent work, Hsieh and Klenow (2014) focus on diﬀerences in the life-cycle of ﬁrms as
an important mechanism by which frictions reduce aggregate productivity by distorting the incentive
for ﬁrms to grow. They show that ﬁrm dynamics diﬀer systematically across countries, with ﬁrms
in developed countries growing much faster than those in poor countries over their life cycle. Hsieh
and Klenow (2014) for instance, estimate that if U.S. ﬁrms exhibited the same dynamics as Indian or
Mexican ﬁrms, aggregate manufacturing TFP would be roughly 25% lower.
    There is a relatively smaller body of work that focuses on exploring misallocation and distortions
in the business environment for ﬁrms in Sub-Saharan Africa. Perhaps the most salient contributions in
this area are Kalemli-Ozcan and Sorensen (2012) and Aterido et al. (2011). The former explores capital
misallocation in 10 African countries using the World Bank Enterprise Surveys and studies the extent
to which access to ﬁnance can explain the dispersion in marginal returns to capital across countries.
The latter explores the role of distortions in the business environment in explaining the diﬀerential
employment growth across ﬁrms of diﬀerent sizes.
    Our paper makes two contributions to the literature. First, it adds to the body of work replicating
the theory of misallocation and the strategy to measure it from the data developed by Hsieh and Klenow
(2009). We expand the literature in exploring a region of the world where the data requirements for the
application of the methodology have left it relatively unexplored. We remove this limitation assembling
comprehensive and comparable data on manufacturing form in four countries. A second contribution
of our work stems from the illustration of the importance of adequate coverage of ﬁrms in the data,
in terms of representativeness of the sectoral coverage of ﬁrms in the economy. We show that the
misrepresentation of sectors in the ES leads to lower degrees of measured misallocation and subdued
gains from reallocation than what you would otherwise estimate from the census data.


3     Background
We motivate our study reviewing features of the structure of production and the magnitude of the de-
                                                   ote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, and Kenya. Then,
velopment gaps that characterize the economies of Cˆ
in order to get a sense of the quality of the business climate in which ﬁrms operate in these economies,
we provide a brief account of reforms and salient packages of government interventions that were im-
plemented over the course of the years.




                                                   5
3.1        Macroeconomic Performance
As a background for our analysis, we ﬁrst compare the countries along diﬀerent measures of aggregate
economic indicators. The left panel of Figure 1 summarizes the performance of the sample countries by
showing the evolution of real per capital GDP relative to that of the United States from 1980 to 2015.
Ethiopia is the poorest country in the group. In 2015, its income per capita is only 1 percent that of
the United States. The corresponding number for Cote d’Ivoire is 2.8, Ghana is 3.3 and 2.2 for Kenya.
   Although these countries are all developing, there are clearly some diﬀerences in terms of their
economic structure and performance. Looking at the share of sectors to GDP (right panel of Figure 1),
                                                               ote d’Ivoire and Kenya with a share in
while manufacturing is a more important sector of activity in Cˆ
GDP of more than 10 percent, it accounts a small share of GDP in Ethiopia and Ghana. Ethiopia’s
manufacturing sector contributes relatively little (about 4.1 percent) to the overall economy, which is
far below the SSA average. The percentage in Ghana is about 5.1 percent, but still roughly half of
             ote d’Ivoire’s.
Kenya’s and Cˆ

                      GDP per capita relative to the US                                                 Manufacturing Value Added
  .08




                                                                                     20
  .06




                                                                                     15
  .04




                                                                                     10
  .02




                                                                                     5
  0




                                                                                     0




        1980   1985     1990       1995          2000   2005       2010   2015            1980   1985   1990       1995          2000   2005       2010   2015
                                          year                                                                            year

                               Cote d’Ivoire            Ethiopia                                               Cote d’Ivoire            Ethiopia
                               Ghana                    Kenya                                                  Ghana                    Kenya
                               SSA                                                                             SSA




                         Figure 1: GDP per capita and Manufacturing Value Added (percentage of GDP)


   One concern that may arise from looking at the right panel of the ﬁgure is that our analysis is
focusing on a sector that contributes little to the total value added, specially in Ethiopia and Ghana.
In principle, no matter how large the productivity gains we ﬁnd associated with a potential reversal
of misallocation distortions, these are going to be down-weighed by the small share of manufacturing
in value added. Even though this is a fair concern, there are at least two reasons why understanding
barriers to productivity growth in manufacturing is essential for the development prospects of the re-
gion. Firstly, the aggregate implications of manufacturing activity go beyond its contribution to valued
added because of linkages in the input-output network with other sectors. Jones (2011) ﬁnds evidence
of large input-output multipliers resulting from an increase in a given sector’s aggregate productivity
through linkages in production. Even though market frictions presumably reduce the degree of inter-
connectedness in SSA, there is still a multiplier eﬀect at stake. Secondly, increasing productivity in
manufacturing, by raising income levels, can help accelerate the typical process of structural transfor-
mation accompanying development in which resources are shifted away from agriculture. Quantifying
the eﬀects of manufacturing productivity gains should be a subject of future research.




                                                                                 6
3.2      The Size Distribution of Firms
Besides aﬀecting the sectoral allocation of production and the aggregate gaps in productivity, frictions
that misallocate resources will manifest also in the shape of the ﬁrm size distribution. Thus, it is
informative to confront the measurement of misallocation that we perform below with some information
about the shape of the ﬁrm size distribution in the countries that we cover in this study.
    Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics. The table illustrates that, Kenyan ﬁrms, on average, are
much larger (in terms of the number of workers) than ﬁrms in the other countries. While the average
                                                           ote d’Ivoire, it is only 30 in Ethiopia and
number of workers is approximately 145 in Kenya and 67 in Cˆ
29 in Ghana. The distribution of ﬁrm size in all countries is skewed to the left with the median ﬁrm
                                                                 ote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia and Ghana
in Kenya employing 34 workers while the corresponding ﬁgures in Cˆ
are only 9, 8 and 12 workers, respectively. Figure 2 clearly shows that the size distribution of ﬁrms in
Kenya looks diﬀerent from the distribution in the other countries.3

                                                            Table 1: Size Distribution of Firms


                                           Cote d’Ivoire            Ethiopia                       Ghana             Kenya
                                            Census (2012)         Census (2011)              Census (2003)       Census (2010)
                                Size                 N             N         N(wt)           N       N (wt)           N

                               <5                   469           1,618      17,779         464       13,027          171
                               5–9                  210           1,657      22,813         423       7,044           255
                               10–19                184           1,540      10,621        1,683      1,706           325
                               20–49                161           495          810          486           499         410
                               50–99                 81           214          219          110           122         295
                               > 99                 123           302          302          138           146         602
                               Total                1,228         5,826      52,544        3,302      22,544         2,058
                               Mean                  67            30            9           29            8          145
                               Median                9             8             6           12            4          34
                               S.D.                 390           154           52          118           48          404
                              Note: ‘wt’ denotes for the wighted statistics. For the manufacturing censuses in Ethiopia and
                              Ghana, we use the sampling weights constructed by the respective national statistical oﬃces. Each
                              census covers all formal manufacturing ﬁrms in the respective countries.




                                                              Cummulative Distribution Function
                                               1
                                               .8
                                               .6
                                               .4
                                               .2
                                               0




                                                     0        2             4             6           8         10
                                                                        Log of Number of Workers

                                                                              CIV             ETH
                                                                              GHA             KEN




                              Figure 2: Commutative Density Function (Log Number of Workers)


    Notice, too, that re-weighting observations for small ﬁrms according to the weights provided by the
   3 Since   there is no alternative data source, we are not able to verify if this is an the quality of Kenyan data. Nevertheless,
                                                                           ublica Bolivariana de Venezuela (Busso et al.,
the size distribution of ﬁrms in Kenya looks similar to Uruguay and the Rep´
2013).



                                                                                7
national statistical oﬃces of Ethiopia and Ghana reduces the average ﬁrm size even further, to 9 and 8
workers respectively.


3.3    Policy and Institutions
In this sub-section we present the institutional and macroeconomic environment within which ﬁrms
operate in the four countries since the 1960s.
   The 1950s and 1960s marked era of Import Substitution Industrialization (ISI) for Ethiopia, Ghana
and Kenya. In Ethiopia, a deliberate move to stimulate industrial growth began in the mid-1950s
under the imperial regime, with a focus on import-substituting light industries (Gebreeyesus, 2013).
Ghana’s ﬁrst industrial reform since independence – the ISI strategy of 1960-1983 – was centered on
the development of large-scale, capital-intensive state-owned manufacturing industries. The strategy
was marked by massive government intervention in the allocation of substantial resources (Ackah et al.,
2014). Similarly, Kenya pursued an ISI strategy following independence in 1963, with a large amount
of its manufacturing investment went into heavily protected import-substituting industries, such as
textiles, food processing, and metal industries (Chege et al., 2014). Ethiopia has also experienced a
socialist military regime (1974 to 1991), in which the manufacturing sector was largely dominated by
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) with SOEs accounting for 95 percent of the value added and 93 percent
of the employment of the manufacturing sector in the country (Gebreeyesus, 2013). Unlike the three
                  ote d’Ivoire pursued agricultural export oriented growth strategy, creating a liberal
other countries, Cˆ
policy environment that was relatively conducive to domestic and foreign private investment during the
ﬁrst two decades after independence. During this period, the Ivorian economy overall was growing at
an average rate of 7 percent per year, well above the SSA average. Over the same period manufacturing
value added grew by more than 9 percent.
   Since early 1980s all the sample countries have implemented Structural Adjustment Programs (SAP)
                                              ote d’Ivoire launched structural adjustment policy in
under the support of the World Bank and IMF. Cˆ
early 1980s in response to external and internal macroeconomic imbalances, which was mainly triggered
by a sharp decline in the prices of key commodities such as cocoa, and coﬀee (World Bank, 2015). This
resulted in massive government ﬁscal deﬁcit that forced the government to adopt an austerity program
                           ote d’Ivoire instituted a series of trade, ﬁscal, and monetary reforms. The
in 1982 (Harrison, 1994). Cˆ
trade reforms constituted several components that aimed to increase competition in the economy. Ghana
instituted a number of policy reforms since the mid-1980s under the Economic Recovery Program (ERP)
(1984-2000) - the second of its three major industrialization reforms. The ERP introduced a reform
in the industrial policy of Ghana from the traditional ISI to an outward-oriented private sector-led
industrial strategy. Some of the policy reforms include: privatization of the SOEs, removal of price
and distribution controls, and liberalization of the ﬁnancial sector and interest rates (Sandefur, 2010).
The government has made progress in reforming the regulatory framework and liberalizing the ﬁnancial
sector in which the government enhanced competition in commercial banking through a program of
divestiture of state-owned commercial banks. The liberalization has entailed the removal of controls
on interest rates and the sectoral composition of bank lending, and the introduction of market based
instruments of monetary control (Brownbridge and Gockel, 1996). During the 1980s and in the early
1990s, the Kenyan government also introduced a series of reforms to support export, following growing


                                                   8
concerns about the distortionary eﬀects of the ISI.
    Ethiopia launched the market-oriented reforms much later than the rest of the group in 1991, the
major ones being the privatization of SOEs, easing of market entry for privately-owned ﬁnancial insti-
tutions, limiting the role of the state in economic activities and promotion of greater private capital
participation, among others (Gebreeyesus, 2013). Despite the instituting reforms, the Ethiopian ﬁnan-
cial market still seems to be lagging behind those of the other two. For instance, while capital market
regulations were liberalized, there is still substantial domination of the state-owned banks.
    Ethiopia, Ghana, and Kenya launched full-ﬂedged industrial policies at nearly the same time (a
bit later for Kenya): Ghana’s private sector-led accelerated industrial development strategy in 2001,
Ethiopia’s Industrial Policy Strategy (IDS) in 2002/2003, and Kenya’s National Industrial Policy (NIP)
in 2007. The industrial policy of Ghana emphasized value-added processing of the country’s natural
resource endowments through the private sector-led accelerated industrial development strategy (Ackah
et al., 2014). Under this broad industrial development strategy, Ghana formulated series of sector-
speciﬁc strategies. The priority sectors include: the textile industry, food processing sector, chemical
industry, and other ago-processing industries.
    The Ethiopian government also formulated a series of sector-speciﬁc strategies with some sectors
receiving preferential treatment from the government, under the ambitious Growth and Transforma-
tion Plan (GTP) 2010/11 - 2014/15. The priority sectors include textile and garment; meat, leather
and leather products; and other ago-processing and labor-intensive industries. The number of prior-
ity sectors, however, has been updated sequentially. For example, metal and engineering, chemicals
and pharmaceuticals were sequentially added to the list (Gebreeyesus, 2013). These sectors receive
substantial support from the government including economic incentives, capacity building and cluster
development. For example, investors in the priority sectors can access credit from the Development
Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) at preferential lending rates. In addition, ﬁrms in favored sectors can receive
much more generous tax treatment with ﬁve-year tax holiday on proﬁts. Furthermore, imports of all
investment capital goods and raw materials necessary for the production goods are fully exempted from
import tariﬀ, and investors in selected sectors can easily access land. To ﬁll the perceived gaps not
served by the private sector, the government has also recently increased its direct investment in sev-
eral economic activities e.g. textile, garment, rubber tree production, coal phosphate fertilizer, cement
factory, ceramics, pulp and paper (Gebreeyesus, 2013). Critics argue, however, that the practice of
selective interventions that favor some activities and ﬁrms over others may distort the allocation of
resources. For example, Altenburg (2010) highlights that “resource allocation for industrial policy is
not fully transparent, e.g. it is not clear when ﬁrms are eligible to get preferential treatment in terms
of access to licenses, land, credit and foreign exchange, on what condition ailing ﬁrms will be bailed
out, and whether these conditions vary between state-owned enterprises, ﬁrms aﬃliated with the ruling
political parties, and independent private ﬁrms.”


4     Theoretical Framework
To quantify the eﬀect of misallocation on aggregate TFP, we use the accounting framework outlined in
Hsieh and Klenow (2009, HK hereafter). This section provides a brief outline of this framework.
    A ﬁnal output Y is produced in each country using a Cobb-Douglas production technology:


                                                      9
                                             S                     S
                                      Y =         Ysθs with             θs = 1                                    (1)
                                            s=1                 s=1

   where θs is the value added share of sector s, and S is the number of sectors in each country.
   Each sector’s output Ys is obtained by aggregating the output of individual establishments using a
CES technology:
                                                                         σ
                                                    Ms                 σ −1
                                                            σ −1
                                           Ys =           Ysi σ
                                                                                                                  (2)
                                                    i=1

   where Ysi is a diﬀerentiated product by establishment i in sector s, and σ is the elasticity of substi-
tution across producers within industry.
   Each establishment produces a diﬀerentiated product according to the standard Cobb-Douglas pro-
duction function:

                                                       1−αs αs
                                            Ysi = Asi Lsi  Ksi                                                    (3)

   where Asi stands for establishment-speciﬁc productivity, Ksi is establishment’s capital stock, Lsi is
labor input, and αs is industry-speciﬁc capital share.
   Each establishment maximizes current proﬁts:


                            πsi = (1 − τY si )Psi Ysi − wLsi − (1 + τKsi )RKsi                                    (4)

   where Psi is establishment-speciﬁc output price and Psi Ysi is value added of ﬁrm i, w and R are
the common wage rate and the rental cost of capital, respectively. τKsi denotes establishment-speciﬁc
“capital” distortion (which increases the cost of capital relative to labor). A large (small) value of τKsi
increases the cost of capital (labor) relative to labor(capital). A wide range of factors could potentially
cause such distortion, e.g. credit market imperfection and labor market regulations that diﬀer across
ﬁrms. “output” distortion is denoted by τY si . Such distortions could arise because of government
policies such as tax regulation that favor particular ﬁrms or corruption. These distortions could also
reﬂect monopoly power or adjustment costs.
                                                                   R(1+τKsi )                       w
   The ﬁrst order conditions imply that M RP Ksi =                  1−τYsi       and M RP Lsi =   1−τYsi   . From the
ﬁrst-order conditions, the optimal capital-labor ratio is given by:

                                        Ksi     αs w      1
                                            =                                                                     (5)
                                        Lsi   1 − αs R 1 + τKsi
   Building on the work of Foster et al. (2008), Hsieh and Klenow (2009) distinguish between two
productivity measures: one expressed in physical units (TFPQ) and the other in monetary values
(TFPR)

                                                                    Ysi
                                      T F P Qsi = Asi =           −αs αs                                          (6)
                                                                L1
                                                                 si   Ksi

                                                                     Psi Ysi
                                    T F P Rsi = Psi Asi =             −αs αs                                      (7)
                                                                   L1
                                                                    si    Ksi
   Their analysis shows how measures of TFPR relate to the wedges. More speciﬁcally, HK show that


                                                      10
                                                          αs                  1−αs
                                           σ        R                 w              (1 + τKsi )αs
                            T F P Rsi =                                                                                       (8)
                                          σ−1       αs              1 − αs             1 − τY si
   In the absence of distortions, T F P Rsi should be equalized across establishments within in each
industry.
   The actual TFP at industry level can be calculated as
                                                                                       1
                                                    Ms                        σ −1   σ −1
                                                              T F P Rs
                                      T F Ps =            Asi                                                                 (9)
                                                    i=1
                                                              T F P Rsi

   where T F P Rs is a geometric mean of the average marginal revenue product of capital and labor:

                                                                   αs                                             1−αs
                   σ                       R                                                 w
       T F P Rs =                                                                                                  
                  σ−1 α             Ms    1−τY si     Psi Ysi
                                                                            1 − αs
                                                                                      Ms
                                                                                            (1 − τY si )   Psi Ysi
                               s    i=1   1+τKsi       Ps Ys                          i=1                   Ps Ys


   When Asi (= T F P Qsi ) and T F P Rsi are jointly lognormally distributed, HK show that

                                1                      −1   σ
                       log T F Ps = log Ms + log E (Aσ
                                                     si ) −   var(log T F P Rsi )            (10)
                              σ−1                           2
   To empirically implement the HK framework, we require information for several parameters. The
primary parameter we need to ﬁx is the elasticity of substitution – σ . There is little agreement in the
literature on the plausible magnitude of this parameter. We follow Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and set a
conservative estimate σ = 3.4 . Again, following Hsieh and Klenow (2009), we set R = 10% assuming a
real interest rate of 5% and depreciation rate of 5 %. There is some evidence that the cost of capital
is high in Africa. But the diﬀerent values of R only aﬀect the average capital distortion but not the
diﬀerences between ﬁrms in a given industry. Thus, it doesn’t aﬀect our calculation of gains from
reallocation. For the industry-level factor share, αs , we use NBER Productivity Database. We assume
factor intensities are the same as those of the corresponding U.S. industries, which is assumed to be
undistorted.5 After obtaining the capital share at four-digit level, we combine it with our ﬁrm-level
datasets.6
   Once these parameters are ﬁxed, the wedges can be computed as follows:

                                                                 αs wLsi
                                              1 + τksi =                                                                     (11)
                                                               1 − αs RKsi

                                             1       σ − 1 (1 − αs )Psi Ysi
                                                   =                                                                         (12)
                                          1 − τysi     σ        wLsi
  4 Note   that this parameter doesn’t aﬀect the basic measure of dispersion but only alters their eﬀect on aggregate
productivity
   5 HK point out that the labor share in this dataset underestimates the labor compensation because it doesn’t include

fringe beneﬁts and employer social security contribution. Following Hsieh and Klenow (2009), we inﬂate the labor cost
by a factor of 3/2.
   6 Note that industries in Ethiopia, Ghana and Kenya are classiﬁed according to ISIC Rev 3.1, ISIC Rev 3 and ISIC Rev

                                ote d’Ivoire are classiﬁed according to NAEMA (equivalent to ISIC Rev 3) whereas the
4, respectively. Industries in Cˆ
industrial data for US is reported based on 1987 SIC and 1997 NAICS classiﬁcations. We use appropriate concordance
tables to match the datasets. We keep ﬁrms that correspond with the US data at four-digit levels.



                                                               11
     Eq. (11) captures the distortions in input choice relative to the optimal combination of factor input.
More speciﬁcally, it states that a ﬁrm faces a high capital distortion (larger τk ) when the ratio of labor to
capital compensation is high compared to the eﬃcient allocation of input. It is worth emphasizing that
τk measures capital market distortion relative to labor market distortion. Thus high capital distortion
(larger τk ) should be interpreted as a low labor distortions, and vice versa. Eq. (12) states that a ﬁrm
faces a high ‘output’ distortion (higher τy ) when the labor compensation of the ﬁrm is low compared
to what one would expect in a frictionless environment.
     The establishment-level productivity can be inferred as:
                                                                                       σ
                                                      Ysi                 (Psi Ysi ) σ−1
                                        Asi =         −αs αs        =κ        1−αs αs
                                                (wL)1
                                                    si   Ksi             (wL)si      Ksi
                           1
where κ = (Ps Ys )− σ−1 /Ps , which is normalized to 1, as in HK.
     It is worth emphasizing that the HK framework allows to obtain physical output Y using the CES
demand relationship.
                                                                      1
                                                      Ms       −1   σ −1
                               ¯s =
     The industry TFP would be A                            Aσ             , if marginal products were equalized across
                                                      i=1    si
establishments within industry. HK show that the ratio of the actual TFP in 9 to the eﬃcient level of
TFP7 :

                                                                                        θs
                                                 S    Ms                        σ −1   σ −1
                                         Y                   Asi T F P Rs
                                            =                 ¯s T F P Rsi                                            (13)
                                        Yeﬀ   s=1     i=1
                                                             A
     Eq. 13 shows how within industry misallocation of resources leads to a lower measured TFP.


5      Data Description
Our analysis exploits census data for manufacturing ﬁrms in each of the four SSA countries we study:
 ote d’Ivoire (2003-2012), Ethiopia (2011), Ghana (2003), and Kenya (2010). These countries provide
Cˆ
comprehensive and comparable census data. The censuses are nationally representative and both small
and large ﬁrms in the formal sector are adequately included in all countries. In all four countries, the
data are restricted to manufacturing sector (ISIC Rev 3 15-37).
     In what follows, we describe each country’s datasets.

 ote d’Ivoire
Cˆ                                           ote d’Ivoire is balance sheets and income statements associated
                        The data source for Cˆ
with tax reporting. The data is available for all registered ﬁrms in the country and contains detailed
balance sheet information on ﬁrms’ revenue, employment, cost of labor, book value of ﬁxed assets,
intermediate inputs and other ﬁrm characteristics. All registered ﬁrms are required to report their
ﬁnancial statements to the National Statistics Institute (INS), the tax administration (DGI), the court
of justice, and the Central Bank (BCEAO), which are reported under the West Africa accounting system
standards, Systeme Comptable Ouest Africain (SYSCOA). INS processed the data after ﬁrms hand in
hard copies of their forms between March and June following the closing of the ﬁscal year in December.
     ote d’Ivoire data cover 2003 to 2012.
The Cˆ
    7 Following   Hsieh and Klenow (2009), we use an establishment’s total wage bill (including beneﬁts) instead of employ-
ment in order to account for diﬀerences in the quality of labor across establishments.


                                                              12
Ethiopia        The datasets we use for Ethiopia are the census of Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing
Industries Survey (LMSMI) and Small Scale Manufacturing Industries Survey (SSMI), both conducted
by the Ethiopian Central Statistical Agency (CSA). The LMSMI covers all formal manufacturing ﬁrms
in the country that use power-driven machines in production process and employ at least ten persons.
The CSA conducted this census on annual basis since 1976.8 In 2011, the raw dataset contains 1,936
establishments.
    The SSMI survey covers establishments which use power-driven machinery and engage less than ten
workers. The CSA conducted ﬁve waves of SSMI surveys: 1994–1995, 2001–2002, 2005–2006, 2007–
2008, and 2010–2011 - each wave collected on a sample basis. The CSA sampling frame consists of
all registered establishments employing less than 10 workers and using power driven machines. The
SSMI survey was conducted using stratiﬁed sampling procedure to ensure representativeness of all
establishments in the country. The CSA also provide a sampling weight for each ﬁrm. By merging
the two datasets, we obtain complete distribution of establishments sizes for the formal manufacturing
sector in the country. After merging, the share of small ﬁrms (included in the SSMI survey), in terms
of number of establishments, accounts for 96 % of all manufacturing ﬁrms.9

Ghana         The data for Ghana are based on the 2003 National Industrial Census (NIC) dataset, con-
ducted by the Ghana Statistical Service (GSS). Three industrial censuses have been conducted: 1962,
1987 and 2003. The study is based on the 2003 census data , which includes establishments employing
less than 10 workers. The census is similar in sampling design with the Ethiopian data; it covers the
universe of establishments employing more than 10 workers and takes a representative sample of ﬁrms
employing less than 10 workers. The census was undertaken in two phases. In the ﬁrst phase, the reg-
istry covers all establishment (25,865) and includes information on persons engaged, location, age and
industrial group. However, it contains no balance sheet information. In the second phase, the survey
covers all establishments with at-least 10 workers and a 5 % sample of manufacturing establishments
engaging less than 10 workers. Data on production, sales, wages and salaries, material costs, ﬁxed assets
are reported for these ﬁrms. The raw data consist of a total of 3,302 manufacturing establishments.
Applying the weights constructed by the GSS, sampled establishments represent a population of 22,544
ﬁrms in the country.10

Kenya       The Kenyan data come from the 2010 Census of Industrial Production (CIP), conducted by
the Kenyan National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). The dataset provides detailed information needed
for our analysis, including total sales, value of production, labor cost, capital, material and energy costs.
The raw data contain information on about 2,089 manufacturing ﬁrms. However, a large number of
ﬁrms report either missing or zero values of labor cost and capital stock, and thus were omitted from
our analysis.
  8 Note   that although the LSMI targets establishments with more than 10 employees, they remain in the census even if
the number of workers decrease.
   9 In both LMSMI and SSMI, industries are classiﬁed according to the four-digit ISIC Rev 3.1 classiﬁcation. The

manufactures of food products and beverages is the largest sub-sector, measured by the number of ﬁrms.
 10 For more details about the sampling design and detailed description of the data, see Krakah et al. (2014).




                                                           13
Deﬁnition of variables            Variables are deﬁned as follows. In each census, labor is deﬁned as the total
number of paid and unpaid workers plus proprietors.11 The capital input is deﬁned as a book value of
ﬁxed assets. The deﬁnition of labor cost includes wages and salaries of workers as well as other beneﬁts.
Value added is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the value of production minus cost of raw materials
and energy and purchase of services. See Table A1 for the deﬁnition of each variable and parameter.

Data cleaning         These data have been extensively cleaned to remove inconsistencies and ensure cross-
country comparisons.


6     Main Results
6.1     Measuring Productivity and Distortions
Figure 3 plots the distribution of log(T F P R) and log(T F P Q) demeaned by industry-speciﬁc averages.
More speciﬁcally, it plots log(T F P Rsi /T F P Rs ) and log(T F P Qsi /T F P Qs ), weighted by the value
added share of industries. The ﬁgure shows that the distribution of TFPQ has a thicker left tail and
the TFPR distribution has a fat right tail. Table 2 reports various measures of dispersion of TFPQ and
TFPR.
    There are several points worth noting. First, the ﬁndings suggest that there is a substantial dis-
persion in ﬁrm-level productivity in all the sample countries. A comparison of our results with Hsieh
and Klenow (2009) reveals that productivity is more dispersed in our sample countries than in the US,
China and India. While all countries exhibit some degree of productivity disparity, the magnitude of
this dispersion is particularly striking in Kenya, where many less productive ﬁrms coexist with a few
very productive ﬁrms. This pattern is consistent across diﬀerent measures: the standard deviation
(S.D.), the ratio of the 75th to the 25th percentile (75 − 25), and the ratio of the 90th to the 10th
percentiles (90 − 10). To get a sense of the economic magnitude of these numbers, taking the 90th
to the 10th spread of TFPQ shows that the productivity gap across establishment is quite high. In
Kenya, ﬁrms in the 90th percentile of productivity are 290 percent more productive than ﬁrms in the
                                                                                                   ote
10th percentile, while this gap is 87 percent in Ghana, 39 percent in Ethiopia, and 26 percent in Cˆ
d’Ivoire .
    The key question is then why the most productive ﬁrms have not expanded their production to
replace the less productive ones. A multitude of factors may have explained this phenomenon in our
sample countries. One way to assess the extent of resource misallocation is to look at the variation in
marginal products of inputs across producers. In a frictionless environment, the marginal products of
factors should be equalized across ﬁrms and this the dispersion of marginal products should be zero.
Thus a dispersion in TFPR can be interpreted as an indicative of resource misallocation (Hsieh and
Klenow, 2009). Following Hsieh and Klenow (2009), we estimate the dispersion of TFPR, which is
geometric average of the marginal products of capital and labor. The ﬁndings suggest that the TFPR
dispersion across ﬁrms in our sample countries is much higher than in India, China, and the US. For
example, the ratios of 90th to 10th percentiles of TFPR are 51 in Kenya, 17 in Ghana, 13 in Ethiopia,
  11 Note   that unpaid workers account for a large portion of manufacturing employment in SSA in general and in our
sample countries in particular.



                                                          14
          ote d’Ivoire, which are much larger than the corresponding values in India (5.0), China (4.9)
and 7 in Cˆ
and the U.S. (3.3). The results oﬀers a prima facie evidence that resources are severely misallocated
in our sample countries. A plausible explanation for our ﬁndings is that policies and institutions in our
sample countries may prevent the more productive ﬁrms from eliminating the less productive ones.


                                       Log TFPQ                                                                                             Log TFPR
  .4




                                                                                                       .8
  .3




                                                                                                       .6
  .2




                                                                                                       .4
  .1




                                                                                                       .2
  0




                                                                                                       0
       −10                      −5                          0                            5                  −5                                      0                                    5

                                  Cote d’Ivoire                 Ethiopia                                                               Cote d’Ivoire             Ethiopia
                                  Ghana                         Kenya                                                                  Ghana                     Kenya




                                                            Figure 3: Distribution of TFPR and TFPQ



                                                                           Table 2: Dispersion of TFPR and TFPQ


                                        ote d’Ivoire
                                       Cˆ                              Kenya                    Ghana               Ethiopia                       India                  China
                                     TFPR         TFPQ           TFPR         TFPQ       TFPR          TFPQ       TFPR      TFPQ          TFPR          TFPQ      TFPR        TFPQ
                                     2003-12      2003-12         2010            2010       2003          2003   2011          2011       1994         1994       2005       2005

        S.D                           0.65          1.24          1.52            2.41       0.95          1.75   0.78          1.30        0.67         1.23      0.63           0.95
        75–25                         0.88          1.74          1.99            3.34       1.43          2.61   1.26          1.94        0.81         1.60      0.82           1.28
        90–10                         1.99          3.25          3.94            5.67       2.89          4.47   2.56          3.67        1.60         3.11      1.59           2.44
        Cov (TFPQ,TFPR)                      0.70                          0.85                     0.69                 0.74
        Reg.Coeﬀ                             0.42                          0.52                     0.44                 0.53

        N                             4146          4146           757            757        1151          1151   4012          4012      41,006        41,006   211,304     211,304
                                                                                                                                                        ote d’Ivoire
       Note: Log(TFPR) and Log(TFPQ) are demeaned by industry-speciﬁc average. Industries are weighted by their value-added shares. The statistics for Cˆ
       are calculated by taking the average for the years 2003-2012. The statistics for India and China are taken from Hsieh and Klenow (2009). We compute these
       statistics for India using the Prowess database and obtain similar values as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009).




6.2           Calculating Counterfactual Productivity
Next, we use our estimates to perform counterfactual liberalization experiments. Speciﬁcally, we assess
the potential productivity gains associated with equalizing total factor revenue productivity (TFPR)
across the existing set of ﬁrms in each 4-digit industry. The results of this liberalization experiment are
reported in Table 3. The ﬁrst column of Table 3 indicates that the potential TFP gains from better
allocation of resources are much higher in Kenyan manufacturing sector compared to the corresponding
                                ote d’Ivoire. More speciﬁcally, fully equalizing total factor revenue
values in Ethiopia, Ghana, and Cˆ
productivity (TFPR) across ﬁrms in each industry, could increase total productivity by 31.4 percent in
 ote d’Ivoire, 66.6 percent in Ethiopia, 75.5 percent in Ghana and 162.6 percent in Kenya.12
Cˆ
  12 Note       that the gains from reallocation increase with σ . As Hsieh and Klenow (2009) point out, when σ is larger, the
TFPR gaps are closed more slowly in response to a reallocation of resources from low to high TFPR establishments,
leading to a higher gains from reallocation.



                                                                                               15
                                             Table 3: Potential TFP Gains from
                                             Equalizing TFPR


                                                                  Total Gains

                                              Cote d’Ivoire           31.4
                                              Ethiopia                66.6
                                              Ghana                   75.7
                                              Kenya                  162.6


    These estimates can be viewed as a reasonable lower bounds since the counterfactual analysis ab-
stracts from other potential sources of ampliﬁcation. First, our analysis focuses on TFP gain from
the reversal of distortion within four-digit manufacturing industries, abstracting from between-industry
reallocation gains.13 Thus, reversing the between-industry misallocation – equalizing T F P Rs across in-
dustries within the manufacturing sector– may lead to even larger eﬀect on aggregate TFP. Second, our
analysis allows static productivity gains only. Accommodating the dynamic eﬀect would likely amplify
the total TFP gains from removing distortions. Third, reallocation in the manufacturing sector may
have economy-wide implications through backward and forward linkages. The improvement in produc-
tivity in the manufacturing sector could lead to a process of structural change in our sample countries.
Thus, productivity gains from the removal of distortions are likely to be higher than otherwise implied
by a one-sector model. Finally, it is also worth emphasizing that we abstract from potential gains from
directing resources between formal and informal ﬁrms. Since informal ﬁrms are often found to be on
average less productive than formal ﬁrms, reversing the distortion between formal and informal ﬁrms
operating in the same sector may yield a larger TFP gains.


6.3     Correlated Distortions
The empirical facts in the previous section establish that the within-industry dispersion of revenue
productivity of ﬁrms is quite large. As emphasized in Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), distortions would
be particularly costly if they are positively correlated with ﬁrm’s physical productivity. Put diﬀerently,
distortions would severely reduce aggregate productivity if they penalize more eﬃcient relative to less
productive ones.
    Figure 4 non-parametrically plots the log(T F P R) against log(T F P Q), both measured relative to
the log of industry averages. The ﬁgure clearly shows that TFPR is strongly increasing in TFPQ in all
four countries, providing some evidence that more productive ﬁrms are facing a larger distortions.14 The
positive relationship between TFPR and TFPQ is quite consistent with most ﬁndings in the literature,
especially in developing countries.
  13 Note   that T F P Rs are not equalized across sectors s.
  14 Note   that in a frictionless world, ﬁrms with lower TFPR (establishment receiving implicit subsidy) would reduce their
production while establishments with a higher TFPR (establishments facing higher implicit tax) would expand, resulting
in all establishments to fall along the zero log(T F P R/T F P R) line – the undistorted equilibrium line. Along this line
establishments diﬀer only on their physical productivity (TFPQ), as in Melitz (2003).




                                                             16
                                              Local Polynomial Smooth: Cote d’                                                                       Local Polynomial Smooth: Ethiopia




                     4




                                                                                                                           4
                     2




                                                                                                                           2
                 Log TFPR




                                                                                                                       Log TFPR
                     0




                                                                                                                           0
                     −2




                                                                                                                           −2
                     −4




                                                                                                                           −4
                            −8                −6                −4                 −2              0          2                           −6               −4               −2                0                2         4
                                                                     Log TFPQ                                                                                               Log TFPQ

                                                   95% CI         Log TFPR                     lpoly smooth                                                95% CI         Log TFPR                       lpoly smooth
                            kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .35, pwidth = .53                                        kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .55, pwidth = .83




                                              Local Polynomial Smooth: Ghana                                                                            Local Polynomial Smooth: Kenya
                     4




                                                                                                                             5
                     2
                 Log TFPR




                                                                                                                         Log TFPR
                     0




                                                                                                                             0
                     −2
                     −4




                                                                                                                             −5
                            −8                −6                −4                 −2              0          2                     −10                             −5                             0                         5
                                                                     Log TFPQ                                                                                                 Log TFPQ

                                                   95% CI         Log TFPR                     lpoly smooth                                                 95% CI          Log TFPR                      lpoly smooth
                            kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .53, pwidth = .79                                         kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .68, pwidth = 1.02
                                               2  0
                                          Log TFPR
                                               −2
                                               −4




                                                      −10                                              −5                                              0                                                   5
                                                                                                                  Log TFPQ

                                                                                                         Cote d’Ivoire                                     Ethiopia
                                                                                                         Ghana                                             Kenya




                                                                               Figure 4: Log TFPR vs Log TFPQ


   To further highlight the strength of this relationship, we run an OLS regression of a ﬁrm’s log
TFPR on log TFPQ for each sample country. These elasticities turn out to be 0.52 for Kenya, 0.44 for
                                       ote d’Ivoire. To put these numbers in broader perspective, it is
Ghana, 0.53 for Ethiopia, and 0.42 in Cˆ
informative to compare and contrast the ﬁndings with similar studies for other countries. The elasticity
of TFPR with respect to TFPQ in the US manufacturing sector is 0.09 (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014).
TFPR rises more steeply in our sample countries than in the US. These elasticities again reveal that
more productive ﬁrms are “taxed” at a higher rate in our sample countries than in the US. The fact that
these elasticities are signiﬁcantly larger in our countries suggests that more productive ﬁrms are not
able to use resources, and ultimately worsen aggregate productivity (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008).
Additionally, the fact that more productive ﬁrms face higher distortions could slow down the growth of
ﬁrms over their life cycle by discouraging ﬁrms from investing in productivity enhancing technologies
(Hsieh and Klenow, 2014). In the next section, we will examine whether these higher elasticities can


                                                                                                                  17
play a role in aﬀecting the life cycle productivity dynamics of ﬁrms in our sample countries.
   In order to further understand the sources of distortions, it is instructive to decompose the overall
                                               1
distortion into its components: ‘output’     1−τysi    and ‘capital’ distortions (1 + τksi ). Figure 5 plots
these distortions versus percentiles of TFPQ, using local polynomial regression. The ﬁgures provides a
number of interesting insights. To start with, the ﬁgure shows that output distortions are monotonically
increasing in percentiles of establishment productivity (measured by TFPQ) in all four countries. This
suggests that, compared to a frictionless equilibrium, productive establishments face larger output
distortions, causing them to produce lower than their optimal output, while the less productive ones
receive an implicit output subsidy and produce beyond their optimal level, resulting in an ineﬃcient
allocation of resources and thus lower TFP. Second, the capital distortion increases in percentile of
TFPQ for low productive ﬁrms but ﬂattens out for relatively more productivity ﬁrms, albeit some
diﬀerences across the four countries. This suggests that less productive ﬁrms use more capital relative
to labor (or less labor relative to capital) than they otherwise would, while more productive ﬁrms tend to
use slightly lower capital relative to labor (or higher capital relative to labor). Finally, output frictions
appear to explain a large part of the misallocation of resources across ﬁrms of diﬀerent productivity
levels in all four countries. Put diﬀerently, the positive relationship between productivity and overall
distortions seems to be mainly driven by frictions in the product market. Thus removing output
distortion could potentially lead to a higher manufacturing TFP. In other words, the loss in productivity
due to misallocation arising from distortion in the input markets is likely to be modest.




                                                      18
                .5           Capital Distortion vs Productivity                                  Output Distortion vs Productivity




                                                                                     2
                                                                                     1
                         0
      Capital Distortion




                                                                             Output Distortion
                                                                                    0
      −.5




                                                                                     −1
                −1




                                                                                     −2
                             0     20        40     60        80     100                         0    20        40     60        80     100
                                        Log TFPQ (Percentile)                                              Log TFPQ (Percentile)

                                    Cote d’Ivoire              Ethiopia                                 Cote d’Ivoire             Ethiopia
                                    Ghana                      Kenya                                    Ghana                     Kenya




                                                         Figure 5: Distortions vs. Productivity



6.4                  Productivity and Distortions Over the Life Cycle
Our analysis so far has focused on measuring the static eﬀect of resource misallocation, but distortions
are likely to also have important dynamic implications through the eﬀect that greater misallocation
has on ﬁrms’ incentives to invest in technological upgrading. As already mentioned, the fact that more
productive ﬁrms are “taxed” more could discourage ﬁrms from investing in productivity enhancing
technologies, and as a result generate slower life cycle productivity growth, which in turn leads to
slower employment growth.
   Hsieh and Klenow (2014) document a notable diﬀerence in the post-entry dynamics of ﬁrm perfor-
mance between developing and advanced economies. Using comprehensive manufacturing census data,
they ﬁnd that while ﬁrms in the US grow by a factor of eight by the age of 40, Mexican ﬁrms grow
by a factor of two and such growth is much slower in India. The authors attempt to rationalize the
ﬂatter growth of productivity over ﬁrms’ life-cycle in developing countries through an age-dependent
component in the distribution of distortions across ﬁrms. Indeed, they ﬁnd that ﬁrms get progressively
more taxed as they age, and show quantitatively through a model of innovation that this age-dependent
component of distortions undermines productivity growth. Furthermore, they show that the dynamic
response in the underlying distribution of physical productivity magniﬁes the losses from misallocation
that result from a static analysis.



                                                                           19
   This section attempts to investigate the evolution of employment, physical productivity, and dis-
tortions over the ﬁrms’ life-cycle, as inputed from the distribution of each of these objects in the
cross-section of ﬁrms across ages. Does such age-size relationship hold for the African countries under
consideration? To what extent do distortions explain the age-size and age-productivity pattern in our
sample countries?
   Before turning to address these questions, it would be informative to understand how the distribution
of ﬁrms by age looks in our sample countries. Figure 6 plots the age distribution of ﬁrms by country.
The age distribution of ﬁrms in Kenya is strikingly diﬀerent from the other three countries. The ﬁgure
clearly shows that Kenyan ﬁrms are, on average, older than ﬁrms in Ethiopia and Ghana. One potential
reason for such diﬀerence could be because industrialization in Ethiopia and Ghana started after Kenya.
Another plausible explanation for this contrast may be due to diﬀerences in macroeconomic environment
experienced by ﬁrms in these countries. For example, while Ethiopia and Ghana lost a signiﬁcant level
of manufacturing production in the 1980s, Kenya experienced positive manufacturing output growth
during the same period (Van Biesebroeck, 2005). Thus exit rates following the crisis coupled with the
market liberalization could be higher in Ethiopia and Ghana so that fewer ﬁrms survive to old age.

                                                                                                                       Cote d’Ivoire
                                                                       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                       No. of firms relative to the youngest cohort




                                                                                         <5         5−9     10−14   15−19              20−24   25−29   30−34   >=35


                                                                                                                            Ethiopia
                                                                       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                         <5         5−9     10−14   15−19              20−24   25−29   30−34   >=35


                                                                                                                            Ghana
                                                                       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                         <5         5−9     10−14   15−19              20−24   25−29   30−34   >=35


                                                                                                                            Kenya
                                                                       1
                                                                       .5
                                                                       0




                                                                                         <5         5−9     10−14   15−19              20−24   25−29   30−34   >=35

                                                                      The youngest cohort is normalized to 1 in each country




                                                                                              Figure 6: Number of Establishments by Birth Cohort


   To understand whether ﬁrms become larger and improve their productivity as they age, Figure 7
presents the average employment and productivity of ﬁrms across diﬀerent age cohorts.15 The ﬁgure
provides preliminary evidence that ﬁrms have experienced slow employment and productivity growth
over their life cycle, albeit some diﬀerences across countries. This implies that entrants do not seem to
invest in productivity enhancing activities over their life cycle.
 15 The   average employment, physical and revenue productivity are relative to weighted averages of industry in each
country. Thus the relationship should be viewed as within-industry patterns.




                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                  Cote d’Ivoire


                                       0 2 4 6 8
   Average Employment, TFPQ and TFPR
                                                        <5




                                                               9




                                                                             14




                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                  24




                                                                                                                          29




                                                                                                                                         34




                                                                                                                                                 35
                                                              5−




                                                                              −




                                                                                            −




                                                                                                                  −




                                                                                                                           −




                                                                                                                                          −




                                                                                                                                                >=
                                                                           10




                                                                                         15




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                        25




                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                       Age


                                                                                                    Ethiopia
                                       1 2 3 4 5
                                                        <5




                                                               9




                                                                                4




                                                                                              9




                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                             9




                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                 35
                                                              5−




                                                                            −1




                                                                                          −1




                                                                                                                  −2




                                                                                                                         −2




                                                                                                                                        −3




                                                                                                                                                >=
                                                                           10




                                                                                         15




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                        25




                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                       Age


                                                                                                     Ghana
                                       .5 1 1.5 2 2.5
                                                        <5




                                                               9




                                                                                4




                                                                                              9




                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                             9




                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                 35
                                                              5−




                                                                            −1




                                                                                          −1




                                                                                                                  −2




                                                                                                                         −2




                                                                                                                                        −3




                                                                                                                                                >=
                                                                           10




                                                                                         15




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                        25




                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                       Age


                                                                                                     Kenya
                                       0 2 4 6
                                                        <5




                                                                 9




                                                                                4




                                                                                              9




                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                             9




                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                 35
                                                              5−




                                                                             −1




                                                                                           −1




                                                                                                                 −2




                                                                                                                          −2




                                                                                                                                         −3




                                                                                                                                                >=
                                                                           10




                                                                                         15




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                        25




                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                       Age




                                                                                    Employment                          TFPQ
                                                                                    TFPR
                                       The youngest cohort is normalized to 1 in each country.


                                                             Figure 7: Employment, Productivity and Distortions over the Life Cycle.


   We now turn to an investigation of how important distortions may be in explaining slow employment
and productivity dynamics in our sample countries. The ﬁgures shows that TFPR steadily increases
with establishment age (although declining for the oldest cohort) in Ethiopia, suggesting that older
ﬁrms, on average, face bigger distortions. Older Ethiopian ﬁrms are thus smaller than they would be
in a frictionless economy. In contrast, TFPR seems to be decreasing with ﬁrm’s age in Kenya. There
is no apparent relationship between productivity dynamics and TFPR variation. This patter diﬀers
somewhat from earlier work that concluded that TFPR rises with ﬁrm age in developing countries
(Hsieh and Klenow, 2014).
   Before concluding this section, it is important to highlight some caveats. First, the observed pattern
may reﬂect diﬀerences in the time and cohort. As already mentioned, the countries under consideration
instituted major economic reforms over the last three decades. More precisely, beginning in the mid-
1980s for Ghana and Kenya, and in 1991 for Ethiopia was the era of moving towards market-oriented
reforms. As shown in the ﬁgure, for Ethiopia and Ghana, the pattern before the reform (younger than
20 years) are somewhat diﬀerent from the patterns after but the pattern in Kenya seems to be stable
over the life cycle. Second, as emphasized in the literature on ﬁrm dynamics, the observed the life cycle
pattern may reﬂect ﬁrms selection (Hopenhayn, 1992). One way to evaluate whether selection matters
is to examine diﬀerences across surviving and exiting ﬁrms. However, the cross-section structure of our
data limits the eﬀort to make this comparison. As highlighted by Hsieh and Klenow (2014), a simple
comparison of average employment, productivity and distortion over groups of ﬁrms in a cross-section is


                                                                                                  21
may be a crude measure since it does not account for diﬀerences between cohorts at birth with growth
of a cohort over its life cycle. It is obviously of interest to reexamine this relationship using a panel
dataset in Africa.16


7     A Comparison with Survey Data
Our strategy to measure and quantify the costs of misallocation was taken directly from the literature.
In return to relying on strong assumptions, the methodology provides a clear benchmark of eﬃciency
with which to confront the data and is relatively simple to apply. The real limitation is the availability
of adequate data sources. In this section we perform the same exercise of measuring and computing the
costs of misallocation from an alternative data source, the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys.
    First, we diagnose the diﬀerences between the two data sources exploring their implications for the
ﬁrm size distribution. We show that there are signiﬁcant deviations in the coverage of the full spectrum
of ﬁrms in the ES for Ghana, where we ﬁnd that large ﬁrms are over-represented relative to the Census.
In Kenya, on the other hand, we ﬁnd that the two distributions match up relatively closely.
    Then, we investigate the properties of the distribution of TFPQ and TFPR and compute counter-
factual gains in productivity from the ES, in order to highlight diﬀerences with the results from the
Census. In this case, we ﬁnd that accounting for the true distribution of industrial value added share
across manufacturing industries is essential for the patterns of misallocation and the aggregate gains
in productivity from its reversal. Because the ES does not attempt to ensure representativeness at the
4-digit level in these countries, we use industrial weights from the Census. We ﬁnd that when doing so,
the ES depict a much less distorted economy with signiﬁcantly lower gains from resource reallocation.
We interpret this ﬁnding as indicative of the importance of counting with a database that properly
accounts for the real distribution of value added shares in the economy.


7.1     Firm-Size Distribution: Survey vs Census
To give some background to the analysis, the ES is brieﬂy described as follows. The ES is an ongoing
project of the World Bank to collect establishment-level data from several countries, particularly from
low and middle income countries.17 The dataset contains ﬁrm-level information including output and
input measures in a harmonized fashion for 135 countries for at least one year since 2002. Two rounds
of surveys were conducted in each of our sample countries.
    To ensure the proper sample representation, the surveys rely on a stratiﬁed sampling technique.
Three levels of stratiﬁcation were used: sector of activity, ﬁrm size, and geographical location. In
each country, regions are selected based on the extent of economic activity. The population of ﬁrms
is stratiﬁed into three size strata: small (5 to 19 employees), medium (20 to 99 employees), and large
(more than 99 employees). The degree of industry stratiﬁcation depends on the size of the economy. In
Ethiopia, sectors are classiﬁed into two strata: manufacturing and service, whereas in Ghana and Kenya
the manufacturing is subdivided further into selected 2-digit industries according to their contribution
  16 Although   there are some studies in Africa that examine productivity dynamics over the life cycle of ﬁrms using
panel data Van Biesebroeck (2005), they rely on revenue-based measures of productivity. As a result, the dynamics of
“productivity” over the life cycle may be misleading.
  17 The data are freely available from http://www.enterprisesurveys.org.




                                                          22
to value added, employment and number of establishments. The various combinations of these strata
generate the cells for each industrysizeregion. Notice the lack of 4-digit stratiﬁcation, feature to which
we shall return in the subsection below.
        As a ﬁrst look at the data, we assess the comparability between the manufacturing censuses and
ES using the Quantile-Quantile (QQ) plot. Figure 8 plots the quantiles of the size distribution of ﬁrms
in the ES against the quantiles based on manufacturing census data. The size quantiles are given in a
logarithm of employment. If the points in the plot more or less lie on the same line, then we expect
the ES data to reﬂect the size distribution in the national censuses. Departures from this relationship
indicate that the ﬁrm size distribution in the two datasets are diﬀerent.18

                                                        Cote d’Ivoire ES 2009                                                                                                                   Ethiopia ES 2011
                10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                        8




                                                                                                                                                            8
   Employment (ES 2009)




                                                                                                                                       Employment (ES 2011)
            6




                                                                                                                                                6
    4




                                                                                                                                        4
                2




                                                                                                                                                    2




                                  2                           4                 6                                         8                                          2                3             4           5                            6            7
                                                               Employment(Census)                                                                                                               Employment (Census)




                                      Ghana ES 2007                                              Ghana ES 2013                                                           Kenya ES 2007                                             Kenya ES 2013
                                                                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                 8




                                                                                7
                                                                                6




                                                                                                                                                    8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8
                          6
      Employment (ES 2007)




                                                                      Employment (ES 2013)




                                                                                                                                          Employment (ES 2007)




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Employment (ES 2013)
                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                    6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                           4
        4




                                                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                3
                                                                                2
                 2




                                                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2




                              2       3     4      5      6      7                           2   3      4     5       6       7                                  2        4       6         8      10                          2    4       6         8       10
                                      Employment (Census)                                         Employment (Census)                                                    Employment (Census)                                       Employment (Census)




                                                                           Figure 8: QQ plot of the enterprise censuses vs surveys


        A visual comparison of the QQ plots shows that the distribution based on the ES and the census
data look diﬀerent in all the countries except for Kenya.19 The top panel of 8 plots the quantile of
                                      ote d’Ivoire and 2011 ES for Ethiopia vis-a-vis the manufacturing
size distribution in the 2009 ES for Cˆ
census data in same year. As can be seen from the ﬁgure the distribution in the ES diﬀers considerably
from that implied by the manufacturing census. Similarly, the quantile of ﬁrm size in ES for the year
2007 and 2013 is plotted against a the 2003 National Industrial Census of Ghana. A visual comparison
 18 Note                          that we choose not to use sampling weights as they are not appropriate to make this comparison since they are
deﬁned at broader strata.
  19 To make it comparable with the ES, ﬁrms employing fewer than 5 workers are dropped in our sample.




                                                                                                                                  23
shows a clear diﬀerence in ﬁrm size distribution between the two datasets. For the case of Kenya, a
comparison of the ES (for the years 2007 and 2013) against the 2010 Census of Business Establishments
(CBE) reveals that the size distributions of ﬁrms in the two datasets track each other quite closely.
This can be explained by the fact that, unlike in the other countries, the CBE is actually being used to
                                              20
create the sampling frame in Kenya.
    Even though there is no unique mechanism through which biases in the size distribution could be
conveying biases in the distribution of distortions, one would be, in principle, more reassured about
Kenya’s distribution being close to the Census-based one, assuming the latter is the best representation
of the true distribution of ﬁrm sizes. We will see below, however, that one also needs to worry about
the representativeness of the distribution of sectoral value added shares.


7.2     Extent and Cost of Misallocation: Survey vs Census
We turn now to evaluating the degree and costs of misallocation as measured from the ES. The goal
is to see whether the divergence in the size distribution in the case of Ghana, and its similarity in the
case of Kenya, are informative about diﬀerences or similarities in the extent of misallocation in these
economies when compared to the calculations based on the Census.21
    There are a number of challenges involved in making the analysis of misallocation in the ES com-
parable to that in the Census. First, the surveys for the four countries under study are not built to
ensure representativeness of in terms of disaggregated sectoral coverage. As mentioned above, there is
stratiﬁcation across two broad categories, manufacturing and services, in the case of Ethiopia, while
representativeness is captured only at the two digit level in Ghana and Kenya. Adequate sectoral rep-
resentativeness is important for our calculation because aggregate suﬃcient statistics of misallocation
and the aggregate counterfactual gains in productivity are all constructed based on 4-digit weighted
averages. Thus, ensuring that an industry is properly represented in the aggregate is essential for the
validity of the results.
    To illustrate the importance of the adequate weighting of sectors, we perform two versions of our
calculations. In the ﬁrst one we weight 4-digit industries according to the value added shares implied by
the ﬁrms sampled in the surveys. In the second one we adopt the value added shares from the Census.
Under the assumption that Census-based weights are closer to the true ones, the experiments allow us
to assess the quantitative signiﬁcance of the weak sectoral representativeness of the enterprise surveys.
    A second challenge that we face, which is related to the same limitations in the construction of
the ES that we highlighted above, is that some 4-digit industries may receive no coverage at all in the
surveys. To gain comparability in face of this diﬃculty, we restrict the sample of ﬁrms in the Census
to those belonging to industries that are covered both in the Census and the ES, re-weighting valued
added shares accordingly.
  20 Obviously,   we do not expect the sample to resemble our census due to the structure of the sampling procedure. Large
establishments are in typically oversampled in the ES relative to the random sampling of ﬁrms in each country. To further
explore the comparability of the two datasets, we compare the size distribution in our census data with the sampling
frames used to draw samples in the ES. We ﬁnd that the sampling frame signiﬁcantly underestimates small ﬁrms in
Ethiopia and Ghana.
  21 Note that Cˆ
                ote d’Ivoire and Ethiopia are excluded in this exercise due to the large number of missing values of capital
in the ES.




                                                             24
                               Table 4: Dispersion of TFPR and TFPQ based on the Enterprise Surveys

                                                 Kenya                                                                      Ghana
                 TFPR (Census wgts)   TFPR(ES wgts)   TFPQ (Census wgts)   TFPQ(ES wgts)   TFPR (Census wgts)   TFPR (ES wgts)   TFPQ (Census wgts)   TFPR(ES wgts)
                        2013              2013               2013              2013               2007               2007               2007              2007

     S.D                1.30              1.48               2.21              2.72               0.98               1.05               1.28              1.32
     75–25              1.34              1.65               3.21              5.20               1.11               1.60               1.97              2.01
     90–10              2.86              4.37               5.54              7.29               2.56               2.58               3.43              3.57
     Reg. Coeﬀ                                    0.46                                                                       0.49

     N                  150                169               150                169               249                258                249                258




   Statistics about the TFPR and TFPQ distributions are reported in table 4. For each country and
for each variable, we report statistics of the distributions inferred from the ES that diﬀer in the value
added shares used to weight industries in the aggregation. Census − wgts stand for value added shares
inputed from the Census, while ES − wgts are the weights implied by the sample of ﬁrms in the
enterprise surveys.




             Figure 9: Distribution of TFPR : Census, ES with Census weights, and ES with survey Weights


   We can see that when weighting sectors as in the Census, which we view as the most plausible
characterization of true structure of production, all magnitudes of dispersion are reduced relative to the
magnitudes that result from the ES’s own weights. A visual representation of the same conclusion can
be observed in ﬁgure 9, which illustrates the distributions of TFPR from the ES with census weights,
the ES with survey weights, and the Census. The ﬁgure not only validates the conclusion from the table
that the dispersion in the distribution of distortions is lowered when weighting industries according to
Census-based value added shares, it also shows that the survey based distribution is even less dispersed
than the Census one.




                                                                                  25
                             Table 5: Potential TFP Gains with Diﬀerent Industrial Weights


                                       Census                        Enterprise Surveys
                                 Baseline     Partial      ES      Full Census   Partial Census

                      Ghana        75.7         71.1      146.6         32.8           54.3
                      Kenya       162.6        184.2      86.5          16.7           51.4
                    Note: The TFP gains are calculated based on diﬀerent industrial weights. The
                    TFP gains under the column ‘Partial’ are calculated by restricting to the subset
                    of industries that overlap with the ES. The columns “Full Census” and “Partial
                    Census” refer to TFP gains across ﬁrms in the ES where industries are weighted
                    based on the full and partial censuses, respectively.


    Finally, table 5 reports the counterfactual gains in aggregate manufacturing resulting from reversing
distortions in the the three types of data that we have been comparing: census, ES with census weights,
and ES with survey weights. In the case of the Census, we report the baseline results introduced above
together with the gains corresponding to the case where we restrict to the subset of industries that
overlap with the industries in the ES.
    The table conveys a clear message: once industries are weighted as in the census, and hence once
we correct for biases in the sectoral distribution of production in the survey, gains from withdrawing
distortions are signiﬁcantly muted (column 4 vs column 2). They are less than half the census-based
gains in the case of Kenya, and are reduced by 25% in the case of Ghana. The gains from the ES using
its own implied weights are expectedly larger.


8     The Underlying Sources of Misallocation
The results presented above clearly revealed that resource misallocation is quite large in our sample
countries. Thus improving the allocation of resources is a critical element in order to boost manufac-
turing productivity in these countries. To oﬀer speciﬁc suggestions on how these countries can improve
their productivity by reducing allocative ineﬃciency, it is important to identify the speciﬁc factors that
have contributed to the observed misallocation. Nevertheless, identifying the speciﬁc policies or institu-
tions that may have contributed to such misallocation is notoriously diﬃcult. In principle, many factors
– observable and unobservable – may reasonably contribute to resource misallocation across ﬁrms. For
example access to ﬁnance, tax rates and regulatory requirements may favor particular ﬁrms because of
political connections or family ties.22 Identifying speciﬁc distortions is perhaps more diﬃcult in Africa
since the region is often characterized by a high cost of doing business. While our census data do not
allow us to pin down the reasons behind the substantial level of resource misallocation in our sample
countries, we believe that this pattern is associated to the heterogeneous business environment faced
by ﬁrms. Our goal in this section is to uncover the potential underlying sources of misallocation by
examining the role of diﬀerent business environment bottlenecks experienced by ﬁrms. To this end we
merge our data with the ES data, which provide various measures of business climate indicators.
  22 Hsieh   and Klenow (2009) argue that the substantial domination of SOEs and cumbersome licensing requirements
contribute to misallocation of resources in China and India, respectively.




                                                             26
Institutions        The ES database contains both perception as well as quantitative information regarding
the costs of doing business experienced by ﬁrms for a large number of countries. The perception
indicators are often used to examine the eﬀects of the business environment, but present a number
of possible limitations. The main concern is that perception data are subject to measurement errors
since they are likely to be aﬀected by observed and unobserved ﬁrm and country speciﬁc factors. For
example, they might simply reﬂect “individual diﬀerences in the degree of optimism or pessimism of
the managers” and/or experience or performance of the establishment (Aterido et al., 2011). In view of
this, we prefer quantitative measures, where managers are asked to specify the speciﬁc costs incurred
when doing business, over perception data for our analysis.23
    We construct an index of the quality of institutions based on the objective measures from the ES.
    Financial friction is often thought to be an important source of misallocation, particularly in coun-
tries with poorly-functioning ﬁnancial market. It can severely harm aggregate TFP by preventing the
optimal adjustment of factor inputs. A recent study by Buera et al. (2011) has shown that a substantial
portion of the variation in aggregate productivity across countries may be accounted for by resource
misallocation due to imperfect ﬁnancial markets. The ES dataset contains a number of questions in
regard to access to ﬁnance. Speciﬁcally, the survey asked ﬁrms to indicate whether the establishment
has ‘access to ﬁnance’ as well as the actual ‘cost of ﬁnancing’.24 We deﬁne the quality of the ﬁnancial
institution as the ease for establishments to get external ﬁnancing. More speciﬁcally, we measure the
ﬁnancial friction as the percentage of establishments in the each region that do not have a line of credit
or loan from a ﬁnancial institution.
    Another possible driver of misallocation is uneven implementation of regulations which allows un-
productive ﬁrms to enter and survive easily. The ES dataset contains a large number of measures
of the extent of regulation and red-tape induced costs. We use the share of senior managers’ time
that is used in dealing with government oﬃcials as our measure of regulation (Red-tape), as used in
(Hallward-Driemeier et al., 2010; Li et al., 2011).
    It is also plausible that the quality of infrastructure may have a diﬀerential eﬀect on the operation
of ﬁrms within industries. Poor-quality infrastructure is often considered to be a major bottleneck for
performance of ﬁrms in SSA countries. However, the eﬀects of poor infrastructure are not uniform
across establishments. For example, the same extent of power outages may cause less damage to large
ﬁrms because they might insure themselves against outages by purchasing generators or otherwise
substituting away from electricity (Aterido et al., 2011; Allcott et al., 2015). We measure the extent of
infrastructure bottlenecks by the proportion of annual sales lost due to power outages (Electricity ).
    Finally, the high level of resource misallocation could also reﬂect that ﬁrms in our sample countries
face severe corruption costs. The ES contains information on the occurrence of bribe requests as well
as the amount of the informal payments to ‘get things done’ with regard to customs, taxes, licenses,
regulations, other public services.25 To measure the extent of corruption, we use the average percentage
of sales spent on informal payments made to get things done.
  23 Note   that Kalemli-Ozcan and Sorensen (2012) use subjective ﬁrm responses as measures of the business environment
to examine the cost of capital misallocation in Africa.
  24 The speciﬁc questions are “Does this establishment currently have a line of credit or loan from a ﬁnancial institution?

and What is the rate of interest of this most recent line of credit or loan?”, respectively.
  25 The survey questions are: In any of these inspections was a gift or informal payment requested? If so, what percent

of total annual sales is paid in informal payments?



                                                            27
Empirical Speciﬁcation To investigate the role of institution on the process of resource allocation,
we map the measures of business climate from the ES to our census data. Since there is no ﬁrm-speciﬁc
policy variable in our data, we ﬁrst construct policy variables from the ES by taking the averages of
survey responses of ﬁrms located in the same region. The underlying assumption of this approach is
that policies vary across regions within a country, which is plausible since ﬁrms facing the same de
jure policy are likely to face diﬀerent policy implementation across regions (Acemoglu and Dell, 2010;
Hallward-Driemeier et al., 2010).26 The estimation equation is then given by:


                                    yisrc = β0 xic + β1 BE rc + Dc + Ds +        isrc                            (14)

    where yisrc is ﬁrm-speciﬁc measure of distortion of ﬁrm i in industry s region r and country c. Dc
and Ds are country and industry dummies, respectively. xic is a vector of ﬁrm characteristics that
may be correlated with distortions (age and size). The policy variables (BE ) are region-average of the
respective measures of business environment. For example, ‘Finance’ measures the region-average of
fraction of ﬁrms with no access to short-term ﬁnance. Corruption – the region-average of losses due to
informal payments. Electricity - average of losses due to electrical outages in each region. Regulation
– the region-average of the fraction of time that the senior managers spent dealing with government
regulations.
    The results of this regression are reported in Table 6. In a frictionless world, T F P Rsi should
be equalized across all ﬁrms within industries, and we would expect all the coeﬃcients of the policy
variables to be not signiﬁcant if these policies are orthogonal to other factors that may possibly aﬀect
T F P R. To the extent there is a positive and signiﬁcant coeﬃcient of the policy variables, this can be
taken as evidence that the business environment aﬀects idiosyncratic distortions.
    Although it cannot be interpreted as causal evidence, the results in table 6 shows that business
environment indicators are found to be signiﬁcantly correlated with ﬁrm-speciﬁc distortions.27 In
particular, our results show that lack of access to short-term ﬁnance is associated with a higher level of
capital and output distortions, after controlling for ﬁrm and industry diﬀerences. Business regulations,
measured as the fraction of time that the senior managers spent dealing with government regulations, is
also positively correlated with capital and ‘output’ distortions, indicating that regulatory red-tape cause
a higher capital and ‘output’ wedge. The eﬀect of access to electricity on τK is negative, suggesting
that losses due to electricity generate a higher labor distortion relative to capital distortion. This result
is puzzling because one would expect lack of electricity to aﬀect capital more than labor. In addition,
informal payments are associated with higher output distortions. Overall, and although there is a lack
of variability in our data that can facilitate identiﬁcation of the causal eﬀects, the results suggest that
the business environment is an important factor explaining misallocation in the sample countries.
    Although we attempted to make connection between various business environment measures and
resource misallocation, we are nonetheless aware that establishing causal relationship would require
ﬁrm-speciﬁc policy variation, hence, this constitutes a proﬁtable area for future research.
  26 By   regressing ﬁrm-speciﬁc measures of business environment onto regional dummies, we ﬁnd that the policies vary
signiﬁcantly across regions.
  27 Note that the number of observations decreases because the ES only covers establishments in the major regions of

the sample countries. Thus, establishments located in small regions are not included in the analysis.




                                                           28
                                Table 6: Idiosyncratic distortions and business environment


                                                   (1)                          (2)                        (3)
                                                 TFPR                           τ k                        τ y
                                                 ∗∗∗                       ∗∗∗                        ∗∗∗
                Finance                   0.90            (0.04)    1.88              (0.05)   0.20              (0.03)
                                                 ∗∗∗                       ∗∗∗                         ∗∗∗
                Electricity              -0.05            (0.00)   -0.02              (0.00)   -0.04             (0.00)
                                                 ∗∗∗                                                  ∗∗∗
                Corruption                0.06            (0.01)        0.01          (0.01)   0.05              (0.01)
                                                 ∗∗∗                       ∗∗∗                         ∗
                Red-tape                  0.03            (0.00)    0.05              (0.01)    0.01             (0.00)
                Industry FE                 Yes                         Yes                      Yes
                Firm controls               Yes                         Yes                      Yes
                Observations               8037                         8037                    8037
                    2
                R                          0.631                        0.648                   0.237
                Standard errors in parentheses
                ∗   p < 0.05,   ∗∗   p < 0.01,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.001



9     Sensitivity Analysis
This section provides a sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of our main ﬁndings reported in
Table 3. To start with, in our baseline analysis, labor input is measured using wage bill. However, one
can also argue that wages reﬂect rent sharing between the establishment and its workers, resulting in
the underestimation of TFPR dispersion across establishments since the most proﬁtable establishments
have to pay better wages (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). As a ﬁrst robustness check, we test our results using
the number of people engaged as our measure of labor input instead of using wage bill. The reallocation
                                   ote d’Ivoire (33.2 vs 31.4), Ethiopia (77.97 vs. 66.6) and Kenya
gains would be modestly larger in Cˆ
(170.6 vs. 162.6) but smaller in Ghana (66.9 vs. 75.7). This reﬂects that wage diﬀerences can lead to a
                                                      ote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia and Kenya, but increases
decrease in TFPR dispersion across establishments in Cˆ
in Ghana. Overall, our results are robust to this change, the potential gains from reallocation continue
to be the largest in Kenya.
    In our baseline computation, αs was set to correspond to the capital share in the U.S. One may
argue that the characteristics of the U.S. industries can be diﬀerent from those in SSA countries, due
to the diﬀerences in technology and other factors. As a robustness check, we recalculate the potential
TFP gains under two diﬀerent assumptions of αs . First, we set αs = 1/3 for all sub-sectors s. Second,
we repeat our computation by setting αs on the basis of industry-speciﬁc capital share in each country
instead of capital share in the US, assuming that the industry is, on average, undistorted in these
countries. The result reveals that using country-speciﬁc elasticity of capital leads to a much larger
potential gains from reallocation in all four countries.
    The extent of misallocation is sensitive to the treatment of outliers. To ensure that our results are
not aﬀected by outliers, we also estimate the potential aggregate TFP gains by trimming the top and
bottom 2 % tails of TFPR and TFPQ. The potential gains from reallocation decrease from 31.4% to
          ote d’Ivoire, 75.7% to 56.1% in Ghana and from 162.6 % to 120.6 % in Kenya but remains
25.8% in Cˆ
unchanged in Ethiopia. The large drop in the TFP gains in Kenya (by about 40%) after trimming the
2% outliers highlights that large gains can be obtained through reallocation of resources from the least


                                                                   29
productive establishments to the most productive ones.
   Finally, in our benchmark analysis we include all establishments regardless of their size. As ex-
plained before our census covers all establishments employing 10 workers and a representative sample
of ﬁrms were taken from establishments with less than 10 workers in Ethiopia and Ghana while the
Kenyan census covers all manufacturing establishments in the country. One may argue that Kenyan
census may not be comparable to the Ivorian, Ethiopian or Ghanaian censuses in covering the smallest
establishments. To examine the extent to which this ﬁnding is an artifact of the Kenyan dataset that
has sparse coverage of small ﬁrms, as a ﬁnal robustness check, we redo the analysis by excluding estab-
lishments employing less than 10 workers. The result shows that the potential gains from reallocation
                                                 ote d’Ivoire, (60.9% vs. 66.6%) in Ethiopia, (66.9% vs.
decreases in all countries (29.4% vs. 31.4%) in Cˆ
75.7%) in Ghana and (141.5% vs. 162.6% ) in Kenya, implying that part of the gains from reallocation
comes from small establishments but the qualitative result remains unchanged.

                      Table 7: Sensitivity Analysis: Potential Gains from Equalizing TFPR


                      Baseline     σ =5    Trim 2%      L > 10     WL=L       αs = 1/3      Country αs s

       ote d’Ivoire
      Cˆ                31.4       44.7       25.8         29.4      33.2        21.8           44.9
      Ethiopia          66.6       82.0       66.0         60.9     77.97        56.41        101.81
      Ghana             75.7       85.1       56.1         66.9     66.88        59.17         93.06
      Kenya             162.6     194.6      120.6         141.5    170.55      153.91        440.24


   Overall, the sensitivity analysis clearly implies that our ﬁnding that resource misallocation is the
                                   ote d’Ivoire is robust to alternative assumptions regarding the
highest in Kenya and the least in Cˆ
measures of labor inputs, elasticity of capital and outliers. However, the ﬁgure that emerges from com-
paring Ethiopia and Ghana is rather mixed, the relative ranking changes depending on the alternative
assumptions.


10     Concluding Remarks
This paper has examined the eﬀects of resource misallocation induced by ﬁrm-speciﬁc distortions on
aggregate manufacturing productivity using comprehensive and comparable data on manufacturing
                                              ote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana and Kenya.
ﬁrms in four Sub-Saharan Africa countriess - Cˆ
   Our main results are as follows. First, we found evidence that ﬁrm-level distortions have a quan-
titatively sizable detrimental impact on aggregate productivity, through the misallocation of resources
away from more eﬃcient to less productive ones, in all four countries we study. The counterfactual
exercises imply a substantial productivity gain from the removal of distortions in Kenya, with a range
of estimates from 162.6 to 194.6, depending on the model assumptions. The potential productivity
gains are also large for Ghana (with range from 66.6 to 82.0 percent) and Ethiopia (with a range from
                            ote d’Ivoire the gains are from 31.4 to 44.7 percent, much smaller than the
75.7 to 85.1 percent). For Cˆ
other three countries. These results are robust to alternative parameter values that we use to measure
the distortions.
   Our results also suggest that distortions are positively correlated with ﬁrm-level productivity in all


                                                      30
four countries, providing evidence that more productive ﬁrms (‘good’) are ‘taxed’ more. Interestingly,
the bulk of these misallocations across ﬁrms of diﬀerent productivity levels arise largely due to frictions
in the output market. The misallocation due to factor market friction has a fairly modest eﬀect on
more productive ﬁrms.
   We also ﬁnd evidence that the measured distortions are correlated with various measures of busi-
ness environment, and suggest that these are likely to play an important role explaining the pervasive
resource misallocation. These ﬁndings suggest that paradoxically, while industrialization and produc-
tivity growth in manufacturing are important policy objectives in these countries, the misallocation
induced by uneven regulations and poor business environment are undermining a larger contribution of
manufacturing in these economies. Improving the business environment should, therefore, be a priority
for policy also from an industrialization point of view.
   Our analysis has abstracted from many factors which may be worth exploring further. First, our
analysis covers ﬁrms in the manufacturing sector, ignoring non-manufacturing sectors. Distortions af-
fecting ﬁrms in the manufacturing sector may have potential economy-wide implications though linkages
in the input-output network with other sectors. An interesting future research area will be to assess the
extent of misallocation in a multi-sector framework by accounting for all the potential linkages between
sectors. Second, although we attempted to make a connection between various business environment
measures and resource misallocation, establishing this relationship with robustness requires ﬁrm-speciﬁc
policy variation of the cost of doing business, which constitutes a proﬁtable area for future research.


References
Acemoglu, D. and Dell, M. (2010). Productivity diﬀerences between and within countries. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(1):169–188.

Ackah, C., Adjasi, C., and Turkson, F. (2014). Scoping study on the evolution of industry in ghana.
  Technical report, WIDER Working Paper.

Allcott, H., Collard-Wexler, A., and OConnell, S. D. (2015). How do electricity shortages aﬀect industry?
  evidence from india.

Altenburg, T. (2010). Industrial policy in ethiopia.

Asker, J., Collard-Wexler, A., and De Loecker, J. (2014). Dynamic inputs and resource (mis) allocation.
  Journal of Political Economy, 122(5):1013–1063.

                                            es, C. (2011). Big constraints to small ﬁrms growth?
Aterido, R., Hallward-Driemeier, M., and Pag´
  business environment and employment growth across ﬁrms. Economic Development and Cultural
  Change, 59(3):609–647.

Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., and Scarpetta, S. (2013). Cross-country diﬀerences in productivity:
  The role of allocation and selection. American Economic Review, 103(1):305–34.

Brownbridge, M. and Gockel, A. F. (1996). The impact of ﬁnancial sector policies on banking in Ghana.
  Institute of Development Studies.


                                                    31
Buera, F. J., Kaboski, J. P., and Shin, Y. (2011). Finance and development: A tale of two sectors.
  American Economic Review, 101(5):1964–2002.

Busso, M., Madrigal, L., et al. (2013). Productivity and resource misallocation in latin america. The
  BE Journal of Macroeconomics, 13(1):903–932.

Camacho, A. and Conover, E. (2010). Misallocation and productivity in colombias manufacturing
  industries.

Chege, J., Ngui, D., and Kimuyu, P. (2014). Scoping paper on kenyan manufacturing. Technical report,
  WIDER Working Paper.

David, J. M., Hopenhayn, H. A., and Venkateswaran, V. (2014). Information, misallocation and aggre-
  gate productivity. Working Paper 20340, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., and Syverson, C. (2008). Reallocation, ﬁrm turnover, and eﬃciency: Selec-
  tion on productivity or proﬁtability? American Economic Review, 98(1):394–425.

    ıa-Santana, M. and Pijoan-Mas, J. (2014). The reservation laws in india and the misallocation of
Garc´
  production factors. Journal of Monetary Economics, 66:193–209.

Gebreeyesus, M. (2013). Industrial policy and development in ethiopia: Evolution and present experi-
  mentation. Technical report, WIDER Working Paper.

Guner, N., Ventura, G., and Xu, Y. (2008). Macroeconomic implications of size-dependent policies.
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):721–744.

Gustavo, M. C. and Cristobal, B. J. (2012). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in bolivia during the
  market liberalization period. The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 12(1):1–45.

Hallward-Driemeier, M., Khun-Jush, G., and Pritchett, L. (2010). Deals versus rules: Uncertainty in
  policy implication in africa. NBER working paper, 16001.

Harrison, A. E. (1994). Productivity, imperfect competition and trade reform: Theory and evidence.
  Journal of international Economics, 36(1-2):53–73.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992). Entry, exit, and ﬁrm dynamics in long run equilibrium. Econometrica, pages
  1127–1150.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china and india. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4):1403–1448.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2014). The life cycle of plants in india and mexico. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129:1035–1084.

Jones, C. I. (2011). Misallocation, economic growth, and input-output economics. NBER Working
  Papers 16742, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and Sorensen, B. E. (2012). Misallocation, property rights, and access to ﬁnance:
  Evidence from within and across africa. Working Paper 18030, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                 32
Krakah, T., Rankin, N., and Teal, F. (2014). Report on the 1987 and 2003 industrial censuses in ghana.

Li, W., Mengistae, T., and Xu, L. C. (2011). Diagnosing development bottlenecks: China and india*.
  Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 73(6):722–752.

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
  productivity. Econometrica, 71(6):1695–1725.

Midrigan, V. and Xu, D. Y. (2014). Finance and misallocation: Evidence from plant-level data. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 104(2):422–58.

Oberﬁeld, E. (2013). Productivity and misallocation during a crisis: Evidence from the chilean crisis of
  1982. Review of Economic Dynamics, 16(1):100–119.

Restuccia, D. and Rogerson, R. (2008). Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heterogeneous
  establishments. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):707–720.

Restuccia, D. and Rogerson, R. (2013). Misallocation and productivity. Review of Economic Dynamics,
  16(1):1–10.

Sandefur, J. (2010). On the evolution of the ﬁrm size distribution in an african economy.

Van Biesebroeck, J. (2005). Firm size matters: Growth and productivity growth in african manufac-
  turing. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 53(3):545–583.

                    ote d’Ivoire: From Crisis to Sustained Growth Priorities for Ending Poverty and
World Bank (2015). Cˆ
  Boosting Shared Prosperity. The World Bank.


                                            APPENDIX




                                                  33
A         Tables and Figures

                                    Table A1: Deﬁnition of Variables and Parameters


Variables                                    Deﬁnition
Production variables
GVP                                          Value of annual gross output.
PY                                           Total value of production minus intermediate inputs.
WL                                           Wages and salaries plus fringe beneﬁts..
K                                            Capital stock is deﬁned as the book value of ﬁxed assets.
M                                            Annual consumption of intermediate inputs - materials,
                                             utilities and purchased services.


Other ﬁrm covariates
L                                            Total number of paid and unpaid workers plus proprietors.
Age                                          Years since the establishment started its operation.
Ownership                                    Private and government-owned ﬁrms.
Location                                     Establishment located in the capital (Addis Ababa, Accra, Nairobi)
                                             or outside from capital.


Parameters
αs                                           The capital share in the corresponding 4-digit US industry.
σ                                            Elasticity of substitution, set at 3 in the baseline calculation.
R                                            The rental rate of capital, set at 10%.


                                                    Table A2: Data Sources.

      Country                  Provider                         Size Threshold              Year                  # Observations

     ote d’Ivoire
    Cˆ              National Statistics Institute         Census of all registered ﬁrms.    2003-2012            Raw     data:
                    (INS): Registrar of Companies                                                                6,746
                    for the modern enterprise sec-
                    tors.

    Ethiopia        Central    Statistical     Agency     Census   of ﬁrms employing        2011                 Raw     data:
                    (CSA): Large and Medium               more than 10 workers.                                  1,936
                    Scale     Manufacturing        and
                    Electricity Industries Survey

                    Central    Statistical     Agency     Survey of ﬁrms employing less     2011                 Raw     data:
                    (CSA): Small-Scale Manufac-           than 10 workers and use power-                         3,882
                    turing Industries Survey              driven machinery.

    Ghana           Ghanaian Statistical Service          Census of more than 10 work-      2003                 Raw     data:
                    (GSS).    National       Industrial   ers and representative sample                          3,302
                    Census                                of establishments engaging less
                                                          than 10 workers.
                                                                                                            Continued on next page



                                                              34
                                     Table A2 – continued from previous page
  Country   Provider and Survey Type                    Size Cutoﬀ          Year   Observations/Year

Kenya       Kenya   National     Bureau   of   Census of all formal ﬁrms.   2010   Raw     data:
            Statistics (KNBS)- Census of                                           2,089
            Industrial Sector.




                                                   35
