                                                     WPS7912


Policy Research Working Paper                       7912




   Residential Electricity Subsidies in Pakistan
     Targeting, Welfare Impacts, and Options for Reform

                                  Thomas Walker
                                  Ezgi Canpolat
                                Farah Khalid Khan
                                   Adea Kryeziu




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7912


  Abstract
 This paper examines the economic and social implications                            is only one of many concerns among electricity users, with
 of the current system of residential electricity subsidies in                       reliability of supply and customer service being arguably
 Pakistan, and assesses the potential to improve the system’s                        more important. The analysis finds that targeting could be
 outcomes through alternative targeting and program design.                          improved considerably by allocating subsidies according to
 The analysis is multi-disciplinary in nature, drawing on                            proxy-means test scores using an existing national proxy-
 national household survey data, electric company data on                            means test database. Providing a flat credit rather than a
 household electricity consumption, a welfare database, and a                        price subsidy could also alleviate certain governance con-
 specially commissioned qualitative assessment of household                          cerns. The paper concludes with some guidance on how to
 and service provider attitudes and experiences. Affordability                       carry out these reforms based on international experience.




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at twalker@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
                       Residential	Electricity	Subsidies	in	Pakistan	1	
                      Targeting,	Welfare	Impacts,	and	Options	for	Reform	
                                                                    	
                                                                    	
                                                            Thomas	Walker	*	
                                                             Ezgi	Canpolat	*	
                                                           Farah	Khalid	Khan	*	
                                                             Adea	Kryeziu	*	
                                                                    	
                                                                    	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Keywords:	Electric	Utilities,	Subsidies,	Welfare,	Safety	Nets,	Targeting,	Pakistan.	
JEL	codes:	L94,	H22,	D6,	I38.	
	                             	


																																																								
	
*	Social	Protection	and	Labor	Global	Practice,	The	World	Bank	Group.		
1	The	authors	thank	Pablo	Gottret,	Gul	Najam	Jamy,	Amjad	Zafar	Khan,	Iftikhar	Malik,	Lucian	Pop,	Mohammad	

Saqib	and	Richard	Spencer	for	their	support.	The	authors	also	appreciate	the	assistance	and	advice	of	officials	
in	 the	 Government	 of	 Pakistan,	 specifically	 the	 Ministry	 of	 Water	 and	 Power,	 Ministry	 of	 Finance,	 Benazir	
Income	Support	Programme,	NADRA,	and	Planning	Commission.	In	addition,	the	authors	are	appreciative	of	
the	generosity	of	officials	at	IESCO,	FESCO	and	GEPCO	for	sharing	consumer	billing	data	analyzed	in	this	report.	
Qualitative	analysis	referenced	in	this	paper	was	carried	out	by	SoSec	International.	The	work	was	financed	by	
a	grant	from	the	United	Kingdom	Department	for	International	Development,	under	the	 Towards	 Integrated	
Social	Protection	Systems	in	Pakistan	trust	fund.		
    I.   Introduction	

The	cost	of	residential	electricity	subsidies	in	Pakistan	constituted	around	0.8	percent	of	GDP	
in	2014–15,	about	the	same	as	total	expenditure	on	the	health	sector.	At	times	in	the	past	
decade,	 electricity	 subsidies	 have	 cost	 the	 government	 more	 than	 2	 percent	 of	 GDP,	
contributing	to	the	national	debt	and	weakening	the	country’s	external	position.	As	part	of	
its	energy	sector	reforms,	the	Government	of	Pakistan	has	in	recent	years	made	efforts	to	
reform	 electricity	 subsidies,	 contributing	 to	 reducing	 their	 budgetary	 cost	 to	 around	 0.4	
percent	of	GDP	in	2015‐16.	This	reduction	has	been	achieved	partly	through	cuts	to	subsidies	
on	the	highest‐volume	residential	consumers	(as	well	as	commercial	and	industrial	users),	
helped	by	declining	costs	of	energy	worldwide.	However,	any	future	hikes	in	international	
energy	prices	would	need	to	be	passed	on	to	the	consumer,	with	adverse	consequences	for	
poverty,	or	absorbed	by	the	government	as	new	debt.	

There	is	a	growing	body	of	international	evidence	demonstrating	that	energy	subsidies	have	
been	some	of	the	most	regressive	and	costly	fiscal	policies,	particularly	for	the	developing	
world	(World	Bank,	OECD	&	OPEC	2010).	In	2015,	global	subsidies	reached	US$5.3	trillion,	
or	6.5	percent	of	global	GDP	(Coady	et	al.	2015a).	While	subsidies	are	often	introduced	with	
the	 intention	 of	 reducing	 poverty,	 redistributing	 wealth	 in	 resource‐rich	 economies,	
protecting	consumers	against	large	price	swings,	or	promoting	access	to	energy,	they	are	an	
inefficient	tool	for	achieving	these	purposes.	Energy	subsidies	put	significant	pressure	on	a	
country’s	 fiscal	 balances,	 consuming	 public	 funds	 that	 could	 otherwise	 be	 used	 for	 more	
effective	programs.	These	subsidies	also	tend	to	be	regressive,	disproportionately	benefiting	
the	 better‐off.	 They	 discourage	 investments	 in	 renewable	 energy	 and	 promote	
overconsumption	 of	 energy	 and	 investment	 in	 energy‐intensive	 heavy	 industries.	
Recognizing	 this,	 many	 countries	 around	 the	 world	 are	 now	 rolling	 back	 or	 eliminating	
energy	subsidies	(Clements	et	al.,	2013a).	

Despite	cuts	to	tariffs	on	heavy	users,	electricity	subsidies	in	Pakistan	continue	to	be	poorly	
targeted.	Residential	consumers	in	Pakistan	are	charged	electricity	tariffs	based	on	monthly	
electricity	consumption,	with	the	most	generous	subsidies	provided	to	households	with	low	
and	 moderate	 usage.	The	 effectiveness	 of	 this	 targeting	mechanism	 as	 a	 social	 protection	
policy	 relies	 on	 the	 premise	 that	 measured	 electricity	 use	 is	 closely	 related	 to	 household	
welfare.	 But	 as	 we	 show	 in	 this	 paper,	 the	 correlation	 between	 measured	 electricity	
consumption	and	household	welfare	in	Pakistan	is	relatively	weak,	meaning	that	electricity	
subsidies	 continue	 to	 benefit	 the	 richest	 households	 disproportionately.	 Even	 after	 the	
recent	 reforms,	 the	 group	 receiving	 the	 greatest	 share	 of	 electricity	 subsidy	 expenditure	
remains	 the	 richest	 20	 percent	 of	 the	 population.	 The	 average	 subsidy	 for	 the	 richest	 20	
percent	 of	 households	 is	 40	 percent	 higher	 than	 the	 average	 subsidy	 for	 the	 poorest	 20	
percent	of	households.	Moreover,	there	is	a	strong	seasonality	of	electricity	consumption,	
with	both	rich	and	poor	households	consuming	more	in	the	summer	months.	This	pushes	
even	 the	 poorest	 households	 into	 higher‐tariff	 slabs,	 increasing	 their	 bills	 substantially.	
Conversely,	many	richer	households	‘drop’	into	the	more	heavily	subsidized	and	lifeline	slabs	
during	the	winter	months.	




                                                   2	
	
Based	 on	 qualitative	 research	 commissioned	 for	 this	 paper,	 we	 find	 that	 in	 spite	 of	 the	
subsidies,	 low‐	 and	 lower‐middle	 income	 households	 in	 Pakistan	 struggle	 to	 afford	 their	
basic	 electricity	 needs.	 Some	 households	 reported	 being	 forced	 to	 reduce	 expenditure	 on	
food,	 health	 and	 childcare	 in	 order	 to	 afford	 electricity	 bills.	 Such	 coping	 mechanisms	
particularly	affect	women,	who	are	the	main	consumers	of	electricity	at	the	household	level.	
Aside	from	affordability,	residential	electricity	users	are	most	concerned	about	the	reliability	
of	 supply	 and	 quality	 of	 customer	 service.	 Electricity	 is	 central	 to	 the	 lives	 of	 modern	
Pakistani	households,	and	their	lives	are	disrupted	by	long	hours	of	load	shedding	common	
in	recent	years.	The	stress	of	coping	with	the	high	cost	and	low	reliability	of	electricity	is	
taking	 a	 toll	 on	 family	 life,	 health,	 education,	 and	 economic	 activities.	 Low‐income	
households—in	 particular	 urban	 slum	 residents	 and	 beneficiaries	 of	 the	 country’s	 main	
welfare	program—mentioned	resorting	to	illegal	electricity	connections	because	they	could	
not	afford	to	pay	their	bills.	In	addition,	the	qualitative	research	revealed	a	general	lack	of	
trust	in	electricity	service	providers	and	a	poor	perception	of	governance	in	the	sector.	

Households	need	support	to	manage	rising	and	volatile	energy	costs,	but	assistance	can	be	
designed	in	a	way	that	is	less	distortionary	to	prices	and	incentives,	and	more	effectively	
targeted	to	 the	 poor	 than	 the	 existing	 price‐based	 subsidies.	 Pakistan	 has	 state‐of‐the‐art	
targeting	 and	 registration	 mechanisms	 available	 to	 deliver	 better	 targeted	 assistance.	 A	
national	 proxy	 means	 test	 (PMT)	 database	 developed	 for	 the	 Benazir	 Income	 Support	
Program	 could	 be	 used	 to	 target	 assistance	 to	 households	 based	 on	 their	 welfare.	 An	
alternative	would	be	to	use	exclusion	filters	like	land	or	vehicle	ownership,	or	tax	records.	
Targeting	subsidies	would	help	ensure	that	assistance	goes	to	those	households	that	most	
need	it,	while	excluding	the	richest	consumers	would	save	considerable	resources.	Providing	
bill	credits	in	place	of	price‐based	subsidies	would	make	billing	simpler	and	provide	equal	
assistance	 to	 all	 targeted	 households.	 Other	 forms	 of	 assistance	 can	 help	 encourage	
consumers	to	use	the	formal	electricity	supply,	cutting	down	on	non‐technical	losses	in	the	
sector.	 The	 qualitative	 analysis,	 for	 instance,	 identified	 a	 need	 for	 more	 flexible	 payment	
options,	and	points	to	a	waiver	of	late	payment	fees	for	the	poorer	households	as	a	way	of	
helping	to	keep	them	connected.	Measures	such	as	connection	fee	waivers	and	amnesty	on	
kunda	users	could	also	help	attract	more	consumers	back	into	the	formal	system.	

Experience	from	subsidy	reform	episodes	worldwide	stresses	the	importance	of	developing	
an	effective	communication	plan	from	the	beginning	(Clements	et	al.	2013a).	The	qualitative	
research	findings	revealed	that	many	lower‐income	households	are	unaware	that	there	are	
electricity	 subsidies,	 and	 do	 not	 understand	 the	 need	 for	 tariffs	 to	 increase.	 There	 is	 a	
perception	 that	 prices	 are	 already	 ‘too	 high’,	 and	 this	 encourages	 the	 use	 of	 illegal	
connections.	 To	 ensure	 the	 reform	 is	 publicly	 accepted,	 it	 is	 crucial	 to	 develop	 a	
communication	strategy	to	increase	public	awareness	about	subsidies,	the	planned	reform,	
and	measures	to	make	electricity	more	affordable	for	those	most	in	need.	Consumers	might	
be	more	convinced	to	pay	higher	prices	for	electricity	if	there	are	credible	expectations	of	
improvement	in	the	reliability	of	the	electricity	supply	in	the	medium	term.	The	government	
should	also	address	(and	ideally	mitigate)	known	governance	and	accountability	issues	in	
the	 sector	 in	 order	 to	 convince	 the	 public	 that	 the	 reform	 is	 worthwhile.	 For	 instance,	
grievance	redress	mechanisms	related	to	connection	and	bill	payment	could	be	strengthened	
and	better	publicized.	 	


                                                   3	
	
    II.      Country	 Background	 and	 International	 Experience	 with	 Energy	
             Subsidy	Reforms	

Pakistan’s	 power	 sector	 faces	 significant	 challenges	 in	 terms	 of	 capacity,	 governance	 and	
financial	 sustainability.	 Residential	 and	 industrial	 electricity	 consumers	 have	 been	
profoundly	affected	 by	routine	 power	 outages,	 or	 ‘load	 shedding’,	 whereby	 the	 electricity	
supply	is	periodically	cut	off	in	certain	areas	to	ration	supply	during	peak	periods.	In	recent	
years	 load	 shedding	 has	 averaged	 8	 to	 10	 hours	 a	 day	 in	 some	 areas	 of	 the	 country,	
constraining	production	and	employment	(IMF,	2013a).	In	order	to	address	these	challenges,	
the	 Government	 of	 Pakistan	 has	 embarked	 on	 substantial	 reforms	 of	 the	 power	 sector.	
Pakistan's	 National	 Power	 Policy,	 approved	 in	 June	 2013,	 envisages	 that	 “Pakistan	 will	
develop	 the	 most	 efficient	 and	 consumer	 centric	 power	 generation,	 transmission	 and	
distribution	 system	 that	 meets	 the	 needs	 of	 its	 population	 and	 boosts	 its	 economy	 in	 a	
sustainable	and	affordable	manner”	(Government	of	Pakistan	2013).	As	part	of	its	energy	
sector	reforms,	in	October	2013	the	Government	of	Pakistan	increased	residential	electricity	
tariffs	to	higher‐volume	consumers	and	eliminated	subsidies	on	commercial	and	industrial	
supply.	

The	Government	of	Pakistan	provides	several	subsidies	to	residential	electricity	consumers,	
the	largest	being	the	Tariff	Differential	Subsidy	(TDS),	which	following	the	reforms	in	2012‐
13	(FY13)	comprised	96	percent	of	electricity	subsidies.	The	TDS	is	the	difference	between	
the	electricity	tariff	(plus	certain	surcharges)	paid	by	consumers	and	the	‘allowable	costs’	of	
electricity	utilities	determined	by	the	regulator,	NEPRA.	The	TDS	enables	the	government	to	
maintain	 an	 identical	 tariff	 structure	 for	 households	 across	 the	 country	 and	 to	 provide	
subsidies	to	some	consumers.	Residential	electricity	subsidies	in	Pakistan	are	based	on	the	
monthly	electricity	usage	of	each	customer.	The	tariff	structure	is	based	on	‘slabs’	of	monthly	
household	consumption,	with	the	unit	cost	of	electricity	increasing	from	one	slab	to	the	next	
as	shown	in	Table	1.2	A	highly	concessional	‘lifeline	tariff’	is	provided	to	households	that	use	
less	than	50	kilowatt	hours	(kWh)	per	month.3	The	lifeline	tariff	is	intended	to	protect	the	
poor	by	allowing	them	to	afford	a	minimum	amount	of	electricity.	However,	the	benefit	of	
the	lifeline	tariff	is	curtailed	by	a	minimum	monthly	charge	of	Rs	75,	meaning	the	subsidized	
rate	is	effectively	only	paid	by	consumers	with	consumption	between	38	and	50	kWh	in	a	
given	month.	

In	 October	 2013,	 the	 government	 increased	 tariffs	 for	 slabs	 above	 200	 kWh	 per	 month	
(thereby	 splitting	 the	 second	 slab	 in	 two)	 and	 changed	 the	 method	 of	 calculating	 bills.	
Whereas	before	households	paid	for	their	first	100	units	at	the	1‐100	kWh/month	slab	rate,	
the	next	200	at	the	101‐300	kWh/month	tariff,	and	so	on,	households	now	pay	the	unit	rate	
for	the	slab	immediately	below	their	total	monthly	consumption	for	all	electricity	up	to	that	
																																																								
	
2	The	description	here	relates	to	the	standard	tariff.	There	is	also	a	‘time	of	use’	tariff	for	the	1.4	percent	of	

households	with	electronic	meters	(as	of	June	30,	2015),	which	charges	flat	peak	and	off‐peak	rates	for	all	units	
consumed.	
3	In	the	FY16	notifications,	yet	to	become	effective,	the	lifeline	is	to	be	restricted	to	households	based	on	

sanctioned	load	and	average	consumption.	


                                                           4	
	
slab’s	upper	bound,	and	the	unit	rate	on	the	subsequent	slab	for	the	remainder.	For	example,	
a	household	consuming	350	kWh/month	pays	the	200‐300	kWh	slab	tariff	rate	for	the	first	
300	kWh	used	and	the	301‐700	kWh	tariff	for	the	remaining	50	kWh	used.	Given	an	average	
cost	of	supply	of	around	Rs	12	in	2015‐16,	the	top	two	slabs	are	no	longer	subsidized,	but	
due	to	the	201‐300	slab	subsidy	some	households	consuming	over	300	kWh/month	still	get	
a	small	subsidy.	

Despite	 the	 recent	 tariff	 adjustments,	 electricity	 subsidies	 remain	 poorly	 targeted	 and	
provide	limited	support	to	vulnerable	households.	In	a	previous	World	Bank	study,	it	was	
illustrated	that	electricity	consumption	is	weakly	related	to	overall	welfare	in	Pakistan,	and	
therefore	 richer	 households	 still	 benefit	 disproportionately	 from	 subsidies	 (Walker	 et.	 al.	
2014).	Meanwhile,	poor	households	struggle	to	afford	higher	electricity	costs	and	resort	to	
coping	 mechanisms	 that	 negatively	 impact	 their	 overall	 well‐being.	 Around	 one‐third	 of	
households,	the	majority	of	which	are	poor	or	living	in	remote	areas,	remain	unconnected	to	
the	 grid	 and	 instead	 use	 more	 expensive	 or	 less	 efficient	 energy	 sources.	 Since	 energy	
subsidies	are	poorly	targeted,	it	is	natural	to	ask	whether	there	might	be	more	efficient	and	
equitable	means	of	making	energy	affordable.	In	doing	so,	however,	one	must	consider	the	
direct	 and	 indirect	 impacts	 on	 household	 welfare,	 through	 higher	 prices	 for	 electricity,	
alternative	energy,	and	indirectly	on	other	goods	and	services.	International	experience	with	
energy	 subsidy	 reforms	 emphasizes	 the	 importance	 of	 compensation	 to	 protect	 poorer	
households	 against	 adverse	 impacts	 of	 subsidy	 reforms,	 and	 raise	 public	 acceptance	 of	
reforms.	 The	 choice	 of	 compensation	 method	 depends	 on	 the	 country’s	 economic	 and	
political	 circumstances.	 When	 undertaking	 such	 reforms,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 consider	 the	
availability	 of	 existing	 social	 programs,	 administrative	 capacity,	 fiscal	 soundness	 of	 the	
budgets,	as	well	as	the	political	context	(Yemtsov	et	al.,	forthcoming).	Such	compensatory	
measures	 should	 be	 tailored	 to	 the	 likely	 impact	 of	 the	 reform	 on	 a	 variety	 of	 different	
groups.	

    Box 1: Indonesia’s subsidy reform experience 
    Indonesia is one of the flagship examples of successful subsidy reform. In 2005, the increase in international oil 
    prices gave way to ambitious subsidy reforms, which proceeded in two stages (Clements et. al., 2013). In March 
    2005, the government raised gasoline and diesel prices by 33 and 27 percent respectively.  Kerosene, being the 
    least  regressive  of  the  subsidized  goods,  was  initially  left  unchanged.  In  the  second  round  of  reform  later  that 
    year, all fuel prices were increased, and kerosene prices almost doubled as a result.  Had there not been a proper 
    compensation  plan,  it  is  estimated  that  these  price  hikes  (particularly  of  kerosene)  would  have  caused  the 
    poverty headcount index to rise by 5.6 percentage points (Yemtsov et al., forthcoming). To mitigate such drastic 
    impacts  on  the  poor  and  near‐poor  households,  the  government  introduced  a  two‐pronged  compensation 
    package,  reallocating  a  significant  share  of  the  savings  from  the  subsidy  reform  towards  social  protection.  A 
    temporary (two‐year) unconditional cash transfer introduced in conjunction with the reforms, Subsidi Langsung 
    Tunai,  was  provided  to  the  poorest  35  percent  of  the  population  (well  above  the  16  percent  poverty  line),  in 
    order  to  protect  the  near‐poor  and  minimize  political  unrest  (Beaton  and  Lontoh,  2010).  What  was  then  the 
    world’s largest UCT program proved to be largely successful in reaching the poor; the poorest quintile received 
    21  percent  of  the  benefits,  while  the  second,  third  and  fourth  quintiles  received  a  total  of  40  percent.  The 
    compensation  package  also  included  education,  health  and  rural  infrastructure  programs  for  the  poor  (which 
    were introduced later). 

Cash	 transfers	 are	 often	 introduced	 or	 augmented	 as	 a	 means	 of	 replacing	 or	 at	 least	
temporarily	mitigating	the	adverse	effects	of	subsidy	reform.	Untargeted	cash	transfers	are	


                                                                    5	
	
sometimes	used	in	oil‐exporting	countries	(for	example	in	the	Islamic	Republic	of	Iran),	with	
all	households	at	least	in	principle	able	to	access	the	compensation.	Targeted	cash	transfers,	
on	the	other	hand,	remain	one	of	the	most	preferred	safety	net	tools	available	for	energy	
subsidy	 reform.	 The	 experience	 of	 Indonesia	 (see	 Box	 1)	 illustrates	 that	 targeted	 cash	
transfers	 can	 reduce	the	 population’s	 opposition	 to	 subsidy	 reform,	and	 help	 assist	 those	
most	in	need.	In	Pakistan,	the	largest	cash	transfer	program	is	the	Benazir	Income	Support	
Programme	 (BISP),	 a	 targeted	 program	 which	 reaches	 over	 5	 million	 households.	 The	
monthly	payment	to	beneficiaries	has	been	increased	by	50%	since	2013,	likely	offsetting	
the	bulk	of	the	adverse	impact	of	the	2013	subsidy	reform	(Walker	et	al.,	2014).	


III.         Distributional	Incidence	of	Electricity	Subsidies		

We	 begin	 by	 examining	 the	incidence	 of	 subsidies	 using	household	 survey	 data,	 updating	
findings	from	an	earlier	survey	presented	in	Walker	et	al.	(2014).	Figure	1	shows	how	the	
current	 residential	 tariff	 structure	 concentrates	 subsidies	 on	 households	 with	 low	 to	
moderate	 monthly	 electricity	 consumption.	 However,	 the	 incidence	 of	 these	 subsidies	
depends	on	the	patterns	of	consumption	by	welfare	level.		

To	 examine	 this	 relationship,	 we	 use	 data	 from	 the	 2013‐14	 Pakistan	 Survey	 of	 Living	
Standards	 (PSLM)	 to	 construct	 total	 monthly	 household	 consumption	 per	 capita	 for	 each	
household	 (a	 measure	 of	 welfare).	 Figure	 2	 shows	 the	 breakdown	 of	 monthly	 electricity	
consumption	by	slab	for	each	decile	of	household	per	capita	expenditure.	While	there	is	a	
clear	 difference	 in	 consumption	 across	 deciles,	 the	 graph	 shows	 that	 the	 vast	 majority	 of	
households	 except	 in	 the	 top	 decile	 consume	 less	 than	 300	 kWh/month,	 and	 therefore	
continue	 to	 benefit	 from	 subsidies	 even	 after	 the	 2013	 reforms.	 However,	 since	 the	 total	
subsidy	provided	to	households	with	moderate	consumption	(between	around	150	and	300	
kWh/month)	 is	 greater	 than	 that	 for	 households	 below	 150	 kWh/month,	 the	 bulk	 of	
subsidies	still	goes	to	better‐off	households.	One	potential	shortcoming	of	the	above	analysis	
is	that	the	survey	asks	about	total	electricity	consumption	over	the	preceding	month.	Self‐
reports	may	be	inaccurate,	or	may	include	expenditure	on	other	forms	of	electrical	power	
such	as	batteries	or	uninterrupted	power	supplies.	In	order	to	corroborate	these	findings,	
we	now	examine	actual	billing	data.	

Data	on	monthly	electricity	consumption,	along	with	other	household	details,	were	obtained	
for	325,926	households	from	three	electricity	distribution	companies	(DISCOs):	Gujranwala	
Electric	 Power	 Company	 (GEPCO),	 Faisalabad	 Electric	 Supply	 Company	 (FESCO)	 and	
Islamabad	 Electric	 Supply	 Company	 (IESCO). 4 	These	 DISCOs	 together	 serve	 almost	 38	
percent	 of	 Pakistan’s	 residential	 electricity	 consumers. 5 	The	 three	 DISCOs	 also	 cover	 a	
significant	 share	 of	 northern	 Pakistan	 and	 include	 a	 mix	 of	 semi‐urban,	 rural	 and	 urban	
areas.	 For	 this	 analysis	 IESCO,	 FESCO	 and	 GEPCO	 each	 provided	 a	10‐15	 percent	 random	

																																																								
	
4	Other	 DISCOs	 were	 approached	for	 inclusion	 in	 the	 analysis,	 but	 data	 could	 not	 be	 sourced	 with	 the	 right	

specifications	in	time	for	this	study.	
5	For	a	breakdown	of	billing	data	please	refer	to	the	Appendix.	




                                                            6	
	
sample	of	household	monthly	electricity	billing	records	for	the	period	July	2013	to	June	2014	
(the	same	period	during	which	the	PSLM	data	were	collected).6	

The	 DISCO	 databases	 have	 a	 record	 of	 basic	 household	 characteristics	 and	 monthly	
electricity	consumption,	but	they	do	not	have	any	information	on	the	household’s	welfare	
level.	To	obtain	a	good	proxy	for	welfare	level,	we	merged	the	billing	data	with	the	National	
Socio‐Economic	 Registry	 (NSER),	 a	 near‐census	 of	 households	 in	 Pakistan	 conducted	 in	
2011.	The	NSER	has	data	for	27	million	households	in	Pakistan	on	occupation	of	the	head,	
household	 size,	 assets	 and	 dwelling	 characteristics.	 The	 government	 collected	 and	 used	
these	variables	to	create	a	proxy	means	test	(PMT)	score	for	each	household	for	targeting	of	
BISP. 7 	The	 National	 Database	 and	 Registration	 Authority	 (NADRA),	 which	 manages	 the	
NSER,	 generously	 agreed	 to	 merge	 the	 two	 databases	 for	 us,	 using	 the	 citizen’s	 national	
identity	card	number	(CNIC)	as	a	common	identifier.8		

As	well	as	looking	for	direct	matches	between	CNICs	in	the	two	databases,	NADRA	also	used	
its	 ‘family	 folder’	 system	 to	 look	 for	 family	 links	 between	 CNICs	 in	 each	 database	 as	
illustrated	in	Figure	3.	Around	45	percent	of	the	325,926	records	in	the	DISCO	database	were	
successfully	 matched	 to	 the	 NSER	 data.	 This	 seems	 low,	 but	 is	 actually	 quite	 impressive	
considering	the	NSER	database	was	put	together	in	2011,	and	many	households	that	did	not	
have	a	CNIC	in	2011	may	have	since	obtained	one	and	recorded	it	in	the	DISCO	database.	
Another	major	reason	why	records	did	not	match	was	that	many	CNICs	in	the	billing	data	
were	 missing	 or	 invalid.	 As	 robustness	 check,	 we	 compared	 the	 matched	 and	 unmatched	
samples	and	found	that	they	did	not	differ	substantially	(see	Appendix	Table	A2).	We	are	
therefore	 relatively	 confident	 that	 the	 omission	 of	 these	 households	 does	 not	 skew	 the	
results	of	the	analysis.	Even	though	we	have	data	on	each	month	of	the	year	July	2013	to	June	
2014,	meter	readers	are	often	unable	to	read	each	meter	every	month,	so	billing	data	are	
often	estimated	in	these	months	and	balanced	at	the	end	of	the	year	or	when	the	meter	is	
next	read.	To	avoid	introducing	this	measurement	error	into	the	analysis,	in	this	section	we	
report	average	monthly	consumption	over	the	year.	

Table	2	summarizes	basic	characteristics	of	the	data	by	quintile.	Again	we	see	an	increasing	
but	very	weak	relationship	between	welfare	level	and	electricity	usage.	We	use	quintiles	of	
the	 PMT	 as	 the	 measure	 of	 welfare	 rather	 than	 per	 capita	 consumption. 9 	It	 can	 be	 seen	
immediately	that	electricity	consumption	is	relatively	similar	across	the	population	and	is	
weakly	correlated	with	poverty.	


																																																								
	
6	Data	provided	for	each	household	included	the	identity	card	number	of	the	bill	holder,	name	and	address,	

father/guardian	name,	kWh	consumed	per	month	for	2013‐14	(FY14),	connected	load	(in	kWh),	phase,	and	
number	of	air	conditioners.		
7	The	PMT	score	is	designed	to	correlate	closely	with	household	per	capita	expenditure,	enabling	one	to	rank	

all	households	in	the	country	roughly	from	poorest	to	richest.	It	is	based	on	23	variables	related	to	household	
structure,	dwelling	characteristics,	education,	occupational	status	and	assets.	
8	The	Citizen’s	National	ID	Card	Number	(CNIC)	is	a	national	unique	identification	number	provided	to	adult	

citizens.	Further	details	on	the	matching	process	are	provided	in	the	Appendix,	part	A.	
9	The	cutoff	PMT	scores	for	each	quintile	are	as	follows:	Poorest	Quintile	=	0	to	22,	Lower‐Middle	Quintile	=	22	

to	29.7,	Middle	Quintile	=	29.7	to	37.4,	Upper‐Middle	Quintile	=	37.4	to	46.4,	Richest	Quintile	=	46.4	to	95.17.	


                                                           7	
	
Figure	4	replicates	the	results	of	the	PSLM	data	analysis	presented	in	Figure	2.	There	are	
some	key	differences	in	the	results.	Most	notably,	household	electricity	use	is	considerably	
lower	according	to	the	billing	data.	Around	30	percent	of	the	poorest	two	deciles	consumed	
less	than	50	kWh/month	(the	lifeline	slab)	according	to	the	billing	data,	compared	to	less	
than	10	percent	in	the	PSLM	data.	Again,	this	may	be	due	to	reporting	of	other	electricity	
expenses	(such	as	batteries)	in	the	household	survey	measure.	Despite	the	generally	lower	
consumption	 levels,	 however,	 the	 pattern	 across	 the	 welfare	 distribution	 is	 similar:	
electricity	consumption	rises	gradually	with	welfare,	but	almost	all	households	still	consume	
less	than	300	kWh/month	and	therefore	benefit	from	subsidies.	This	graph	also	implies	that	
the	subsidy	cuts	in	2013	likely	had	a	direct	impact	on	only	a	small	proportion	of	households,	
since	the	tariff	increases	were	restricted	to	slabs	above	200	kWh/month.	

Figure	5	shows	that	the	distribution	of	subsidies	is	disproportionately	in	favor	of	the	richest	
households,	with	the	top	20	percent	of	households	receiving	about	24	percent	of	the	total	
subsidy.	It	can	also	be	seen	that	the	50‐100	and	100‐200	kWh/month	slabs	account	for	the	
majority	of	subsidies:	any	substantial	cuts	to	subsidies	will	need	to	be	focused	on	these	slabs,	
and	this	would	adversely	impact	the	majority	of	lower	and	middle‐income	households.	

The	 current	 subsidy	 system	 does	 not	 take	 into	 account	 natural	 intra‐year	 variation	 in	
electricity	consumption.	Given	Pakistan’s	warm	summer	climate	and	cool	winters,	electricity	
expenditures	vary	widely	by	season	(Figure	6).	Even	poor	households	that	qualify	for	the	
lifeline	in	the	winter	(Q3)	move	into	higher	slabs	during	the	summer	(Q1	&	Q4).	In	the	winter,	
around	13	percent	of	rich	households	qualify	for	the	lifeline	subsidy.	These	findings	indicate	
that	a	static	subsidy	scheme	throughout	the	year	is	failing	to	protect	the	poor,	and	provides	
an	 unnecessary	 benefit	 to	 the	 richest	 households	 in	 the	 winter	 months,	 when	 electricity	
affordability	is	less	of	a	concern.	

Robustness	Checks	

Low	match	rate	

Our	analysis	is	predicated	on	the	assumption	that	the	PMT	scores	matched	to	the	billing	data	
tell	 us	 about	 the	 patterns	 of	 electricity	 consumption	 and	 welfare	 at	 the	 national	 level.	
However,	only	45	percent	of	DISCO	records	could	be	matched	with	the	PMT	score	through	
the	NSER.10	A	relatively	small	share	of	records	could	not	be	matched	due	to	errors	in	the	
CNICs	records	in	the	DISCO	database.	The	majority	of	the	unmatched	households	could	not	
be	found	in	the	NSER	survey	data,	however,	likely	because	those	families	did	not	have	a	CNIC	
at	the	time	of	the	survey	in	2010.	The	survey	is	currently	in	the	process	of	being	updated,	
however,	meaning	that	in	future	the	match	rate	is	likely	to	be	significantly	higher.	




																																																								
	
10	The	unmatched	55%	will	have	similar	socioeconomic	breakdown	or	might	be	skewed	towards	the	better	off	

households	as	records	of	the	initial	NSER	survey	shows	that	most	refusals	came	from	better	off	households.	
The	K‐density	plot	shows	the	variance	in	PMT	across	the	matched	sample	(see	Appendix,	part	E).	


                                                           8	
	
To	check	for	biases	in	the	matched	sample,	we	compared	the	average	consumption	for	both	
the	matched	and	unmatched	sample	using	a	simple	t‐test,	and	found	no	significant	difference	
between	the	two	samples.11	

Tenant	households	

It	is	common	in	Pakistan	for	the	name	on	the	electricity	bill	to	be	that	of	the	owner	of	the	
house,	even	if	the	property	is	rented	by	another	family.	If	this	is	the	case,	it	is	likely	that	the	
better‐off	 landlord’s	 PMT	 score	 is	 matched	 against	 the	 poorer	 tenant’s	 actual	 electricity	
consumption,	 perhaps	 contributing	 to	 the	 low	 recorded	 consumption	 among	 wealthy	
households.	

To	determine	whether	this	affects	the	results	of	the	study,	we	look	at	the	extent	of	rentership	
in	the	study	area.	The	PSLM	2013‐14	data	indicate	that	in	rural	areas,	93	percent	of	families	
own	 their	 house,	 while	 in	 urban	 households,	 home	 ownership	 was	 around	 72	 percent.	
However,	this	cannot	explain	a	large	part	of	the	findings	since	the	service	areas	of	the	three	
DISCOs	are	predominantly	semi‐urban	and	rural.	A	district‐wise	representation	of	the	billing	
data	sample	can	also	be	found	in	the	Appendix.	

Representativeness	of	the	billing	data	

The	PSLM	data	examined	in	Part	I	are	nationally	representative.	The	billing	data	sample	is	
fully	 random,	 but	 comes	 from	 only	 three	 non‐randomly	 selected	 DISCOs.	 How	 might	 the	
analysis	 differ	 if	 the	 other	 DISCOs	 were	 included?	 First,	 we	 note	 that	 the	 three	 DISCOs	
covered	in	this	analysis	comprise	38%	of	all	households.	Being	better‐off	districts,	we	would	
expect	to	see	higher	electricity	consumption	among	this	sample	overall.	This	would	imply	
that	nationwide	there	would	be	proportionately	less	households	above	the	300	kWh/month	
level,	reinforcing	the	above	analysis.	There	is	no	reason	to	expect	the	consumption	patterns	
across	quintiles	to	differ	significantly	given	the	large	sample.	

Multiple	connections	

The	 final	 potential	 concern	 is	 that	 households	 may	 have	 multiple	 connections,	 spreading	
their	 consumption	 across	 meters	 and	 thereby	 understating	 their	 total	 consumption.	
Approximately	83	percent	of	the	matched	sample	has	a	single	meter	connection	(that	is,	the	
bill	payer’s	CNIC	appeared	only	once	in	the	database),	6	percent	have	2	or	3	meters,	and	11	
percent	have	more	than	3	meters	(see	Appendix,	part	A).	For	the	analysis	we	removed	all	
households	with	duplicate	observations,	since	it	is	not	clear	whether	this	reflects	an	effort	
on	the	part	of	households	to	evade	higher	tariffs	or	is	simply	an	error	in	the	CNIC	records.	
However,	even	if	wealthier	households	are	using	multiple	meters,	they	qualify	(illegally)	for	
subsidies	despite	having	higher	overall	electricity	consumption.	Thus	this	would	not	affect	
our	finding	that	the	bulk	of	subsidies	go	to	non‐poor	households.	
	

																																																								
	
11	Results	are	available	upon	request.	




                                                           9	
	
IV.          Social	and	Gender	Impacts	of	Energy	Subsidies	and	Reform	

To	 examine	 issues	 related	 to	 energy	 access	 and	 affordability	 for	 low‐	 and	 lower	 middle‐
income	households,	and	to	inform	the	design	of	subsidy	reforms	in	a	politically	and	welfare‐
sensitive	way,	a	qualitative	study	was	commissioned	and	supervised	by	the	World	Bank	and	
carried	out	by	a	local	research	firm.	The	study	took	place	in	three	provinces	of	Pakistan	in	
May	 and	 June	 2015.	 The	 firm	 conducted	 focus	 group	 discussions	 (FGDs)	 with	 400	
participants	 from	 six	 districts,	 stratified	 by	 income	 group	 (low‐income	 and	 lower	 middle	
income),	 gender,	 and	 location	 (urban	 and	 rural).12	In	 addition,	 FGDs	 were	 held	 with	 BISP	
beneficiaries	and	katchi	abadi	(slum)	residents.	All	participants	had	an	electricity	connection	
(either	 legal	 or	 illegal).	 In	 all,	 44	 FGDs	 took	 place,	 each	 with	 8‐10	 participants.	 The	
discussions	 covered	 a	 range	 of	 topics	 related	 to	 energy	 usage,	 affordability	 and	 service	
quality,	and	explored	attitudes	toward	subsidy	reforms	and	compensation.	Following	each	
FGD,	 an	 individual	 participant	 was	 randomly	 selected	 to	 participate	 in	 an	 ethnographic	
interview	(EI)	to	discuss	the	issues	in	more	detail.	Finally,	the	study	included	12	interviews	
with	 BISP	 officers	 and	 energy	 company	 representatives,	 in	 order	 to	 get	 a	 government	
perspective	on	the	issues	raised.	Further	details	on	the	methodology	and	survey	instrument	
are	provided	in	the	Appendix	(part	F).	

Energy	Use	and	Spending	Patterns	

Electricity	 is	 central	 to	 the	 lives	 of	 households	 and	 households	 use	 a	 variety	 of	 electrical	
appliances.	Nearly	all	households	mentioned	using	electricity	for	lighting.	While	the	type	of	
electrical	appliances	used	by	households	depends	on	welfare	level	and	location,	nearly	all	
participants	indicated	that	they	use	electric	fans	in	their	homes.	Most	BISP	beneficiaries	and	
katchi	 abadi	residents	(the	poorest	groups	interviewed)	reported	using	washing	machines,	
fridges,	irons,	TVs	and	mobile	phone	chargers.	Lower	middle‐income	households	reported	
using	a	variety	of	electrical	appliances,	including	personal	computers,	evaporative	coolers,	
juicers,	vacuum	cleaners	and	sewing	machines.	More	than	half	of	the	research	participants	
mentioned	using	electric	pumps	to	fill	household	water	tanks.		Although	these	water	pumps	
consume	a	limited	amount	of	electricity,	the	household	water	supply	is	interrupted	if	load	
shedding	 occurs	 when	 tanks	 are	 empty.	 Respondents	 engaged	 in	 farming	 also	 mentioned	
using	electric	pumps	for	tube‐well	irrigation.	While	farmers	have	relatively	higher	electricity	
use	on	average	for	this	reason,	households	residing	in	rural	areas	use	slightly	less	electricity	
on	average	than	their	urban	counterparts	due	to	lower	rates	of	appliance	use	(Figure	7).	This	
is	not	just	due	to	lower	living	standards:	during	the	summer	months,	rural	families	can	sleep	
outside	at	night,	and	thereby	avoid	the	need	for	electric	cooling.	


																																																								
	
12	The	 average	monthly	 income	 of	participants	varies	based	 on	 province	 and	 location.	 Overall,	 the	 reported	

average	monthly	income	of	low‐income	respondents	was	between	Rs	13,050	and	Rs	14,675,	representing	the	
first	and	second	quintiles	according	to	2011‐2012	PSLM.	The	average	monthly	income	of	lower	middle	income	
participants	ranged	between	Rs	19,700	and	Rs	22,000,	corresponding	to	the	3rd	and	4th	quintiles	according	to	
2011‐2012	PSLM/HIES.		



                                                           10	
	
As	 observed	 in	 the	 previous	 section,	 household	 electricity	 expenditure	 is	 seasonal:	 more	
electricity	 is	 used	 and	 the	 per‐unit	 cost	 is	 higher	 during	 the	 summer	 months	 (May	 to	
September)	due	to	the	use	of	electric	fans	and	coolers.	 Due	to	the	hot	summer	weather	in	
Pakistan,	people	take	showers	more	frequently	and	need	to	wash	and	iron	their	clothes	more	
often	at	these	times.	This	results	in	higher	use	of	water	pumps,	washing	machines	and	irons.	
Participants	also	mentioned	using	fridges	more	often	during	the	summer.	Ramadan,	which	
has	taken	place	during	the	summer	for	the	past	few	years,	also	increases	the	consumption	of	
electricity.	 Households	 stated	 that	 they	 use	 energy‐intensive	 food	 processors	 and	 juicers	
more	 during	 Ramadan	 to	 prepare	 for	 sehri	 and	 iftar. 13 	Another	 reason	 is	 that	 work	 and	
school	hours	are	shorter	during	Ramadan,	meaning	men	and	children	are	at	home	for	more	
of	the	day,	increasing	the	use	of	fans,	lights,	and	other	electric	appliances.	

Consumption	 of	 energy	 is	 highest	 during	 the	 weekends	 and	 evenings.	 Most	 respondents	
mentioned	 doing	 household	 chores	 in	 the	 evenings	 and	 on	 weekends.	 Male	 household	
members	 often	 come	 home	 at	 midday	 on	 Fridays	 to	 prepare	 for	 prayers.	 Consumption	 is	
higher	during	the	weekends	due	to	the	presence	of	working	adults	and	school	children.	On	
Sundays	women	use	washing	machines	and	iron	more	preparing	school	uniforms	for	their	
children.	

Women	and	men	have	different	electricity	use	behaviors.	Women	are	the	main	consumers	
of	 electricity	 at	 the	 household	 level,	 being	 traditionally	 responsible	 for	 performing	
household	 chores	 and	therefore	 the	 primary	 users	 of	 electric	appliances	 such	as	 washing	
machines,	irons,	refrigerators	and	food	processors.	The	women	interviewed	were	frequently	
involved	in	household	budgeting,	and	appeared	to	be	more	aware	than	male	respondents	of	
how	to	use	energy	efficiently.		

Despite	struggling	with	higher	energy	prices,	most	households	make	it	a	priority	to	pay	their	
electricity	bills	on	time	to	avoid	surcharges.	Most	respondents	mentioned	that	poverty	and	
unexpected	 shocks	 are	 the	 main	 reasons	 for	 nonpayment	 of	 electricity	 bills.	 Households	
expressed	empathy	towards	those	who	are	unable	to	pay	their	bills;	however,	the	majority	
of	 research	 participants	 disapproved	 of	 illegal	 electricity	 use	 and	 believed	 that	 it	 was	
contributing	to	higher	overall	tariffs	and	poor	electricity	service.		

Coping	with	Increasing	Energy	Costs	

High	energy	costs	diminish	the	physical	and	psychological	well‐being	of	households.	Figure	
8	 summarizes	 the	 main	 coping	 methods	 by	 socioeconomic	 group.	 Both	 low‐income	 and	
lower	middle‐income	households	reported	reducing	spending	on	food	to	pay	their	electricity	
bills.	 Katchi	 abadi	 residents,	 BISP	 beneficiaries	 and	 low‐income	 households	 mentioned	
reducing	the	number	of	meals	consumed,	eating	chutney,	onions,	chilies	and	roti	(flat	bread)	
more	frequently,	and	cutting	out	meat	and	other	proteins.	These	households	also	expressed	
that	they	could	not	cut	further	their	already	minimized	spending	on	basic	needs	such	as	food.	

																																																								
	
13	Sehri	is	an	Islamic	term	referring	to	the	meal	consumed	by	Muslims	before	fasting	during	Ramadan.	 Iftar	is	

one	of	the	religious	observances	of	Ramadan	and	is	often	done	as	a	community,	with	people	gathering	to	break	
their	fast	together.	


                                                           11	
	
Lower	middle‐income	households,	on	the	other	hand,	reported	switching	to	lower‐quality	
foods.	Low‐income	households	also	reported	cutting	spending	on	childcare	and	education	
(e.g.	 sending	 children	 to	 public	 schools,	 and	 economizing	 on	 school	 uniforms	 and	
equipment).	This	group	of	respondents	also	reported	reducing	health	expenses	by	avoiding	
doctor	visits.	Some	rural	households	also	reported	selling	livestock	in	order	to	pay	their	bills.	
These	results	are	consistent	with	the	findings	of	a	household	budgeting	study	conducted	by	
the	 Sustainable	 Development	 Policy	 Institute	 (SDPI,	 2014).	 Finally,	 social	 isolation	 is	 an	
indirect	result	of	higher	energy	prices:	some	households	reported	having	to	stay	away	from	
social	gatherings	such	as	weddings	due	to	a	lack	of	money	to	pay	for	the	necessary	clothing	
and	gifts.	

Households	actively	reduce	their	energy	usage	to	manage	their	electricity	costs.		Both	low‐
income	 and	 lower	 middle	 income	 respondents	 mentioned	 that	 they	 switch	 off	 lights	 in	
unused	spaces,	staying	in	one	room	with	all	family	members	to	use	fewer	lights	and	fans,	
sleeping	 in	courtyards	in	rural	 areas,	 wash	 clothes	 by	 hand,	 and	 use	 electrical	 appliances	
sparingly.	Women	are	more	affected	by	such	measures	as	their	workload	increases	due	to	
decreased	use	of	electric	appliances	such	as	washing	machines.	Households	also	appear	to	
invest	in	energy	saving	appliances:	68	percent	of	lower	middle‐income	households	reported	
purchasing	 energy	 saver	 bulbs	 and	 more	 efficient	 appliances.	 Respondents	 engaged	 in	
farming	emphasized	the	potential	savings	from	switching	to	alternative	energy	sources	such	
as	solar	power.	

Paying	bills	in	installments	is	another	coping	mechanism	mentioned	by	FGD	participants.	


    Box 2: Ethnographic Interview I 
    General information about the household 
    The  respondent  lives  in  the  village  of  Timargarh  in  Lower  Dir,  KPK,  with  his  extended  family  of  ten.  For  the  last 
    35 years he has worked as a driver. His house is partially constructed and has four rooms. His wife takes care of 
    all  the  household  chores.  Both  of  his  children  are  deaf,  and  he  pays  their  medical  expenses  out  of  his  limited 
    income. He has a separate kunda electricity connection in addition to a functioning legal connection. 
    Expenditures on energy sources 
    Electricity  is  mainly  used  in  his  home  for  lighting,  and  for  appliances  including  fans,  a  fridge  and  an  iron.  The 
    respondent stated that his electricity bills are usually delivered in the last week of the month at the local mosque. 
    The amount varies from Rs. 200 to Rs. 1,000 per month. 
    Coping mechanisms 
    The respondent supplements his driver’s income with wages from agricultural work. In order to reduce electricity 
    expenditures, his  family  makes  an  effort  to turn  off  all  extra  lights  and to  minimize  use  of  the  fridge during  the 
    winter months. 


Some	respondents	reported	that	they	would	not	prefer	to	pay	their	bills	in	installments	as	it	
creates	 additional	 stress	 on	 household	 members.	 When	 they	 pay	 in	 installments,	 they	
constantly	worry	about	whether	they	will	be	able	to	pay	on	time.	Respondents	also	saw	this	
method	as	unattractive,	reporting	that	it	sometimes	required	bribery	of	officials.	Borrowing	
money	is	also	employed	as	a	coping	strategy	by	some	respondents.	Around	a	third	of	low‐
income	respondents	mentioned	borrowing	money	from	their	relatives	to	pay	high	bills.	The	



                                                                    12	
	
respondents	 see	 borrowing	 money	 as	 a	 last	 resort	 coping	 strategy	 since	 this	 puts	
considerable	stress	on	households	and	negatively	affects	family	relations.		

Despite	the	sensitivity	of	the	topic,	a	small	share	of	households	conceded	that	they	resorted	
to	illegal	electricity	(the	 kunda	 system)	 because	they	could	no	longer	cope	with	increasing	
electricity	costs.	Users	of	the	kunda	system	pay	a	small	amount	to	the	linemen	every	month	
to	prevent	them	from	cutting	their	illegal	connection.	Some	respondents	mentioned	that	they	
started	using	the	kunda	system	after	their	electricity	was	disconnected	due	to	nonpayment	
of	bills.	According	to	Faisal	and	Eatzaz	(2014),	per	capita	income	and	the	consumer	price	of	
electricity	are	key	determinants	of	electricity	theft.	A	small	number	of	lower	middle‐income	
households	also	mentioned	using	the	kunda	system	intermittently.	These	respondents	have	
legal	 connections	 but	 use	 the	 kunda	 system	 for	 high	 electricity	 consuming	 appliances.	
Respondents	 also	 mentioned	 that	 they	 share	 meters	 with	 their	 neighbors,	 as	 they	 cannot	
afford	to	have	a	separate	meter.	Respondents	who	share	meters	pay	less.	However,	they	lack	
control	over	the	total	electricity	consumption	and	the	bill	amount	and,	therefore,	are	less	
inclined	to	save	electricity.	Also,	households	who	share	a	meter	are	less	likely	to	qualify	for	
subsidies.	

Experiences	with	Service	Quality	and	Energy	Sector	Officials	

Load	shedding	

The	 most	 common	 concern	 cited	 by	 research	 participants	 was	 not	 the	 cost	 of	 electricity,	
however,	 but	 rather	 the	 reliability	 of	 the	 service.	 Respondents	 from	 all	 groups	 expressed	
dissatisfaction	 with	 officials	 and	 with	 the	 long	 hours	 of	 unscheduled	 load	 shedding.	 Long	
hours	of	load	shedding	and	electricity	outages	have	had	adverse	impacts	on	the	economic,	
physical	 and	 social	 well‐being	 of	 citizens.14 	Respondents	 from	 various	 occupation	 groups	
such	as	shop	owners,	factory	workers,	and	tailors	mentioned	that	due	to	load	shedding	their	
income	levels	have	dropped.	Most	of	the	respondents	complained	that	due	to	load	shedding	
they	are	unable	to	use	water	pumps	to	get	water;	due	to	lack	of	electric	light	their	children	
cannot	study	in	the	evening;	and	a	lack	of	fans	and	coolers	means	they	cannot	get	regular	
sleep	 during	 the	 summer.	 The	 psychological	 well‐being	 of	 participants	 is	 also	 negatively	
affected	by	load	shedding:	some	reported	that	they	cannot	relax	in	their	homes	and	that	they	
feel	angry	due	to	the	unavailability	of	electricity.		

As	the	main	consumers	of	electricity	at	the	household	level,	women	are	more	affected	by	load	
shedding	and	by	the	household’s	efforts	to	manage	electricity	expenses.	 Nearly	all	women	
participants	stated	that	due	to	long	and	unpredictable	hours	of	load	shedding,	they	could	not	
use	 appliances	 such	 as	 washing	 machines,	 irons,	 vacuum	 cleaners,	 and	 electric	 cooking	
appliances.	 Instead,	 they	 perform	 household	 chores	 manually,	 which	 increases	 their	
workload	and	reduces	time	that	can	be	spent	on	educational	or	income‐generating	activities.	
Female	respondents	also	mentioned	that	income‐generating	opportunities	such	as	stitching	
																																																								
	
14	In	the	summer	of	2015,	a	heat	wave	in	the	country	killed	more	than	1,300	people,	and	65,000	people	suffered	

heat	stroke.	Long	hours	of	power	outages	were	a	factor	(Imtiaz	and	ur‐Rehman,	2015).	
 


                                                           13	
	
and	 embroidery	 and	 housekeeping	 were	 negatively	 affected	 by	 the	 unreliable	 electricity	
service.	 Female	 respondents	 are	 also	 adversely	 affected	 by	 the	 stress	 of	 sleep‐deprived	
husbands	and	children	in	the	summer	months.	

In	the	absence	of	electricity,	respondents	switch	to	alternative	sources	such	as	electrically	
charged	lights	and	candles.	Candles	were	the	most	common	alternative	lighting	source,	used	
by	 65	 percent	 of	 BISP	 beneficiaries	 and	 44	 percent	 of	 katchi	 abadi	 residents.	 Overall,	 72	
percent	of	respondents	reported	using	electrically	charged	battery	lights.	These	carry	costs	
too:	households	spent	Rs.	200	to	Rs.	250	on	average	each	month	on	candles,	while	a	battery	
operated	light	cost	Rs.	250.	A	small	number	of	lower	middle‐income	households	mentioned	
using	an	Uninterrupted	Power	Supply	(UPS)	during	load	shedding	hours.	The	price	of	UPS	
devices	ranges	from	Rs.	10,000	to	Rs.	60,000.		

Billing	system	

The	second	most	important	problem	reported	by	respondents	was	a	pervasive	lack	of	trust	
in	the	billing	system,	with	80	percent	of	respondents	complaining	that	their	electricity	bill	
amounts	do	not	reflect	their	actual	use	(Figure	9).	As	a	male	BISP	beneficiary	in	Nawabshah,	
Sindh,	stated,	“with	so	much	load	shedding,	why	is	the	bill	so	high?	They	are	not	reading	the	
meter	 properly.”	 Such	 perceptions	 are	 in	 part	 due	 to	 the	 widespread	 practice	 of	 bill	
estimation:	due	to	short	staffing,	meter	readers	do	not	visit	every	house	monthly	but	rather	
‘estimate’	 usage	 and	 make	 an	 ex‐post	 adjustment.	 This	 may	 be	 a	 source	 of	 confusion	 to	
consumers.	On	the	other	hand,	some	respondents	claimed	that	meter	readers	inflated	their	
bills	deliberately.	The	fact	that	many	households’	bills	are	delivered	to	communal	places	such	
as	mosques	also	contributes	to	the	participants’	skepticism	that	the	distribution	company	
genuinely	 reads	 their	 meters.	 Unreliable	 service	 contributes	 to	 the	 perception	 of	 inflated	
bills.	 With	 less	 hours	 of	 electricity	 service,	 consumers	 expect	 lower	 bills.	 When	 bills	 rise	
(probably	due	to	price	increases),	there	is	a	perception	among	consumers	that	the	utility	
company	is	cheating.	Electricity	company	representatives	also	emphasized	the	difficulties	
they	face	with	meter	reading	due	to	staff	shortages	and	difficulty	in	accessing	some	localities.	
Meanwhile,	the	government	is	taking	some	measures	such	as	taking	photos	of	meters	for	
billing,	to	build	trust	between	service	providers	and	consumers.		

Governance	

A	 majority	 of	 participants	 complained	 about	 the	 attitude	 of	 electricity	 company	 officials,	
perceiving	them	as	rude	and	unresponsive.	Around	81	percent	of	respondents	stated	that	
corruption	 was	 a	 significant	 problem	 in	 their	 interactions	 with	 service	 providers.	 In	 the	
words	of	a	low‐income	male	interviewee	service	providers	are	“forcing	everyone	to	commit	
sins	by	paying	bribes.”	Meter	readers,	the	primary	point	of	contact	between	the	consumers	
and	electricity	providers,	were	perceived	as	corrupt	by	44	percent	of	urban	respondents	and	
29	percent	of	rural	respondents,	while	32	percent	of	urban	respondents	and	37	percent	of	
rural	respondents	complained	about	their	rude	attitude.	Bribery	of	an	official	was	reported	
by	 65	 percent	 of	 respondents,	 either	 to	 overcome	 issues	 related	 to	 overbilling,	 resolve	
technical	 problems,	 or	 in	 some	 cases	 to	 get	 an	 illegal	 electricity	 connection.	 The	 general	
perception	 among	 the	 participants	 was	 that	 without	 bribes	 no	 problem	 would	 be	 solved.	



                                                   14	
	
There	was	also	general	dissatisfaction	with	the	ineffective	and	untimely	response	of	service	
providers	 to	 technical	 problems	 such	 as	 transformer	 breakdowns.	 All	 respondents	 were	
aware	of	the	electricity	company’s	complaint	offices,	and	many	male	respondents	had	visited	
them	at	least	once.	However,	a	substantial	number	of	respondents	reported	having	given	up	
on	their	complaints	after	visiting	the	office.	We	also	spoke	to	both	DISCO	officials,	and	they	
explained	 that	 conditions	 for	 good	 service	 and	 accurate	 billing	 were	 made	 difficult	 by	
resource	constraints,	especially	short‐staffing.	

Social	Assistance	

Energy	affordability	assistance	is	arguably	part	of	the	social	safety	net.	If	subsidies	are	not	
helping	 households	 to	 afford	 basic	 electricity	 needs	 without	 resorting	 to	 harmful	 coping	
mechanisms,	 improved	 assistance	 should	 be	 developed	 in	 the	 context	 of	 the	 country’s	
broader	 safety	 net	 policy.	 BISP,	 Pakistan’s	 largest	 safety	 net	 scheme,	 is	 an	 antipoverty	
initiative	covering	over	5	million	households	and	providing	monthly	cash	transfers	as	well	
as	 other	 support.	 Despite	 its	 size,	 BISP	 is	 targeted	 only	 to	 the	 poorest	 15‐20	 percent	 of	
households	in	Pakistan.	We	specifically	interviewed	BISP	beneficiaries	and	non‐beneficiaries	
about	 the	 program	 in	 order	 to	 explore	 what	 role	 it	 could	 play	 in	 any	 alternative	 energy	
affordability	policy.	

Respondents	 overall	 demonstrated	 a	 high	 level	 of	 awareness	 of	 BISP.	 Low‐income	
households	 in	 particular	 were	 aware	 of	 BISP’s	 eligibility	 criteria	 and	 application	
requirements,	since	most	had	participated	in	the	2010	NSER	survey	(from	which	most	BISP	
beneficiaries	 were	 selected).	 BISP	 beneficiaries	 consider	 the	 cash	 assistance	 an	 essential	
element	of	their	income	that	helps	them	afford	their	utility	bills.	Around	70	percent	of	BISP	
beneficiaries	 interviewed	 perceived	 the	 application	 procedure	 and	 the	 amount	 of	 money	
received	as	fair.		

    Box 3: In‐Depth Interviews with Service Providers 
    According  to  a  meter  reading  supervisor  at  PESCO,  in  Lower  Dir  district  of  KPK,  meter  readers  face  challenges 
    during meter reading and bill distribution due to a shortage of field workers and difficulty reaching remote areas. 
    Due  to  the  limited  number  of  staff,  the  company  could  not  deliver  bills  on  time  to  such  areas.  This  has 
    consequences for the customers: 
    “Just two  or  three days have been  given  to us  for  the  distribution  of  bills.  Because  of  the  limited  time frame  we 
    cannot  reach  bills  to  all  people,  and  thus  some  people  get  their  bills  after  the  due  date  for  bill  payment.  As  a 
    result they have to pay extra surcharge and fines.”  (Meter reader supervisor, Lower Dir, KPK) 
    The  supervisor  also  emphasized  that  there  is  a  tension  between  meter  readers  and  communities.  He  said  that 
    there have been instances in which consumers threatened meter readers over higher bills. 
    A sub‐division officer at PESCO observed that meter readers are often accused of unfair readings. He mentioned 
    that the manual meter reading system needs to be replaced with a new system. According to sub‐division officers 
    in his area, there are more than 30,000 customers, but his staff checks only 6,000 to 7,000 meters a month. The 
    remaining households receive estimated bills. 
                                                                                                                                             	
A	 considerable	 number	 of	 non‐BISP	 beneficiaries	 in	 the	 low‐income	 group,	 on	 the	 other	
hand,	felt	that	they	should	have	been	selected	and	reported	concerns	about	the	clarity	and	
fairness	 of	 BISP	 selection	 procedures.	 These	 respondents	 expressed	 their	 desire	 for	
additional	support	mechanisms	that	could	help	them	with	their	energy	expenses.	


                                                                    15	
	
We	 asked	 respondents	 to	 choose	 their	 preferred	 energy	 affordability	 policy	 from	 three	
options:	 (i)	 increasing	 the	 BISP	 cash	 transfer;	 (ii)	 implementing	 targeted	 concessional	
pricing	 for	 the	 poor;	 and	 (iii)	 providing	 grants	 for	 energy	 saving	 measures.	 The	 most	
common	response	(with	87	percent	support)	was	targeted	concessional	pricing	for	the	poor.	
There	was	a	prevailing	perception	among	the	research	participants	that	well‐off	households	
get	cheaper	electricity,	which	should	be	addressed	through	credible	and	impartial	targeting	
of	 assistance.	 Respondents	 agreed	 that	 adding	 an	 amount	 to	 BISP	 would	 help	 vulnerable	
households	 with	 their	 electricity	 expenses;	 however,	 there	 was	 a	 broad	 feeling	 that	 the	
benefit	 would	 not	 help	 many	 needy	 low	 and	 lower	 middle‐income	 households	 that	 are	
excluded	from	the	scheme.	


    Box 4: Ethnographic Interview II 
    General information about the household  
    There are eight members in the household. The respondent‘s husband is the main earner in the household and 
    he  works  as  a  farmer.  They  live  in  a  house  in  the  countryside  and  have  a  separate  meter.  They  mainly  use 
    electricity for lighting, running fans and electrical appliances such as the fridge. They are not receiving any social 
    assistance. 
    Expenditures on energy sources  
    The respondent stated that at times the electricity bill seems too high. She believes that the high electricity bill 
    is not plausible given excessive load shedding for several hours daily.  
    Coping mechanisms  
    High electricity bills cause the household a great deal of stress. Due to inflation it is difficult to manage household 
    expenses  including  food  and  the  children‘s  education.  The  family  tries  to  reduce  food  and  clothing  related 
    expenses to pay their electricity bills. They also try to stay in one room to save energy and tend to sleep outside 
    at night to avoid using fans. Despite these measures, they receive high electricity bills and are unable to pay. The 
    respondent also added that friends and relatives had their own expenses and no one will lend them money.  
    Attitudes toward energy reforms  
    The  respondent  has  general  knowledge  about  reforms,  and  has  noted  the  gradual  increase  in  electricity  tariffs 
    over the last five years. She does not have any interaction with WAPDA and mostly her husband deals with such 
    matters. The respondent did not know the location of the electricity complaint office, nor the process of lodging 
    complaints. She believes that it is government‘s responsibility to fix tariffs according to people‘s economic status.  

Awareness	and	Acceptance	of	Energy	Reforms	

Finally,	we	asked	participants	about	the	planned	reforms	to	subsidies,	and	under	what	terms	
they	would	accept	price	increases.	In	general,	respondents	were	unaware	that	there	were	
electricity	 subsidies,	 especially	 given	 that	 electricity	 prices	 have	 increased	in	 the	 last	 few	
years.	Women	were	more	aware	of	price	increases	than	their	male	counterparts	as	they	are	
heavily	affected	by	efforts	to	afford	electricity.	However,	women	were	less	informed	about	
the	reasons	for	energy	sector	reforms.	They	expressed	a	belief	that	the	increase	in	prices	is	
associated	with	poor	government	policies	and	governance	issues	in	the	sector.	Consumer	
attitudes	towards	reforms	are	also	influenced	by	their	trust	in	energy	sector	institutions	and	
their	interactions	with	electricity	service	providers.		




                                                                16	
	
    Box 5: Ethnographic Interview III 
    General information about the household 
    There are eight members in the respondent’s household. They live in a semi‐structured house in a village. The 
    respondent‘s  husband  works  at  a  hotel,  while  she  manages  the  household.  They  have  six  children,  and  all  of 
    them  are  school  age.  The  household  shares  an  electricity  connection  with  relatives,  and  the  monthly  bill  is 
    divided equally. 
    Expenditures on energy sources  
    The  household  spends  Rs.  300  to  700  per  month  on  electricity  and  Rs.  200  to  300  each  month  on  alternative 
    energy sources such as candles. The family collects its electricity bills from the local village mosque, and the men 
    pay the bills. The respondent tries her best to pay the bills on time given the bill is shared with her relatives. If 
    there are any delays in payment, her relatives pressure her and this leads to tension.  
    Coping mechanisms  
    The  respondent  generally  pays  her  bill  on  time.  There  was  only  one  time  when  she  had  to  take  a  Rs.  300  loan 
    from  her  sister  to  pay  her  bill.  However,  her  husband  is  sick,  and  even  small  bills  are  difficult  to  afford.  Any 
    increase  in  cost  of  electricity  would  affect  the  monthly  budget.  It  is  not  easy  for  her  to  send  her  children  to 
    school since the family struggles to afford food.  
    Social assistance  
    The  respondent’s  family  has  received  Rs.  1,500  monthly  from  BISP  for  the  last  three  years,  and  this  has  been 
    very useful in helping her afford her electricity costs. Her household uses the BISP cash mainly for food and the 
    children‘s education. She has also managed to put aside some money for emergencies. 
    Attitudes toward energy reforms  
    The respondent stated that she does not have sufficient knowledge regarding the reforms in the energy sector. 
    In her opinion, the government is responsible for making such decisions. However, she was aware that the price 
    of electricity had been increasing. 

Participants	perceive	future	price	increases	as	unjustified	without	improvements	in	service	
reliability	and	quality.	Most	of	the	respondents—in	particular,	BISP	beneficiaries	and	katchi	
abadi	residents—mentioned	that	they	could	not	bear	further	increases	in	electricity	tariffs.	
Upon	further	probing,	interviewees	agreed	that	price	increases	would	be	acceptable	only	if	
bills	 are	 made	 credible,	 load	 shedding	 is	 reduced	 and	 governance	 issues	 are	 addressed.	
However,	the	majority	of	households	voiced	their	skepticism	during	the	discussions	as	they	
doubt	that	such	improvements	will	ever	happen.	This	contrasts	with	findings	from	the	SDPI	
study,	in	which	63	percent	of	respondents	indicated	that	they	would	be	willing	to	accept	a	
Rs.	100‐500	increase	in	their	utility	bills	if	they	were	provided	24	hours	of	uninterrupted	
service.	When	asked	whether	they	would	be	willing	to	pay	an	increase	greater	than	Rs.	500,	
only	19	percent	of	respondents	agreed.	SDPI	reported	that	all	respondents	would	accept	an	
increase	in	electricity	charges	if	it	was	guaranteed	that	there	would	be	no	load	shedding	in	
the	future	(SDPI,	2014).	


    V.      Policy	Recommendations	

Moving	beyond	general	price	subsidies	

As	we	have	demonstrated	throughout	this	paper,	the	existing	price‐based	subsidy	fails	to	
protect	 low	 and	 middle‐income	 households	 from	 high	 electricity	 costs	 while	
disproportionately	benefiting	rich	households.	Price‐based	subsidies	will	only	favor	the	poor	


                                                                    17	
	
if	recorded	electricity	consumption	is	closely	tied	to	overall	welfare.	This	is	evidently	not	
true	 in	 the	 case	 of	 Pakistan—either	 because	 electricity	 usage	 patterns	 are	 similar	 across	
households,	 or	 because	 the	 current	 system	 of	 metering	 does	 not	 accurately	 capture	
consumption.	 Seasonal	 fluctuations	 further	 distort	 the	 functioning	 of	 subsidies,	 exposing	
poor	 households	 to	 higher	 per‐unit	 costs	 for	 electricity	 in	 the	 summer,	 when	 their	
consumption	 is	 highest,	 and	 providing	 unwarranted	 assistance	 to	 rich	 households	 in	 the	
winter	months.	To	address	these	drawbacks	with	the	present	system,	in	this	section	we	look	
at	how	targeting	can	be	improved,	and	how	to	make	energy	affordable	while	encouraging	
users	to	stay	within	the	formal	system.	

Improved	targeting	

It	is	evident	from	the	electricity	consumption	analysis	that	price‐based	subsidies	are	not	an	
effective	 means	 of	 targeting	 assistance	 to	 the	 households	 that	 need	 it	 the	 most.	 Pakistan	
already	has	a	demonstrably	better	targeting	mechanism.	The	NSER	contains	‘poverty	scores’	
for	almost	all	households	in	the	country,	effectively	ranking	them	from	poorest	to	richest.	
The	registry,	indexed	by	CNIC	number,	is	already	used	for	targeting	in	over	30	programs	in	
Pakistan.	The	NSER	allows	the	government	to	select	any	subgroup	of	the	population	based	
on	 their	 welfare	 level;	 therefore	 assistance	 could	 be	 directed	 to	 any	 subgroup	 of	 the	
population.	

The	 matching	 exercise	 conducted	 for	 this	 paper	 was	 in	 effect	 a	 preliminary	 test	 of	 the	
applicability	of	this	targeting	mechanism	to	electricity	subsidies.	Using	the	CNIC	records	in	
the	DISCO	billing	databases,	NADRA	was	able	to	match	poverty	scores	to	almost	half	of	the	
350,000	households.	The	match	rate	is	impressive	given	that	the	NSER	was	constructed	in	
2010	and	many	households	did	not	have	a	CNIC	at	the	time.	A	higher	match	rate	could	be	
achieved	if	the	NSER	is	updated,	an	exercise	which	the	Government	of	Pakistan	is	currently	
undertaking.	To	be	sure	that	records	can	be	matched,	households	could	be	required	to	report	
in	person	to	the	DISCO	office	with	their	national	ID	card	and	a	recent	electricity	bill.	They	
would	 identify	 themselves	 using	 the	 biometrics	 stored	 in	 the	 card,	 and	 the	 CNIC	 number	
would	be	used	to	look	up	their	poverty	score	and	make	an	instant	determination	of	eligibility	
for	assistance.15	For	renters,	a	tenant	would	be	entitled	to	claim	a	subsidy	even	if	the	bill	is	
in	the	name	of	a	landlord,	but	the	subsidy	would	be	limited	to	one	per	family,	with	families	
encouraged	 to	 re‐register	 at	 their	 new	 address	 if	 they	 move.	 NADRA	 could	 provide	 the	
technical	support	to	implement	such	a	targeting	system	through	DISCO	offices	or	another	
government	 post.	 To	 limit	 subsidies	 to	 one	 per	 family,	 a	 central	 database	 of	 beneficiaries	
would	need	to	be	developed.	

A	 simpler	 alternative,	 which	 might	 work	 well	 if	 the	 objective	 is	 to	 eliminate	 the	 richest	
households	only,	would	be	to	apply	exclusion	filters	to	determine	eligibility.	For	example,	
households	with	registered	land,	payers	of	income	tax,	holders	of	bank	accounts,	and	so	on,	
could	be	identified	by	CNIC	and	excluded	from	the	benefit.	Further	analysis	would	be	needed	

																																																								
	
15	NADRA	has	the	capacity	to	access	the	NSER	database	in	real	time,	and	the	CNIC	is	equipped	with	biometric	

identification	capabilities.	


                                                           18	
	
to	better	understand	which	households	would	be	excluded,	and	whether	there	would	be	any	
deserving	households	unduly	impacted	by	this	approach.	

With	any	targeting	mechanism,	it	is	important	to	have	a	very	clear	process	of	application,	
review,	appeal,	and	final	eligibility	determination.	This	touches	on	two	issues	in	particular:	
the	 need	 for	 a	 grievance	 redress	 mechanism;	 and	 the	 need	 for	 a	 carefully	 designed	
communications	policy.	Both	issues	are	discussed	in	further	detail	below.	

Affordability	measures	

The	existing	subsidy	structure	could	be	maintained	for	eligible	households	only;	ineligible	
households	could	be	charged	the	NEPRA‐determined	tariff	or	another	cost‐neutral	pricing	
formula.	However,	such	a	system	would	not	be	fully	equitable,	and	would	not	deal	with	the	
seasonality	issue.	An	alternative	approach	would	be	to	replace	subsidies	with	a	 bill	 credit,	
charging	all	households	a	cost‐recovery	tariff	and	applying	a	monthly	credit	to	the	bills	of	
eligible	 households.	 The	 credit	 could	 be	 set	 at	 an	 amount	 equivalent	 to	 basic	 electricity	
needs,	with	the	household	paying	for	usage	above	this	level.	The	amount	of	the	credit	would	
thereby	vary	with	tariffs.	The	credit	would	serve	as	a	visible	‘subsidy’	from	the	government,	
in	contrast	to	the	more	opaque	implicit	price	subsidies	provided	currently.	To	address	the	
seasonality	 issue,	 any	 unused	 portion	 of	 the	 credit	 could	 be	 rolled	 over	 to	 subsequent	
months	(with	some	cap),	so	that	households	not	using	all	of	their	credit	in	the	winter	could	
save	the	remainder	for	the	summer	months.	

We	also	recommend	that	the	government	consider	more	flexible	options	for	payment	of	bills.	
Our	qualitative	analysis	found	that	poorer	households	are	vulnerable	to	unexpected	shocks,	
such	as	illness,	that	may	make	paying	electricity	bills	difficult.	Some	reported	that	they	were	
disconnected	as	a	result,	and	turned	to	the	kunda	system.	Allowing	flexible	repayment	would	
reduce	pressures	on	customers	to	bribe	officials	or	move	to	 kunda.	It	would	also	help	very	
poor	households	to	smooth	their	consumption	and	avoid	resorting	to	selling	assets	or	going	
into	debt.	Households	could	be	provided	with	a	low‐interest	repayment	option,	or	given	a	
longer	period	of	time	to	repay	their	bill.	Penalties	for	late	payment	could	also	be	waived	for	
households	in	the	target	group.	Such	policies	would	need	to	be	designed	carefully	to	avoid	
moral	 hazard	 issues,	 but	 would	 be	 a	 way	 of	 recognizing	 the	 vulnerability	 of	 poorer	
households	to	rising	energy	costs.	

One	of	the	main	limitations	of	the	above	forms	of	assistance	is	that	they	exclude	households	
who	are	not	formally	customers	of	the	DISCOs—a	group	that	includes	many	of	the	poorest	
and	most	physically	isolated	households	in	Pakistan.	These	‘unconnected’	households	can	be	
broken	 into	 three	 groups:	 (i)	 households	 living	 outside	 the	 service	 area;	 (ii)	 households	
living	 in	 service	 areas	 but	 not	 (formally)	 connected	 to	 the	 grid;	 and	 (iii)	 households	
connected	to	the	grid	through	an	illegal	connection	(such	as	kunda).	For	households	outside	
the	 service	 area,	 there	 is	 no	 straightforward	 solution	 other	 than	 gradual	 expansion	 of	
coverage.	 In	 the	 meantime,	 the	 government	 may	 consider	 providing	 other	 forms	 of	
assistance	to	these	households	to	help	them	cover	their	energy	costs.	For	those	inside	the	
service	area,	some	could	be	encouraged	to	connect	to	the	grid	by	offering	a	waiver	of	the	
connection	 fee.	 For	 those	 who	 are	 connected	 illegally,	 an	 amnesty	 and	 waiver	 of	
reconnection	fee	could	be	provided	for	a	limited	time	to	entice	these	customers	to	resume	


                                                 19	
	
an	official	account,	while	the	bill	credit	and	more	flexible	payment	options	proposed	above	
would	help	them	pay	their	bills	and	stay	connected.	

Ensuring	the	success	of	the	reform	

International	experience	illustrates	how	countries	that	succeeded	in	reforming	subsidies	did	
so	by	addressing	issues	of	concern	to	the	public	through	a	clear	communications	campaign,	
and	through	careful	sequencing	of	the	reform.	

Packaging	the	reform	

The	qualitative	analysis	shows	that	consumers	are	primarily	concerned	about	affordability,	
reliability	of	supply,	and	issues	related	to	transparency	and	accountability.	To	convince	the	
public,	the	reform	should	address	each	of	these	issues	with	a	clear	plan	of	action	and	timeline	
for	results.	Affordability	can	be	addressed	in	the	near	term	by	introducing	more	generous	
compensation	 mechanisms	 targeted	 to	 a	 subset	 of	 the	 population	 that	 genuinely	 needs	
assistance.	In	the	longer	term,	affordability	and	reliability	of	supply	can	be	improved	through	
investment	in	infrastructure	and	better	governance.	Concrete	actions	can	also	be	taken	to	
improve	 transparency	 and	 accountability,	 especially	 relating	 to	 the	 billing	 system	 and	
resolution	of	grievances.	

Consumers	 do	 not	 trust	 the	 accuracy	 of	 their	 bills,	 and	 perceive	 corruption	 in	 their	
interactions	 with	 service	 providers.	 Investment	 in	 capacity	 to	 read	 meters	 and	 clearer	
presentation	of	the	bills	themselves	is	a	known	priority,	and	the	government	has	already	
taken	action	in	this	regard.	Households	also	report	feeling	unable	to	assert	their	rights	as	
consumers.	 DISCOs	 in	 Pakistan	 have	 customer	 service	 mechanisms	 in	 place,	 including	
dedicated	customer	service	centers,	websites	for	lodging	complaints,	call	centers	and	SMS	
services	 (Table	 3).	 These	 mechanisms	 could	 be	 strengthened	 to	 effectively	 and	 rapidly	
respond	to	queries	and	complaints.	The	government	could	encourage	DISCOs	to	experiment	
with	these	techniques	by	rewarding	the	best	performers	and	publicizing	their	approaches.	

The	government	could	also	put	in	place	or	strengthen	grievance	redress	mechanisms	(GRMs)	
and	provide	training	to	staff	to	address	consumer	concerns	in	a	manner	that	builds	trust.	A	
GRM	will	be	essential	to	manage	the	transition	away	from	universal	subsidies,	and	to	deal	
with	 appeals	 to	 selection	 decisions	 under	 a	 new	 targeting	 method.	 Box	 6	 provides	 an	
example	of	how	the	GRM	could	be	designed.	Multiple	implementation	partners	may	need	to	
play	 a	 role	 in	 redressing	 grievances:	 identity	 verification	 grievances	 handled	 by	 NADRA,	
billing	data	grievances	by	DISCOs,	and	eligibility/targeting	grievances	by	BISP.	

To	further	strengthen	citizen	engagement,	a	‘social	compact’	approach	could	be	adopted.	A	
social	compact	is	a	formal	arrangement	in	which	the	views	of	citizens	are	sought	at	regular	
forums	 at	 the	 local	 level,	 and	 actively	 incorporated	 in	 policy	 making.	 The	 social	 compact	
approach	aims	to	increase	mutual	trust	and	accountability	between	service	providers	and	
consumers	 through	 stakeholder	 consultations	 and	 participatory	 monitoring.	 The	 social	
compact	approach	was	implemented	in	two	provinces	in	Southeastern	Anatolia,	Turkey—
the	 region	 with	 the	 highest	 nonpayment	 rates	 in	 the	 country.	 Stakeholder	 committees	
representing	consumers	and	the	electricity	company	were	established.	These	committees	


                                                 20	
	
developed	a	joint	plan	to	address	payment,	service	quality,	and	communication	issues.	The	
electricity	company	agreed	to	institutionalize	this	plan	and	improve	its	grievance	redress	
mechanism.	In	return,	citizens	were	expected	to	increase	payment	rates.	This	approach	may	
likewise	 be	 a	 good	 way	 of	 increasing	 trust	 and	 mutual	 accountability	 between	 service	
providers	 and	 consumers	 in	 Pakistan,	 especially	 in	 areas	 where	 illegal	 electricity	 use	 is	
common.	Indeed,	Karachi	Electric	has	already	had	successful	experience	applying	such	an	
approach	in	some	of	its	service	areas.	


    Box 6: Example of a Successful GRM: The Pakistan Flood Emergency Cash Transfer Project 
    The  cash  transfer  program  for  the  Pakistan  Flood  Emergency  project  had  a  very  successful  grievance  redress 
    mechanism  (GRM).  The  GRM  included  facilitation  centers  with  grievance  redress  counters.  It  also  included  a 
    public information campaign on the grievance redress process. Television, radio, print, and word‐of‐mouth were 
    used as part of the communication strategy. In addition to facilitation centers, complaints could be registered by 
    text  messages,  phone  and  calls.  The  project  successfully  mobilized  different  organizations  to  address  different 
    types of grievances, for example NADRA centers handled grievances related to incorrect personal details and local 
    authorities  dealt  cases  of  eligibility/targeting  grievances.  Hotlines  were  created  to  handle  cases  of  incorrect 
    personal details. The local authorities checked whether the applicant is based in a flood‐affected area and if they 
    have already received the benefit. Another channel of communication was through local influential leaders who 
    could  verify  the  applicants’  status  as  flood  affectees.  The  district  authorities  supervised  the  review  process  and 
    the  eligibility  statuses  were  submitted  to  the  Provincial  Disaster  Management  Authority  (PDMA).  The  final  step 
    involved  NADRA  entering  the  decisions  into case  management  systems  and  clearing  the households  enrolled  at 
    the facilitation centers. For the payment grievances, the partner commercial banks operated through offices and 
    dedicated  hotlines.  Grievances  related  to  maladministration  and  unaddressed  complaints  were  handled  by  the 
    District  Administration  or  NADRA.  The  GRM  successfully  handled  grievances  and  has  been  cited  as  one  of  the 
    most effective GRMs for emergency projects in Pakistan. The example shows that an effective GRM is one that is 
    efficient  on  multiple  fronts  and  where  each  organization  effectively  handles  grievances both  individually  and  as 
    part of the collective effort. 
    Source: Rao, 2014. 


Communication	and	Sequencing	

Lack	of	awareness	and	misinformation	can	be	one	of	the	biggest	barriers	to	subsidy	reform.	
A	study	by	the	IMF	indicated	that	in	22	cases	of	reform,	lack	of	a	communication	plan	was	
the	 biggest	 cause	 of	 failure	 (Clements	 et	 al.,	 2013b).	 Information	 campaigns	 have	
underpinned	 the	 success	 of	 reforms	 in	 a	 number	 of	 countries,	 including	 Armenia	 (ibid),	
Indonesia	 (World	 Bank,	 2011),	 the	 Islamic	 Republic	 of	 Iran	 (IMF,	 2013b)	 and	 Uganda	
(Sdralevich	et	al.,	2014).	In	the	case	of	Pakistan,	the	information	campaign	should	both	make	
the	 case	 for	 the	 reform,	 and	 educate	 eligible	 households	 about	 how	 to	 apply	 for	 the	 new	
benefits.	The	campaign	could	include	public	addresses	by	senior	government	officials,	media	
campaigns,	focused	outreach	activities,	and	inclusion	of	civil	society	and	other	stakeholders.	
The	communication	agenda	should	continue	throughout	the	reform	process,	and	should	be	
launched	before	the	reforms	begin.	The	communication	strategy	should	take	into	account	
the	 interests	 of	 various	 stakeholder	 groups	 (World	 Bank,	 2015).	 Beyond	 the	 traditional	
media,	 interpersonal	 channels	 could	 be	tapped,	such	 as	 community	influencers,	mosques,	
representatives	 of	 the	 local	 Union	 Councils,	 and	 community	 outreach.	 This	 may	 be	 more	
effective	 in	 reaching	 poorer	 households:	 a	 recent	 survey	 found	 that	 among	 BISP	


                                                                  21	
	
beneficiaries,	 58	 percent	 relied	 on	 mosque	 announcements	 for	 information,	 47	 percent	
relied	on	TV,	and	only	10	percent	mentioned	radio	or	newspaper	(Mott	McDonald,	2014).	


VI.     Conclusion	

Although	electricity	subsidies	were	introduced	as	a	form	of	social	safety	net	in	Pakistan,	the	
analysis	of	household	survey	and	billing	data	in	this	paper	demonstrates	that	they	continue	
to	 be	 regressively	 targeted,	 and	 that	 many	 poor	 households	 remain	 exposed	 to	 high	 bills	
especially	in	the	summer	months.	Subsidies	are	often	introduced	in	the	name	of	helping	the	
poor,	but	implemented	in	isolation	from	other	social	protection	programs,	mainly	due	to	the	
mapping	 of	 implementation	 responsibilities	 within	 government.	 Going	 forward,	 subsidies	
and	their	reforms	should	be	part	of	the	broader	dialogue	on	social	protection	in	Pakistan,	
and	considered	as	one	of	a	set	of	antipoverty	interventions.	

The	 qualitative	 assessment	 findings	 indicate	 that	 electricity	 is	 central	 to	 the	 lives	 of	 low‐
income	and	lower	middle	income	households	and	that	households	struggle	with	electricity	
costs	and	they	resort	to	coping	mechanisms	such	as	reducing	necessary	expenses	on	food,	
health	 and	 child	 care	 to	 afford	 electricity	 bills.	 Low‐income	 households,	 especially	 katchi	
abadi	residents	and	BISP	beneficiaries,	use	illegal	electricity	(called	the	 kunda	system)	as	a	
way	to	cope	with	increasing	electricity	costs.	Despite	efforts	to	improve	service	delivery,	load	
shedding	and	electricity	outages	still	negatively	impact	on	households’	economic	and	social	
well‐being.	 Women	 are	 more	 affected	 by	 load	 shedding	 and	 by	 the	 household’s	 efforts	 to	
manage	 electricity	 expenses	 because	 they	 are	 on	 average	 the	 main	 users	 of	 electrical	
appliances	and	spend	more	time	in	the	home.	The	majority	of	consumers	do	not	trust	their	
bills,	and	believe	that	their	bill	amounts	do	not	reflect	their	actual	consumption.	Almost	none	
of	the	respondents	were	aware	that	the	government	provides	electricity	subsidies.	Overall,	
the	negative	attitude	of	respondents	toward	the	electricity	service	is	a	result	of	frustration	
with	 unreliable	 supply	 and	 perceptions	 of	 poor	 sector	 governance.	 Despite	 struggling	 to	
afford	electricity,	respondents	appear	willing	to	pay	higher	prices	provided	service	quality	
improves	 and	 governance	 problems	 are	 addressed.	 However,	 most	 respondents	 are	
skeptical	that	such	improvements	will	take	place.	

When	 governments	 undertake	 subsidy	 reforms,	 they	 have	 two	 main	 levers	 to	 help	
households	adapt	to	higher	prices:	(i)	compensating	households	for	the	price	increase;	and	
(ii)	 encouraging	 households	 to	 adjust	 their	 consumption	 patterns	 (Yemtsov	 et	 al.,	
forthcoming).	In	this	analysis	we	have	focused	on	the	former,	and	illustrated	how	Pakistan	
can	 better	 cushion	 the	 effect	 of	 energy	 price	 fluctuations	 on	 poor	 and	 economically	
vulnerable	families	by	targeting	compensation	using	the	existing	NSER	database.	However,	
a	pilot	would	be	needed	to	examine	the	cost‐effectiveness	of	the	approach	given	the	costs	of	
implementation.	




                                                   22	
	
References		

Beaton,	C.	and	Lontoh,	L.	2010.	“Lessons	learned	from	Indonesia’s	attempts	to	reform	
fossil‐fuel	subsidies,”	International	institute	for	sustainable	development	(IISD).	Trade,	
Investment	and	Climate	change	series.		

Clements,	D.C.,	Benedict,	J.,	Fabrizio,	S.,	Gupta,	S.,	Alleyne,	T.	and	Sdralevich,	C.	A.	2013a.	
“Energy	Subsidy	Reform:	Lessons	and	Implications.”	International	Monetary	Fund:	
Washington,	DC.		

Clements,	D.C.,	et.	al,	2013b.	“Case	studies	on	energy	subsidy	reform:	lessons	and	
implications.”	International	Monetary	Fund:	Washington,	DC.	

Coady.	D.,	Parry,	I.,	Sears,	L.	and		Shang,	B.	2015a.	“How	Large	Are	Global	Energy	
Subsidies?”	IMF	Working	Paper	WP/15/105,	Washington,	DC.		

Faisal,	J.	and	Eatzaz,	A.	2014.	“An	Empirical	Study	of	Electricity	Theft	from	Electricity	
Distribution	Companies	in	Pakistan.”	Pakistan	Development	Review.	

Government	of	Pakistan,	Ministry	of	Water	and	Power.	2013	“National	Power	Policy.”	
Available	at:	http://www.ppib.gov.pk/National%20Power%20Policy%202013.pdf		

International	Monetary	Fund	(IMF).	2013a.	“Pakistan:	Staff	Report	for	The	2013	Article	IV	
Consultation	and	Request	for	an	Extended	Arrangement	Under	the	Extended	Fund	Facility.”	
Available	at:	https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr13287.pdf	

International	Monetary	Fund	(IMF).	2013b.	Energy	Subsidy	Reform:	Lessons	and	
Implications.	Working	Paper,	January	28,	2013.	

Imtiaz,	S.	and	ur‐Rehman,	Z.	2015.	“Death	Toll	From	Heat	Wave	in	Karachi,	Pakistan,	Hits	
1000.”	New	York	Times.	June	2015.	Available	at:	
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/world/asia/karachi‐pakistan‐heat‐wave‐
deaths.html		

Mott	Macdonald.	2014.	‘BISP	Spot	Check	and	Beneficiary	Feedback‐	National	Cash	Transfer	
Programme’,	Volume	1.	

O’Leary,	S.,	Cheema,	I.,	Hunt,	S.,	Carraro	L.	and	Pellerano,	L.	2011.	‘Benazir	Income	Support	
Programme	Program	Evaluation,	Baseline	Survey	Report.’	Oxford	Policy	Management	
Institute,	2011.	

Rao,	S.	2014.	‘Grievance	Redress	Mechanisms	in	Pakistan.’	GSDRC.	
http://www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/hdq1117.pdf	

Sdralevich,	C.,	Sab,	R.,	Zouhar,	Y.	and	Albertin,	G.	2014.	Subsidy	reform	in	the	Middle	East	
and	North	Africa:	Recent	progress	and	challenges	ahead.	International	Monetary	Fund:	
Washington,	DC.	
Sustainable	Development	Policy	Institute.	2014.	“Energy	&	Tax	Reforms:	Household	
Analysis	from	Pakistan.”	Islamabad:	Sustainable	Development	Policy	Institute.	

Walker,	T.,	Sahin,	S.,	Saqib,	M.	and	Mayer,	K.	2014.	“Reforming	Electricity	Subsidies	in	
Pakistan:	Measures	to	Protect	the	Poor.”	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.		

The	World	Bank.	2011.	Indonesia:	Communications	Strategy	to	Support	Fuel	Subsidy	
Reform	and	Ensuing	Cash	Transfer.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.		

The	World	Bank.	2015.	“Toward	Gender‐Informed	Energy	Subsidy	Reforms:	Findings	from	
Qualitative	Studies	in	Europe	and	Central	Asia”.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

The	World	Bank,	OECD	&	OPEC.	2010.	“A	roadmap	for	phasing	out	fossil	fuel	subsidies,”	
The	World	Bank	Group’s	contribution	to	the	2nd	IEA,	World	Bank,	OECD	and	OPEC	Joint	
Report,	prepared	for	submission	to	the	G20	summit	meeting	in	Seoul,	11‐12	November	
2010.	

Yemtsov,	R.,	et	al.	Forthcoming.	“Social	Safety	Nets	and	Political	Economy	of	Energy	
Subsidies	Reform:	A	Guidebook	for	Practitioners”.	Social	Protection	Global	Practice.	The	
World	Bank	Group:	Washington,	DC.		

	                            	




                                              24	
	
                         Table	1:	Residential	electricity	tariff	schedules	
	
    Monthly	consumption	
                                    2012‐13	         2013‐14	               2014‐15	         2015‐16	
    (kWh)	
    0‐50*	                           1.87	                2.00	               2.00	             2.00	
    1‐100**	                         4.54	                5.79	               5.79	             5.79	
    101‐200	                                              8.11	               8.11	            8.11	
                                     6.86	
    201‐300	                                              8.11	              12.09	            10.20	
    301‐700	                         10.65	              12.33	              16.00	            16.00	
    700+	                            13.29	              15.07	              18.00	            18.00	
Note:		*	Lifeline	rate	for	consumers	below	50kWh/month.	See	also	footnote	2.	**	Consumers	above	50	
kWh/month	pay	this	rate	for	the	first	100	units.	
                                                     	

                        Table	2:	Summary	of	household	characteristics	
                         and	electricity	consumption	by	PMT	quintile	

    Quintile	of	PMT	       Median	             Median	number	             Median	       Mean	electricity	
    distribution	       household	size	         of	household	            electricity	     consumption	
                                                members	per	            consumption	     (kWh/month)	
                                                    room	              (kWh/month)	
    Poorest		                  7	                     6	                     81	               92	
    Lower‐Middle	              6	                     4	                     94	              101	
    Middle	                    5	                     3	                    102	              110	
    Upper‐Middle	              4	                     2	                    100	              109	
    Richest	                   5	                     2	                    118	              133	
                                                     	

                         Table	3:	DISCO	customer	service	mechanisms	

    DISCO	             Customer	       Complaints	        Call	center	       Complaints	     Online	bill	
                        service	       on	website	                              via	         payments	
                        center	                                              SMS/Phone	
    IESCO	                 	                  	                 	             	               	
    LESCO	                 	                  	                 	              	              	
    GEPCO	                 	                  	                  	              	               	
    FESCO	                 	                  	                  	             	               	
    PESCO	                 	                  	                 	              	               	
    HESCO	                 	                  	                  	             	              	
    MEPCO	                 	                  	                  	             	               	
    SEPCO	                 	                  	                 	              	              	
    K‐Electric	            	                  	                 	             	              	
	

	                               	




                                                    25	
	
     Figure	1:	Current	price	and	subsidy	structure	for	residential	subsidies,	2014‐15	

                     Rs                                                                       Rs
                  18000                                                                       1800
                                  Total subsidy
                  15000                                                                       1500
                                  (right axis)
                                                            Total cost
                  12000                                     (left axis)                       1200

                   9000                                                                       900

                   6000                                                                       600
                                                     Total tariff
                   3000                               (left axis)                             300

                          0                                                                   0
                              0   100   200   300   400   500       600   700   800   900 1000
                                              Monthly Consumption (kWh)
                                                                                                     	
                     Note:	Cost	is	the	national	average	NEPRA‐determined	tariff	for	the	slab.	
	
	
    Figure	2:	Residential	electricity	expenditure	by	decile	of	per‐capita	consumption	
                              (Based	on	PSLM	2013‐14	data)	
    100%


    80%


    60%


    40%


    20%


     0%
           Poorest                      Decile	of	per capita	consumption	in	2013‐14                      Richest

           Lifeline	(0‐50)        50‐100       100‐200          200‐300         300‐700     700+ kWh/mth
                                                                                                                   	
Source:	Staff	calculations	based	on	PSLM	2013‐14	data.	
	                                     	




                                                          26	
	
                             Figure	3:	Illustration	of	matching	process	

           DISCO Database                                                                NSER Database 
                                                   Direct match 
          1014455407970                                                                  1014455407970 

                                                  Indirect match 
          1014628567800                                                                  1120103884459 
                                               NADRA Family Folder 

          1016026187900                           1120103884459                          1110145063983 


          1110115162273                           1014628567800                          1140532444124 


          1110145063983                           1120145728065                          1197818458200 




Note:	Numbers	for	each	record	are	the	CNIC	numbers	for	the	bill‐payer	(DISCO	database)	and	household	head	
(NSER	database),	which	can	be	reconciled	as	shown	using	the	family	folder	(list	of	all	CNICs	of	family	
members)	as	shown	in	the	diagram.	

	

    Figure	4:	Distribution	of	mean	monthly	electricity	consumption	of	households	in	
                     GEPCO,	FESCO	and	IESCO	service	areas,	2013‐14	
                           (By	PMT	score	decile	and	tariff	slab)	
      100%

       80%

       60%

       40%

       20%

         0%
                Poore
                  1          2         3              5 of	PMT	score	
                                               4 Decile      6        7            8        9      Riche
                                                                                                    10
            0‐50	(LIFELINE)        50‐100      100‐200        200‐300     300‐700       700+ kWh/mth
                                                                                                             	
              Source:	Staff	calculations	based	on	matched	data	from	GEPCO,	FESCO	and	IESCO	consumers	for	2013‐14.	

	                                  	




                                                        27	
	
                             Figure	5:	Distribution	of	subsidies,	2013‐14	
                                       By	slab	and	PMT	quintile	
            Rs	m
             200


              150


              100


               50


                 0
                      Poorest	20%       Lower‐Middle        Middle          Upper‐Middle      Richest	20%

                             0‐50       50‐100   100‐200         200‐300     300‐700       700+
                                                                                                                	
       Source:	Staff	calculations	based	on	matched	data	from	GEPCO,	FESCO	and	IESCO	consumers	for	2013‐14.	

	


              Figure	6:	Seasonal	Variation	in	Electricity	Consumption,	2013‐14	
                                      By	PMT	quintile	
    100%                                                                                                            100%

    80%                                                                                                             80%

    60%                                                                                                             60%

    40%                                                                                                             40%

    20%                                                                                                             20%

     0%                                                                                                             0%
           Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
             Poorest 20%         Lower‐Middle           Middle              Upper‐Middle          Richest 20%

               0‐50 (Lifeline)          50‐100         100‐200             200‐300          300‐700         700+
                                                                                                                           	
       Source:	Staff	calculations	based	on	matched	data	from	GEPCO,	FESCO	and	IESCO	consumers	for	2013‐14.	
       Note:	Lines	show	cumulative	share	of	households	by	quintile	and	quarter.	Q1:	July‐September	2013,	Q2:	October‐
       December	2013,	Q3:	January‐March	2014,	Q4:	April‐June	2014.	

	                                   	




                                                           28	
	
                        Figure	7:	Electricity	use	by	appliance	and	respondent	type	

                      AC
        Juicers&mixers                                                                            Katchi abadi
            Computers                                                                             BISP beneficiaries

        Fodder cutters                                                                            Rural
                                                                                                  Urban
           Heating rod
     Sewing machines
                 Fridge
                      TV
         Water motors
        Washing mach
                    Iron
      Mobile chargers
                   Fans

                           0          10       20     30     40         50       60         70     80        90         % 	
                                                                                                                       100
Source:	Authors’	calculations	based	on	data	collected	on	participants	in	qualitative	study.	
	

                                               Figure	8:	Coping	mechanisms	

            Work additional jobs                                             Lower middle income
                                                                             Low income + mixed income
              Reduce energy use
                                                                             BISP beneficiaries
       Kunda (illegal connection)                                            Katchi abadi

           Sell assets or livestock


           Pay bill in installments


    Borrow from friends/relatives


           Cut other expenditure


                                      0%            20%           40%             60%             80%             100%

                                                                                                                         	
Source:	Authors’	calculations	based	on	data	collected	on	participants	in	qualitative	study.	
	                                          	




                                                             29	
	
        Figure	9:	Percentage	of	FGD	participants	perceiving	their	bills	as	inaccurate	


      Low income rural
     Low income urban
          Mixed urban
                  BISP
     Lower middle rural
    Lower middle urban
         Katchi abadies

                          0%   10%        20%     30%       40%      50%       60%      70%    80%   90%   100%
                                                                                                                  	
Source:	Authors’	calculations	based	on	data	collected	on	participants	in	qualitative	study.	
	                                     	




                                                             30	
	
Appendices	

     A. Details	of	the	matching	process	for	billing	data	analysis	

	
Table	A1:	Domestic	consumers	in	each	of	the	DISCOs	
  DISCO	    Total	customers	       Share	of	national	
                                     consumption	
  GEPCO	       2,487,990	                 12.5	
  FESCO	       3,004,486	                 15.1	
  IESCO	       1,983,613	                 10.0	
  Total		      7,476,089	                 37.6	
Source:	Ministry	of	Water	and	Power	(June	2015)	
	
Table	A2:	Success	rate	of	matching	consumption	CNICs	with	poverty	scores		
     DISCO	    CNICs	provided	by	     Matched	to	   Not	matched	    Proportion	
                     DISCO		            NSER	         to	NSER	     matched	(%)	
  GEPCO	            132,388	            60,653	        71,735	          45.8	
  IESCO	             47,463	            24,016	        23,447	          50.6	
  FESCO	            146,075	            61,410	        84,665	          42.0	
  Total	            325,926	           146,061	       179,865	         44.8	
	
Figure	A1:	Domestic	consumption	patterns,	2013‐14	
	
                  Billing Data Sample                           All DISCOs
                                          Above                                  Above 
                                           700                                    700
                       301‐                                    301‐
                       700                                     700
                               Up to 50                                Up to 50
                201‐300                                   201‐300
                                 51‐100
                                                            101‐200     51‐100
                     101‐200


                                                                                          	
	
	
The	variables	matched	through	CNIC	with	NSER	records	were:	
1. Poverty	score	

2.    Household	composition	(number	of	children,	number	of	adults	in	the	family)		

3.    Gender	of	CNIC	holder		


                                                   31	
	
4.        Age	bracket	of	CNIC	holder			

5.        Disability	status	of	the	household	head	

6.        Employment	status	of	the	household	head	

7.        Education	level	of	the	household	head	

8.        Number	of	rooms		

9.        Electric	appliances	owned16		

10. Livestock	owned17		

A	query	of	the	NSER	database	was	run	to	match	the	CNICs	in	the	billing	data	with	the	CNICs	
in	 the	 NSER	 database.	 The	 two‐step	 matching	 process	 was	 designed	 to	 get	 the	 maximum	
number	 of	 CNICs	 from	 DISCOs	 matched	 with	 the	 NSER	 CNICs	 so	 that	 a	 poverty	 score	 is	
recorded	for	the	analysis.	The	first	step	was	to	directly	match	the	DISCO	CNIC	with	the	NSER	
database	and	the	second	step	was	to	match	the	DISCO	CNIC	through	a	family	member’s	‘alpha	
family’18	in	the	NSER.	This	second	step	was	designed	to	achieve	maximum	results	from	the	
matching	process.	NADRA	matched	the	records	by	CNIC	number,	a	common	variable	in	both	
data	sets.	Around	45%	of	the	CNICs	were	successfully	matched	with	the	PMT	scores.	FESCO,	
GEPCO	and	IESCO	have	updated	consumer	CNIC	records.	Each	of	these	DISCOs	has	a	different	
timeframe	for	updating	their	CNIC	records;	IESCO	updates	its	records	each	year	while	FESCO	
&	GEPCO	last	updated	their	records	2‐3	years	ago.		
	
Table	A3:	Frequency	of	CNICs	in	database	
    Column1                                                Sample      % of Sample
    Total DISCO CNICs                                         381907            100
    Single meters                                             317140             83
    2 meters                                                   17630                  5
  3 meters                                                      4842                  1
	 More than 3 meters                                           42289                 11 	
	                                                      	




																																																								
	
16	Electric	equipment:	washing	machine,	refrigerator,	AC,	cooking	range,	microwave,	geyser,	cooking	stove,	

cooking	range,	TV,	air	cooler	and	heater.	
17	Livestock:	Sheep,	bull,	cow,	buffalo	and	goat	
18	Alpha	family	is	a	term	used	by	NADRA	which	includes	parents	and/or	spouse	and	children	of	the	person.		




                                                                          32	
	
      B. Distribution	of	Subsidy	by	Poverty	Status	

	
Table	B1:	Total	subsidy	by	poverty	group	
                                Number of            Subsidy received by slab
    Quintile of poverty score   households 0‐50 50‐100 100‐200 200‐300 300‐700 700+ Total subsidy Subsidy per HH
    First quintile               29214.0      17.5 48.8    39.4       9.7     1.0 ‐0.1      116.4          3983.1
    Second quintile              29800.0      16.4 53.6    49.4     12.9      1.2 ‐0.1      133.4          4477.2
    Third quintile               28641.0      14.5 54.3    55.1     15.7      1.3 ‐0.1      140.8          4915.6
    Fourth quintile              29196.0      15.2 53.6    54.5     15.7      1.3 ‐0.1      140.2          4800.4
    Fifth quintile               29209.0      12.2 56.8    67.9     24.6      2.0 ‐0.2      163.3          5590.6 	
	
	
Table	B2:	Consumption	by	quintile	and	slab	
                                    Number of        Average  electricity consumption (kWh/mth) for 2013‐14
    By quintile of poverty score    households    None 0‐ 50 50‐100 100‐200 200‐300 300‐ 700           700+
                                                                     Subsidized               Unsubsidized
      First quintile                 29,214        566 8,854 7,980 9,873            1,540   386         15
      Second quintile                29,800        546 7,998 7,338 11,224 2,127             551         16
      Third quintile                 28,641        546 7,143 6,462 11,082 2,609             783         16
      Fourth quintile                29,196        562 7,672 6,533 10,939 2,624             844         22
      Fifth quintile                 29,209        508 6,323 4,935 11,468 4,176 1,741                   58        	
	
	
Table	B3:	Average	TDS	in	FY14	
                                      0‐50	
                                    (Lifeline
    	                                   )	        50‐100	         100‐200	   200‐300	    300‐700	       700+	
    NEPRA	Determined	
    Tariff	(PKR	per	unit)	                4	        11.8	          14.39	     14.39	       16.25	       17.85	
    GOP	Notified	Tariff		
    (PKR	per	unit)	                       2	        5.79	          8.11	      12.09	         16	          18	
    TDS	(PKR	per	unit)	                   2	        6.01	          6.28	       2.3	         0.25	        ‐0.15	
Note:	TDS	=	GOP	Notified	Tariff	–	NEPRA	Determined	Tariff		
	
	                                     	




                                                            33	
	
        C. Sample	Distribution	by	District	

	
Table	C1:	District‐wise	representation	in	billing	data	sample	

                                                Share	of	billing	
    DISCO	           District	
                                               data	sample	(%)	

    IESCO	           Attock								                    4	
    FESCO	           Bhakkar																           2	
    IESCO	           Chakwal									                  1	
    FESCO	           Faisalabad						                 14	
    GEPCO	           Gujranwala							                 8	
    GEPCO	           Gujrat							                    10	
    GEPCO	           Hafizabad						                   2	
    IESCO	           Islamabad							                  2	
    FESCO	           Jhang							                      8	
    IESCO	           Jhelum					                       1	
    FESCO	           Khushab								                   2	
    GEPCO	           Mandi	Bahauddin							            8	
    GEPCO	           Narowal							                    4	
    IESCO	           Rawalpindi						                  7	
    FESCO	           Sargodha				                      5	
    GEPCO	           Sialkot						                     7	
    FESCO	           Toba	Tek	Singh				                5	
    	                Others	                          10	
    	                Total	                          100	
	
	                                    	




                                                    34	
	
     D. Home	Ownership	and	Rental	

	
    Owns	home?	            Rural	                 Urban	   Total	
    Owner	                 92.5	                   72.0	   84.7	
    Non‐owner	              7.5	                   28.0	   15.3	
Source:	Authors’	calculations	based	on	PSLM	2013‐14.	
Notes:	Rural	population	share	is	62%,	urban	is	38%.	
	
	                           	




                                           35	
	
      E. PMT	distribution	in	billing	data	sample	

	
Table	E1:	Comparison	of	billing	data	PMT	distribution	with	population	distribution	

                                              Kernel density estimate
              .03
              .02
    Density
              .01
              0




                     0                20                40            60     80   100
                                                         Poverty Score
                    kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.2137

                                                                       	
The	plot	shows	the	distribution	of	the	PMT	score	in	the	sample	used	for	the	analysis	(line),	
with	the	PMT	distribution	in	the	full	NSER	dataset	overlaid	(columns).	The	NSER	data	was	
sourced	from	a	BISP	internal	analysis	presentation	entitled	“Presentation	to	the	Cabinet	
Division,	Government	of	Pakistan”	(dated	22	March,	2012).	
	
	                           	




                                                                       36	
	
    F. Further	Details	on	the	Qualitative	Research	

The	 qualitative	 research	 comprised	 44	 focus	 group	 discussions	 (FGDs),	 16	 follow‐up	
ethnographic	interviews	(EIs)	with	a	single	participant	from	the	focus	group,	and	12	in‐depth	
interviews	with	key	informants.	The	breakdown	of	FGD,	EI,	and	IDI	participants	is	described	
in	Table	F1.	
	
Focus	 group	 discussions	 were	 conducted	 with	 8‐10	 household	 heads	 or	 spouses,	
segregated	 by	 gender	 and	 stratified	 by	 socioeconomic	 status.	 The	 FGDs	 encouraged	 free	
discussion	of	the	following	topics:	
	
1. Consumer	behavior	
     Electricity	consumption	patterns	of	households;	
     The	most	stressful	times	with	respect	to	electricity	payments;	
     The	impact	of	electricity	bills	and	tariff	increases	on	household	budgets;		
     Methods	households	use	to	cope	with	tariff	increases—for	example,	cutting	back	on	
       other	spending	(and	if	so,	what	expenses	are	cut);	and	
     Gender‐specific	implications	of	an	increase	in	electricity	tariffs.	
	
2. Perceptions	of	service	quality	
     Reliability	and	value	for	money	of	the	electricity	service;	
     Consumer	experiences	interacting	with	electricity	service	providers;	and	
     Concerns	relating	to	service	providers	(including	clarity	of	tariff‐setting	processes,	
       accountability,	understanding	of	billing,	and	theft	or	nonpayment	of	bills).	
	
3. Attitudes	towards	reform	and	compensation	
     Awareness	 of,	 and	 attitudes	 towards,	 the	 government’s	 electricity	 sector	 reform	
       agenda;	
     Conditions	under	which	consumers	would	be	willing	to	pay	more	for	electricity	and	
       pay	their	bills	on	time;	
     Elements	that	should	be	considered	in	communication	efforts	accompanying	energy	
       reforms;	and	
     Perceptions	 of	 the	 most	 effective	 measures	 to	 protect	 poor	 households	 against	
       adverse	impacts	of	energy	tariff	increases.	
	
Ethnographic	 interviews	focused	on	more	specific	information	about	households’	energy	
costs	and	the	ways	in	which	they	experience	the	impacts	of	tariff	reforms.	
	
In‐depth	 interviews	were	conducted	with	key	informants	to	gather	their	opinions	on	the	
same	 topics	 to	 validate,	 explain,	 and	 balance	 opinions	 expressed	 by	 households’	 energy	
consumers.	 Key	 informants	 interviewed	 included	 social	 assistance	 and	 energy	 company	
representatives.		




                                               37	
	
Table	F1:	Qualitative	Research	Sample	
	
    Province	   District	      Locality	    Village	/Community	Name	                Gender	   Socioeconomic	Group	       Ethnographic	   Service	provider	
                                                                                                                          interview?	     interview	(IDI)	
    Khyber	     Lower	Dir	     Urban	       Qurataro	Mohallha,	UC	Timar	Ghara	       Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	             	           IDI	with	BISP		
    Pakhtun‐                                                                                                                             Assistant	Director	
    khwa	                                   Rahimabad‐	UC/Tehsil‐	Samarh	Bagh	      Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                               	
                                            Shah	Mohalla	Shakhans‐	UC‐	Timer	       Female	      Katchi	abadi	                         IDI	with	lineman	
                                            Gahara	
                               Rural	       Rehmnabad,	UC	Noora	Khal		               Male	       Lower	Income	                                  	
                                            Nageer	Payeen	                          Female	      Lower	Income	                                   	
                Manshera	      Urban	       Chennai‐	UC	3	                           Male	       Lower	Income	                                   	
                                            Neighbourhood	No	Ghaz	1	                Female	      Lower	Income	                                   	
                                            City		No‐	Nogai	Nori,	UC‐	2	             Male	        Katchi	abadi	                                 	
                               Rural	       Shamdara	                                Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	                               	
                                            Behali,	UC		Manshera	                   Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                             IDI	
                                            Behali,	UC	Manshera	                     Male	           BISP	                                      	
                                            Shamdara/Tehsil‐Mansehra	               Female	          BISP	                                    IDI	
    Punjab	     Lodhran	       Urban	       Mahmooda	Abad,	UC	Gulab	Pura	            Male	       Mixed	Income	                                  	
                                            Dunia	Pur,	UC	Gulab	Pura	               Female	      Mixed	Income	                                  	
                                            Shah	Muhammad	Qabristan‐Eid	Gah	        Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                             IDI	
                                            Mohallah‐Duyina	Pur	
                                            Mohala	Nokhal	Wala		                    Female	       Katchi	abadi	                                  	
                               Rural	       Chak	231,	Lodhran	                       Male	       Lower	Income	                                   	
                                            UC	Gulab	Pura	Basti	sal	sadar			        Female	      Lower	Income	                                  	
                                            Chak	No‐	237/WB	                         Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	                            IDI	
                                            Sal	Sadar	                               Male	           BISP	                                     IDI	
                                            Chak	No.	237	                           Female	          BISP	                                IDI	with	BISP	
                                                                                                                                         Assistant	Director	
                Muzafargarh	   Urban	       Ward	No	10	Mohalla	Mochi	wala	           Male	       Lower	Income	                                  	
                                            Basti	Dewan	Wala	                       Female	      Lower	Income	                                   	
                                            Darkhan	Wala,	UC	Khan	Garh	             Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                              	
                                            Tibba	Kareem	Wala	                       Male	        Katchi	abadi	               	          IDI	with	lineman	
                               Rural	       Basti	Kodaiwala,	Tehsil	Kot	Uddo	(UC	    Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	            	                   	
                                            Minha)	
                                            Village	Ganga	                          Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                              	
                                            Basti	Hayat	Wala	Moza	Munha	Sharif,	     Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	                               	
                                            Darkhan	
	
	                                       	




	                                                          	 	                                               	       	                                         38
	
	
Table	F1:	Qualitative	Research	Sample	(continued)	
	
    Province	   District	        Locality	   Village	/Community	Name	                    Gender	    Socioeconomic	Group	   Ethnographic	    Service	provider	
                                                                                                                            interview?	      interview	(IDI)	
    Sindh	      TM	Khan	         Urban	      Mizar	Barani	Mohalla,	UC	3	                   Male	       Mixed	Income		                                	
                                             Gulshan	Faiz	Colony,	UC	1	                   Female	      Mixed	Income		                             IDI	
                                             Pattar	Goth,	UC	1	                            Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	                             	
                                             Pattar	Kot	UC	1	                             Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                             	
                                             Gulshan	Faiz	Colony,	Mohalla	Somra,	UC	       Male	       Katchi	abadi	                      IDI	with	Bait‐ul‐mal	
                                             1	                                                                                                   officer	
                                 Rural	      UC	Allah‐Yar	Turk		Village,	Mula	Katiyar	     Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	                            	
                                             and	Jamal	Shoro	
                                             UC	Syed	Pur	Village	‐	Takar	Mohala	          Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                          IDI	
                                             Memon	
                                             Kamis	Pur	                                    Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	                            	
                                             Kamis	Pur,	District	–Tando	Muhammad	         Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                            	
                                             Khan,	Sindh	
                Nawabshah	       Urban	      Sachal	Colony	–Benazira	abad		                Male	    Lower	Middle	Income	                            	
                (Benazirabad)	               Imamia,	UC	3,	Nawabshah	district		           Female	   Lower	Middle	Income	                            	
                                             Mohammad	Saleh	Deraj	                        Female	      Katchi	abadi	                                	
                                 Rural	      Khair	Shah	                                   Male	       Low	Income	                                  	
                                             Benazirabad,	Obhayo	Mangsi	                  Female	      Low	Income	                                  	
                                             UC‐Marhabpur	
                                             Haji	Jarrar	UC	Mehrapur	                      Male	           BISP	                                  	
                                             Khair	Shah	Solangi	Mohalla	                  Female	          BISP	                                  	
    Total		     	                	           	                                               	              44	                 16	                12	
	
	




                                                                                         39	
	
