                                                     WPS7994


Policy Research Working Paper                       7994




      For India’s Rural Poor, Growing Towns
        Matter More than Growing Cities
                                   John Gibson
                                  Gaurav Datt
                                  Rinku Murgai
                                 Martin Ravallion




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7994


  Abstract
  It is theoretically ambiguous whether growth of cities mat-                       poverty measures for rural India, calibrated to a panel
  ters more to the rural poor than growth of towns. This                            of 59 regions observed four times over 1993–2012. The
  paper empirically examines whether growth of India’s                              expansion of lit area had greater effect on the rural poverty
  secondary towns or big cities mattered more to recent                             measures than did intensive margin growth in the bright-
  rural poverty reduction, noting that data deficiencies                            ness of light from urban areas. For India’s current stage of
  have made this a difficult question to answer previously.                         development, growth of secondary towns may do more to
  Satellite observations of night lights are used to measure                        reduce rural poverty than big city growth, although the
  urban growth on the extensive and intensive margins                               theoretical model suggests that cities may eventually take
  in the context of a spatial Durbin fixed-effects model of                         over from towns as the drivers of rural poverty reduction.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to
  provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  rmurgai@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
         For India’s Rural Poor, Growing Towns Matter More than
                                          Growing Cities


              John Gibson, Gaurav Datt, Rinku Murgai and Martin Ravallion1




        JEL Codes: O15, R12

        Keywords: Cities, luminosity, poverty, secondary towns, spatial Durbin model, India



1
  Gibson is with the Department of Economics, University of Waikato, Datt is with the Department of
Economics, Monash University, Murgai is with the World Bank and Ravallion is with the Department of
Economics, Georgetown University. These are the views of the authors and need not reflect those of their
employers. We are grateful to participants in the Secondary Towns, Jobs and Poverty Reduction Conference at
the World Bank for their helpful comments, and to Geua Boe-Gibson for the preparation of the maps.
I.      Introduction

        There appears to be a broad consensus among development economists that
agricultural growth, and rural development more broadly, is good for rural poverty reduction
(although this was not always widely accepted).2 Models of the development process have
also attached importance to the scope for rural poverty reduction through urban economic
growth, and some observers have seen this as the more important channel for rural poverty
reduction.3 Urban economic growth is expected to contribute to reducing rural poverty
through two main channels:
        (i) Labor absorption: an expanding urban economy will benefit the rural poor by
either absorbing surplus rural labor, as in the classic Lewis (1954) model, or by tightening
rural labor markets (leading to higher wage rates).
        (ii) Backward linkages: growth in the urban economy increases public or private
resources that benefit the rural poor; for example, greater urban demand for rural products
may increase rural incomes or labor-augmenting technical progress in urban areas may
increase the remittances sent back to rural families.
        The strength of these channels has been an important issue for setting development
priorities for India, as elsewhere. The evidence suggests that India’s urban economic growth
in the post-Independence period up to around 1990 did rather little to reduce rural poverty,
although urban growth had reduced urban poverty, and rural poverty was primarily driven by
rural growth (Ravallion and Datt, 1996). Since economic reforms began in earnest in India in
the early 1990s, there has been considerable progress in reducing poverty, with trend rates of
decline that are higher than in the pre-reform era (Datt, Ravallion and Murgai, 2016). The
indications are that urban economic growth since the early 1990s has been more poverty
reducing, and that this has come with larger gains to India’s rural poor (Datt and Ravallion,
2011; Datt et al., 2016).
        Lanjouw and Murgai (2014) conjecture that the link from urban development to rural
poverty reduction is stronger if urban economic growth stems from India’s secondary towns
rather than from the big cities. The secondary towns may be more tightly connected to the
surrounding rural hinterland than are the cities, so growth in small towns may have more
effect on rural poverty. Yet it is the big cities, defined as those with population above one


2
  For an overview of past debates on the relationship between economic growth (including by sector) and
poverty reduction see Ravallion (2016, Chapter 8).
3
  See, for example, Collier (2009), with reference to Africa.


                                                      2
million, that have the lowest poverty rates and that appear to be growing faster than the
smaller statutory towns, with the share of the urban population in the big cities rising from
38 percent in 2001 to 42 percent in 2011 (Tripathi, 2013). Higher wage rates in larger cities
will to some degree spill over to the towns and rural areas both through labor market
adjustment and because they may also generate larger trade and remittance flows. Thus, it is
theoretically ambiguous whether larger cities generate larger gains to the rural poor.
       The Lanjouw and Murgai hypothesis that India may have experienced faster poverty
reduction if smaller towns had grown as fast as the cities is consistent with evidence from
other countries on the relationship between poverty and city size (Ferré, Ferreira and
Lanjouw, 2012). However, it is difficult to test this hypothesis for India, or more generally to
relate variation in growth of different types of cities to variation in rural poverty reduction.
One difficulty arises because it is only once every ten years that city growth (in terms of
population rather than economic output) is measured in India, using the census. A lot of the
variation in rural poverty reduction occurs within a ten-year censual period and so would be
missed by studies that rely on the census data to measure urban growth. Another difficulty is
the absence of timely and spatially detailed (e.g. at city level) economic statistics.
       This study uses a proxy for urban growth to test the hypothesis that it is the growth
rates of India’s secondary towns, rather than the big cities, that matter most for rural poverty
reduction. We use nighttime lights, as detected by satellite, to measure urban growth,
distinguishing between growth on the extensive and intensive margins, and between the
growth of cities and of secondary towns. These new measures of urban growth are
econometrically related to sub-national poverty estimates that are formed at a finer spatial
resolution than in the existing literature. Specifically, we use a division of India into 59
National Sample Survey (NSS) regions that are more finely-grained than the usual division
into states and union territories. Our study covers four observations for each of these regions
between 1993/94 and 2011/12, based on NSS “thick” rounds (with larger sample sizes such
that the survey is representative at the NSS regional level). We also account for the spatial
autocorrelation that is increasingly apparent in patterns of rural poverty in India.
       The following section provides a simple theoretical model of a three-sector labor
market in which one of the sectors—the “big city”—has a labor market distortion, but wages
are flexible in the other two sectors, the secondary towns and the rural hinterland, with
workers free to move between the two. For this model, we derive conditions under which
technical progress in the big cities has less impact on the rural wage rate than does technical
progress in the secondary towns. However, this is only one possible outcome. Even in this


                                                 3
simple model, city growth could more effectively “trickle down” to the rural poor. It is an
empirical question as to which type of urban growth is better for the rural poor.
        Section III describes our data for addressing that question, in which we have formed a
regional panel data set, combining results from household surveys with data on the extent of
night light. Section IV explains our econometric model, which is calibrated to the panel data.
Alternative models are also described, and shown to be testable restrictions on our preferred
(encompassing) specification. Our results are then presented in Section V, which provide
strong support for the hypothesis that economic growth in secondary towns has more impact
on rural poverty than does growth of the big cities. Section VI concludes.

II.     A Simple Theoretical Model

        The purpose of the following model is to illustrate one source of urban-rural linkage,
namely through the labor market, for which urban economic growth emanating from cities
brings different gains to the rural poor than growth in towns.
        We suppose that the urban economy comprises two sectors, a town and a city. In the
spirit of the classic Harris-Todaro (1970) model of rural-urban migration in the presence of
an urban labor-market distortion, we assume that the wage rate in the city is fixed above the
market clearing level, but the wages in the town and the rural economy are fully flexible, and
come into parity. Technical progress in the town is assumed to increase the marginal product
of labor there, which will lead to higher wages in the town, and also in the rural hinterland
due to the integrated labor markets; indeed, in equilibrium the wage gains will be the same.
Technical progress in the cities will increase employment there, which will attract workers
out of unemployment and from both the town and rural areas. This will bring gains to wages
in the latter sectors.
        In the context of this model, we ask whether technical progress in the town has more
impact on poverty than that in the city. There is no inequality within sectors (although this
can be relaxed to assume an inequality-neutral growth processes). The poor in this model are
taken to be all workers except those who get a job in the city (i.e., rural plus township
workers, plus the urban unemployed). In other words, the poverty line is below the city wage
rate but above the rural and town wage rates.
        In more formal terms, the model is as follows: The production functions are Ai Fi ( N ie )

(i=c,t,r) for the city, town and rural areas respectively, where N ie denotes employment in

sector i and Ai is the shift parameter for (Hicks-neutral) technical progress; we will only


                                                4
consider the comparative static effects of changes in Ac and At so we set Ar  1 . All three

production functions are strictly increasing and strictly concave. The respective wage rates
are Wi for i=c,t,r. These are all taken to be normalized by the poverty line. The town and

rural wage rates are flexible, such that all those who want work can find it; in equilibrium,
Wt  Wr . The city wage rate is fixed, such that N c  N ce are left unemployed and they are

assumed to earn nothing (where N c is the city workforce, including the unemployed). In
equilibrium, the rural wage rate is equated with the expected wage rate in the city (the
probability of getting a city job times the city wage rate), Wr  ( N ce / N c )Wc . Firms maximize

profits, requiring that wage rates equate with marginal products, Wi  Ai Fi( N ie ) (i=c,t,r), with

(variable) wage elasticities of labor demand denoted i ( 0) . Total population is normalized

at unity ( N c  N te  N re  1 ).
         We now consider the effects on rural poverty of technical progress in the town versus
the city. Since all rural workers are taken to be poor, we will only consider impacts on the
rural poverty gap index (PG), which is the mean distance of the rural wage rate below the
poverty line. Since PG  1  Wr in our model, we focus solely on the rural wage rate.4
         Proposition 1: Technical progress in the town will have a larger (smaller)
proportionate impact on the rural wage rate if the ratio of the city workforce (employed plus
unemployed) to the town’s workforce is greater than (less than) the ratio of the wage
elasticity of the town’s labor demand to that of city labor demand.
         To verify this claim, consider the effects on the rural wage rate of an increase in Ac

and compare this to the effect of an increase in At . On log differentiating and solving

(invoking the usual implicit function theorem) we obtain:5
                             ln Wr          t N te
                                                            0                                             (1.1)
                             ln At  r N re  t N te  N c

                             ln Wr        c N c
                                                          0                                               (1.2)
                             ln Ac r N r  t N te  N c
                                         e




  For the economy as a whole, PG  (1  W )(1  N c ) where W  Wr ( N r  Nt ) /(1  N c ) is the mean wage
4                                                    e                     e     e         e


rate of the poor in the economy as a whole. As long as the workforce-weighted mean labor demand elasticity in
the town and rural sectors is less than unity, the direction of change in the overall poverty gap also depends on
the change in the rural wage rate.
5
  Note that the following derivatives are not symmetric since it is the total city workforce (including the
unemployed) in the numerator of (1.2). This feature stems from the fixity of the city wage rate. An addendum is
available from the authors with more detail on the derivation.


                                                         5
Growth in either urban sector reduces the rural poverty gap. The ratio of the two
proportionate effects on rural wages is:
                             ln Wr      ln Wr c N c
                                                                                                          (2)
                             ln Ac      ln At t N te
Thus Proposition 1 follows.
        So even in this simple model we cannot predict which urban sector will be the most
rural-poverty reducing. When city size is small ( N c approaches zero) technical progress in

that sector will bring negligible gains to the rural poor via the labor market. Alternatively,
even when the city workforce is as large as that in the secondary towns, economic growth in
the cities will bring less gain to the rural poor if labor demand is less wage elastic in the cities
than the towns. But these are special cases, and one can readily find counter-examples, such
as when the city workforce is either relatively large or its labor demand is more wage elastic.
        Proposition 1 also suggests that we may well find that town growth tends to matter
more to the rural poor at early stages of overall economic development, assuming that this
entails that cities expand (in number or size). But in due course, this will change, such that
cities become the stronger driver of rural poverty reduction. This is implied by the above
model if the wage elasticities of labor demand change little as the share of the workforce
living in cities grows, with that in towns falling.

III.    Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1     Poverty Data

        Our poverty data are based on estimates of real household consumption that are
measured in four “thick” rounds of household surveys conducted by the National Sample
Survey Organization (NSSO). These “thick” rounds each have a sample size of over 100,000
households as opposed to the more frequent “thin” rounds. We use data from 1993/94 (50th
round), 2004/05 (61st round), 2009/10 (66th round), and 2011/12 (68th round). The NSSO
surveys began in the early 1950s and in terms of the international norms for consistency of
expenditure or consumption surveys they have maintained a high degree of comparability
over time, with the exception of the late 1990s (Datt et al, 2016).6 For the four surveys that
we use, a mixed-recall period (MRP) is used, with a 30-day recall for food and frequently



6
 There is debate about the consumption and poverty estimates from the 55th round (1999/00) that is described in
detail by Deaton and Kozel (2005). We do not use the results from this round.


                                                      6
consumed items, and a one-year recall for clothing, footwear, health, education, and durable
goods.
         The monthly per capita consumption estimates are put in spatially and temporally real
terms by using India’s official poverty lines as deflators.7 We use two poverty measures. The
first is the headcount index, given by the percentage of the population living in households
with consumption per capita less than the poverty line. The second is the poverty gap index,
given by the mean distance below the poverty line expressed as a proportion of that line,
where the mean is formed over the entire population (counting the non-poor as having zero
poverty gap). In keeping with our focus on how urban economic growth has impacted rural
poverty we confine attention to the rural poverty measures.8
         Much of the research on poverty in India is based on a disaggregation into the urban
and rural sectors of each state or union territory (UT). Here we use instead more finely
grained data, based on “NSS Regions”. These regions have been used by the NSSO since the
4th round, where disaggregation below the state level was first available. Initially, 52 regions
were formed, where a region was defined as a group of contiguous districts from within the
same state that had similar geographical features and had similar population densities in the
1951 population census. With the subsequent splitting of states and districts, the number of
NSS regions grew to 88 by the 68th round survey in 2011/12. We only use data for 19 major
states, and we also control for state- and district-level splitting by anchoring our panel to the
administrative geography of India as of the 55th round survey in 1999/00. Consequently, the
number of regions we have poverty estimates for is 59, with these available for four years,
giving a balanced panel of N=236.
         The pattern of change in rural poverty over time is shown in Table 1. The headcount
index halved over the two decades considered, falling from 50 percent in 1993/94 to
25 percent in 2011/12. The poverty gap index declined even faster, with a fall from 0.123 in
1993/94 to 0.045 in 2011/12. The reductions in poverty rates are spread fairly evenly between
the four survey years, but since there is a ten-year gap between the first two surveys and then
gaps of four years and two years, it is clear that the pace of poverty reduction is increasing.



7
  These are the “Tendulkar” poverty lines, after Suresh Tendulkar who headed an expert group that revised
India’s official poverty lines. Among several revisions were a smaller rural-urban cost of living differential than
the original Planning Commission poverty lines. At 2011 purchasing power parity (PPP) the Tendulkar poverty
lines have a value of $2.09 per day.
8
  The NSSO follows the Census in defining areas as urban, based on criteria in terms of minimum population,
minimum population density, and the percentage of the population working outside of agriculture, or whether an
area is a Statutory town (e.g., has a Municipality, Corporation, Cantonment Board, etc.).


                                                        7
         The NSS is a weighted survey but the weights do not affect the estimated downward
trends in poverty rates in Table 1. This is reassuring because the spatial panel estimators that
we use in the econometric analyses below do not handle variable sampling weights. We
therefore rely on the unweighted data; based on Table 1 this should provide similar patterns
to the weighted data. The other pattern in Table 1 is the regional divergence in poverty rates;
the coefficient of variation of rural poverty rates based on the NSS regions rises
monotonically over time, for both poverty measures and whether using sampling weights or
not. In other words, even though India has been escaping from mass absolute poverty it is
doing so at an uneven rate over space.
         The spatial pattern of rural poverty at baseline is shown in Figure 1, for the headcount
index (left panel) and poverty gap index (right panel). The spatial autocorrelation in the data
is apparent, with regions having high poverty likely to be neighbors with other high poverty
regions and vice versa for regions with low poverty rates. Roughly speaking, if one drew a
straight line from Nashik in Maharashtra (which is about 100 miles northwest of Mumbai)
that went at a 50 degree angle to pass west of Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh (UP), all but three
regions to the southeast of that line would be in the highest three poverty classes, which had
headcount poverty rates of 42 percent or more in 1993/94.9 Conversely, almost all regions
along the Arabian Sea coast, and in northwest India were in the lowest classes for poverty. A
common test for spatial autocorrelation is Moran’s I test, which has some parallels with the
Durbin-Watson statistic.10 This test reveals significant positive spatial autocorrelation with
I=0.30 for the headcount index in 1993/94 and I=0.26 for the poverty gap index.
         The spatial pattern of rural poverty at the endpoint of our panel, in 2011/12, is even
more apparent than it was a baseline. In the left panel of Figure 2 a belt of high headcount
poverty is apparent, which extends from the northeast in Assam and comes west across India
at a slight downward angle to reach the Eastern Gujarat region, located on the Arabian Sea
coast about midway between Mumbai and Ahmedabad. The Moran statistic for the headcount
index in 2011/12 is 0.43 while for the poverty gap index it is 0.38. These increases in the
Moran statistic from the baseline show that rural poverty has become increasingly spatially



9
  The three exceptions were the Central Plains of West Bengal (WB) which surround Kolkata, Coastal Tamil
Nadu (TN) and Inland Southern Andhra Pradesh (AP).
10
   For any variable z in deviation from mean form and spatial weights matrix W, Moran’s I is equivalent to the
slope coefficient in a linear regression of Wz on z (Anselin, 1988). In other words, it examines the strength of the
relationship between one observation and the spatially weighted average of its neighboring observations. The
weights matrix used here is based on contiguity; any region sharing any boundary point with another region is
considered its neighbor. These are known as Queen weights, based on where pieces move on a chessboard.


                                                         8
concentrated. This growing inequality over space in the poverty rate also featured in the rise
over time in the coefficients of variation for the poverty statistics in Table 1.
        The description of poverty patterns over time and space is completed by Figure 3,
which shows the proportion of baseline poverty eliminated by 2011/12. The spatial patterns
are especially clear when considering the poverty gap index in the right panel of Figure 3.
The southern states of Kerala, Karnataka, TN, and AP, and all of Maharashtra except the
Coastal region (where the poverty gap index increased) eliminated from 60-95 percent of the
baseline poverty gap index in the rural sector and similar progress is seen in much of
northwest India. However, in Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, and parts of
Madhya Pradesh, a much smaller proportion of rural poverty was eliminated. Thus, the rate
of reduction in poverty is also spatially auto-correlated, with Moran statistics of 0.30 for the
proportion of the rural poverty gap eliminated and 0.15 for the proportion of the rural
headcount poverty that was eliminated. In other words, rural poverty started out as spatially
concentrated, the poverty reduction process has also been spatially uneven, and so rural
poverty at the end-line for our data is even more spatially concentrated than it was at the start.

3.2     Night Lights Data

        If India were China it would be fairly easy to examine how growth of different types
of cities affects rural areas. China has annual GDP data for prefectures, a sub-provincial unit
a little more disaggregated than NSS regions are with respect to India’s states, and also for
each city and county. One could compare how rural poverty is affected by growth in big
cities versus growth in smaller ones, such as county-level cities.11 However, the available
sub-national economic statistics are much more limited for India. For example, annual data
on Gross District Domestic Product are reported by the Planning Commission, but exclude
some big states like Gujarat, and for many states the data end in 2005/06 and so miss the
recent period of rapid poverty reduction. The Population Census for 1991 and 2011 roughly
lines up with the 50th and 66th or 68th round NSS data but not with the 61st round, and does
not inform about economic growth. The lack of agglomeration-level boundaries, like the
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA) in other countries, also means that India’s census data
correspond to administrative rather than to economic definitions of cities.




11
 Deng et al (2010) are an example of studying patterns of urban change in China using these spatially detailed
GDP data.


                                                       9
         To measure urban growth, we therefore rely on data that are not limited by India’s
statistical infrastructure, namely night-time lights, as detected by satellite. These data are
originally from the Defence Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) and are processed by
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. They provide annual estimates over
1992-2012 at a one square kilometer resolution (in some years two satellites are in orbit so
there are 33 satellite-year observations). Gibson et al (2015) use these data to estimate rates
of area expansion over 1992-2012 for 47 Indian agglomerations with a population of at least
one million in the 2011 census.12 These agglomerations are shown in Figure 4, in terms of
their lit area in 2012. We treat these 47 agglomerations as India’s “big cities” and contrast the
effects of their growth with the effects of the growth of smaller towns.13 The threshold of one
million population is also used by Chatterjee et al (2015) and Li and Rama (2015) to
demarcate between India’s large and small urban areas.
         Figure 4 also shows the NSS regions; 39 of 59 have one or more of the big cities in
them. For the others, the city effects come indirectly, with these spatial spillovers captured by
our econometric model. We consider city growth on the extensive and intensive margins,
since it is a priori unclear which matters more to poverty reduction. For example, extensive
margin growth may offer easier commuting from rural areas but more sprawling cities may
be less efficient. Specifically, we use the night lights to both demarcate the edge of cities for
examining effects of expanded areas (the extensive margin), and to calculate the intensity of
light—the “digital number” (DN)— emanating from within these boundaries (the intensive
margin).14
         There is also a measurement reason for distinguishing between lit area and light
output within an area. Some DMSP satellites distribute measured light less intensely over a
wider area and others focus it into a smaller area.15 For example, Liu et al (2012) note that

12
   The census lists 53 million-plus cities but two are within the Delhi agglomeration (Faridabad and Ghaziabad)
and four others (Malappurum, Srinigar, Kollam and Kannur) were too dim to be detected at the 50% threshold
used for the other cities. At the 20% luminosity threshhold we use to distinguish towns from rural areas, these
four cities contribute just 0.4% of total lit area (and 1.3% of big city lit area, if measured at that threshold).
13
   The area expansion rate of the 23 cities that were million plus in 1991 was not significantly different from the
others that crossed the million threshhold between 1991 and 2011, indicating that there is no evident selection or
survivorship bias by defining the sample of big cities by their meeting a criteria set at the end of the period.
14
   Technically, we measure areas by starting at the center of each big city, where lights should be brightest, and
as the algorithm moves outwards and comes across pixels less illuminated than the brightness threshold it
searches in a different direction. If the algorithm finds no contiguous pixels with light above the threshold
except those closer to the city center that it has already scanned over, it sets a boundary.
15
   To briefly digress, DMSP was to detect clouds, for daily weather forecasts to help Air Force pilots, rather than
to detect ground level activity to help economists. Photons from the observed area enter a scanner and create a
pulse of electrons that map to a DN ranging from 0-63; this range was because on-board data holding could
spare just six bits of memory (26=64) for each datum (Abrahams et al 2015). Given the original purpose, sensors
on board DMSP satellites were adjusted over the lunar cycle to keep the brightness of cloud tops the same, with


                                                        10
satellite F15 in orbit in 2008 gave an average DN value of 16.6 across 0.9 million lit pixels in
China, while F16 in orbit in the same year gave an average DN value of only 10.7 but spread
over 1.7 million lit pixels. Similarly, Gibson et al (2015) show that satellites F14 and F15
differ by 85 km2 (11 percent of the two-satellite mean), when estimating area for Bangalore in
2001. A related issue is that night-lit activity with a particular DN value on one day may not
map to the same DN on another day due to sensor adjustments and inter-satellite differences.
         We respond to these measurement issues in four ways.16 First, we use an annual
composite of non-ephemeral lights so unrecorded adjustments may wash out over the course
of the year as repeated observations converge to some average amplification level. Second,
we average over all satellite-year observations in a two-year window centered on the timing
of the NSS rounds to ameliorate errors due to inter-satellite differences. Third, we measure
smaller cities using two different luminosity thresholds, of 20 percent and 30 percent of the
maximum (equivalent to DN values of 13 and 19), to check that the patterns we find are not
sensitive to a particular choice of DN values.17 Finally, we use the decomposition of night
lights into lit area effects and average DN values within lit areas. We note in passing that
most studies using DMSP data are not from economics and are typically concerned with
urban area rather than with average DN values, while studies in economics typically just use
average DN values.
         In order to distinguish between cities and towns, and between towns and rural areas,
we need luminosity thresholds. Several are used in practice, with examples of some close to
what we use including Small and Elvidge (2013), who use DN12 for their Asia-wide study
of urban areas, and Alvarez-Berrios et al (2013), who use DN20 for intermediate urban
areas in Latin America. Lower thresholds are needed for towns than are used for cities
because even some million-plus agglomerations were undetectable at a 50 percent threshold
(DN>31). Conversely, a low threshold for all urban areas clumps big cities together along lit


no record kept of these adjustments and produce data that are top-coded at DN=63. Also, comparability between
satellites and sensor decay were less important for daily cloud monitoring than for measuring long-term changes
in ground-level lights.
16
   Various ‘calibrated’ night lights series are also available but these typically involve extrapolations from
spatially and temporally limited episodes when amplification levels on the sensors were adjusted to suit the
needs of researchers rather than of Air Force pilots (Hsu et al, 2015) or extrapolations from areas such as Sicily
that were assumed to have stable lights (Elvidge et al, 2009). These assumptions may not be broadly acceptable.
17
   We refer to percentages of the maximum DN value to make the point that it is relative luminosity that is being
measured, rather than the DN being a constant unit of measurement like a kilometer. For big cities, we use a
single threshold of 50 percent because Gibson et al (2015) show the robustness of temporal and spatial patterns
to using alternative thresholds of 40 and 60 percent. Cross-validation exercises also supported results using the
50 percent threshold, which contrasts with findings from Abrahams et al (2015) who found greatly exaggerated
city sizes if night lights are used without correcting for various features causing blurring.


                                                       11
corridors; for example, with a 20 percent threshold one big agglomeration extends 500 km
along India’s National Highway 1 from Delhi through Chandigarh and Ludhiana all the way
to Amritsar. This clumping results in implausibly large cities and reduces the number of them
separately distinguishable, yielding a smaller sample for examining variation in different
types of urban growth.
         Our approach to distinguishing growth in cities from towns is shown in Figure 5,
using the example of three of the big cities in southern India. In 1993, the Inland Southern
region of Karnataka, which is where Bangalore is located, had about 900 km2 of urbanized
area, if using a luminosity threshold of 30 percent.18 This was split roughly equally between
areas of Bangalore that were at or above 50 percent of the maximum brightness, and areas
elsewhere in the region that were between 30 and 50 percent of the maximum. Some of these
less bright areas include the outskirts of Bangalore and we discuss our treatment of fringe
areas of big cities below. The map on the right of Figure 5 shows that by 2011 the area of
Bangalore had almost quadrupled, using the 50 percent threshold to demarcate this big city
from other urban areas. The rate of expansion of the secondary towns in this NSS region was
even faster, so the total urban area of the region (using the 30 percent threshold to separate
urban from non-urban) was almost five times what it was in 1993.
         In the adjacent region of Inland Tamil Nadu, the city of Coimbatore grew almost as
fast as Bangalore; the annual trend expansion rate was 4.6 percent compared to 4.9 percent
for Bangalore (Gibson et al, 2015). However, the growth in less brightly lit areas of Inland
Tamil Nadu was even faster, and so between 1993 and 2011 Coimbatore contributed just
12 percent of the total urban area expansion for the Inland Tamil Nadu region. In contrast,
Bangalore contributed 35 percent of the total urban area expansion for the Inland Southern
Karnataka region. At the heart of our empirical strategy is the fact that for some regions the
urban growth has mainly come from a brightly lit big city like Bangalore while for other
regions the urban growth has come mainly from the expansion of less brightly lit secondary
towns, as in Inland Tamil Nadu. Across all the regions we study, the typical pattern is more
like Inland Tamil Nadu than like Inland Southern Karnataka; a larger share of the growth in
total lit area was due to secondary towns, which contributed about two-thirds of the growth
from 1993/94 to 2004/05 and about four-fifths thereafter. Finally, note that a less rapidly
growing big city, such as Thissur in Kerala, provides another contrast.19 While the limited


18
  The map in the left-hand panel of Figure 5 truncates part of the Inland Southern region, to focus on big cities.
19
  Across all 47 big cities the trend annual expansion rates ranged from -1.6 to 8 percent and the coefficient of
variation over cities in expansion rates was 0.7 (Gibson et al, 2015) so there is a lot of variability to exploit.


                                                        12
expansion of this city is apparent in Figure 5 it is part of an NSS region (Southern Kerala)
that has three big cities (Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram are the other two) and so provides
one of the few examples of big city multi-polar growth.
         The approach to splitting big city growth from smaller town growth in Figure 5 raises
a question of whether the dimmer fringe of a city should be considered as part of that city or
as a separate, smaller, town. Such areas could be existing, distinct, towns that get engulfed by
the expanding big city or they may be new parts of the city built on virgin land that are yet to
be as brightly lit as the center of the city. To check if our method of putting dim areas on the
edge of the city into the secondary towns component of total urban growth affects the results,
we created another data set by using a ‘fixed mask’ approach. (This terminology is because
our algorithm masks the area covered by the big cities when it calculates statistics on urban
area and average DN values for the secondary towns within an NSS region.) Specifically, we
take the area covered by each city when it is at its maximum extent, which is in 2012, and
exclude that area when smaller town area and the average DN values in smaller towns are
calculated for any of the satellite-years. In other words, land that eventually gets engulfed in
the city is treated as never being part of the area that small towns could occupy and is
reserved as only available for the city even if the city has not yet grown into that area at the
time of a particular satellite-year observation. In contrast, our main results use what we call a
‘variable mask’ where the boundary between big cities and smaller towns changes satellite-
year by satellite-year.

IV.      The Econometric Model

         Spatial autocorrelation in levels of, and changes in, poverty was noted in Section 3.1,
and our econometric modeling recognizes this by using the spatial panel estimator of Belotti
et al (2014). The regional N-vector of poverty measures for date t (=1,…,T) is denoted Pt and

the matrix of explanatory variables is X t which includes our measures of urban economic

activity as indicated by the night lights data. Our spatial Durbin model (SDM) can be written
as:20
                  Pt  WPt  X t 1  WX t  2    vt (i=1,…,N; t=1,…,T)                                 (3)




20
   For an excellent overview of the spatial Durbin model see Elhorst (2012). Note that the model is static. A
temporal lag of Pt can also be included. We found that such a temporal lag of the NSS region poverty rate was
statistically insignificant so we dropped it from the model. This allows us to keep the first year of our data.


                                                       13
Here the spatial weighting matrix W describes the structure of spatial relationships between
the NSS regions. The W matrix has zeros along the main diagonal, given that no region is its
own neighbor, while (to allow for geographic spillover effects) the off diagonals are set to
unity for immediate neighbors and zero otherwise. This model allows for changes in an
explanatory variable in a particular region to not only affect the poverty rate in that region,
but also in surrounding regions.
        The error term in (3) has two components. The term  represents time-invariant
regional fixed effects. The second error term, vt , is assumed to be a white-noise process,

orthogonal to the X’s. The fact that we have regional fixed effects gives us greater confidence
in assuming exogeneity in that threats to validity could be expected to come in large part
from latent factors that are relatively constant over time. For example, higher latent
agricultural productivity in a region could simultaneously cause lower rural poverty and
higher urban living standards. This could happen through urban commercial activity
responding to rural demand induced by higher agricultural productivity. The regional fixed
effect should soak up the bulk of the variance due to such factors. However, we acknowledge
that the exogeneity assumption can still be questioned. Probably the most plausible threat is
that temporal (positive or negative) shocks to local agricultural productivity may induce
changes in urban activity levels, making urban areas more or less bright. We will maintain
the exogeneity assumption but make some observations that offer some support.
        Two other possible specifications are the spatial autoregressive model (SAR) and the
spatial error model (SEM). Both are nested within the SDM. The SAR model is:21
                          Pt  WPt  X t     vt                                                    (4)

The SAR is obtained from the SDM under the testable restriction on equation (3) that β2=0.
The restrictions to get the SEM from the SDM are analogous to the common factor
(COMFAC) restrictions of Hendry and Mizon (1978), where a static model with AR(1) errors
is a restricted version of an autoregressive, distributed lag model ADL(1,1). The SEM takes
the form:
                          Pt  X t     vt with vt  Wv t   t                                     (5)

This can be derived from the SDM under the nonlinear parameter restriction that 2   1 .
The SDM will give unbiased coefficient estimates even if the true data-generation process is
a SAR or SEM but the reverse is not true; for example, imposing data-inconsistent COMFAC

21
  The SAR model may also have autoregressive disturbances, but these may be an artefact of mis-specifying the
spatial lags by omitting the lagged X variables in equation (3).


                                                     14
restrictions by estimating a SEM when the true model is SDM involves omitting relevant
variables. For either poverty measure, and irrespective of using either lit area or the sum of
lights (lit area times the average brightness within lit areas), the two sets of restrictions to
derive the SAR and SEM from the SDM are rejected at the p<0.01 level. So, our results focus
on the more general SDM specification in (3).
        A feature of the SDM is that the total effect of changes in an X variable – such as
expansion in cities or towns – may be quite different to what is shown by ˆ since a local

change in poverty rate affects the poverty rates of neighbors which, in turn, affects the
poverty rate of their neighbors, including the original region. These spillover and feedback
effects let us decompose effects of urban growth on rural poverty into direct and indirect
components. To see how, note first that equation (3) can also be written as (in matrix notation
and dropping t subscripts):
                 P  ( I  W ) 1 ( X1  WX 2 )  ( I  W ) 1 v                               (6)
Following Elhorst (2012), the partial derivatives w.r.t. the kth explanatory variable can then
be written as (noting that the diagonal elements of W are zero):
                            P
                                 ( I  W ) 1 ( 1k I N   2kW )                                (7)
                           X k

(Here 1k is the kth element of the vector 1 and similarly for  2 k .) The first RHS term is the
direct effect and the second is the indirect effect. The indirect effects are of two types: local
effects arise from a region’s neighbors and occur as long as  2 k  0, while global effects

need not arise just from neighbors, and occur as long as   0. The direct and indirect
effects can vary over regions, so the spatial panel estimator that we use follows LeSage and
Pace (2009) in reporting a single direct effect, that averages the diagonal elements of the
matrix in (7) and a single indirect effect that averages the row sums of the non-diagonal
elements of that matrix.
        The indirect effects are important for three reasons. First, influences on rural poverty
may be stronger from surrounding regions than the own-region, depending on the geography
of labor market linkages and the variation over space in stages of urban development. Also,
the indirect pathway allows big cities to have a potential effect on poverty of NSS regions
that lack a big city. Finally, the decomposition provides a straightforward way to deal with
big cities that sprawl over region boundaries; for example, in Figure 5, Bangalore extends
across the boundary into Inland Tamil Nadu in 2011. The effect of big city lights within the




                                                      15
NSS region are part of the direct effect and the lights from the part of a city that has spilled
over the border are part of the indirect effect that comes from neighbors.22

V.       Types of Urban Growth and Rural Poverty

5.1      Effects of Unmasked Regional Lights on Rural Poverty

         We start by examining whether night lights have any effect at all, before we compare
effects of lights coming from big cities with those from smaller towns. We refer to these
results as ‘unmasked’ since we consider the entire area of each NSS region without first
masking the pixels lit by the big cities.
         Table 2 reports the estimates of the SDM for the headcount index, H and the poverty
gap index, PG that consider four different ways to use the night lights data. In columns (1)
and (5), the total lit area for each NSS region, for any clusters of lights exceeding 20 percent
of maximum brightness (DN=13) is used as the proxy for urban development. Variables in
these models are in logarithms for the convenience of using elasticities.23 The results suggest
an absolute elasticity of rural poverty with respect to own-region lit urban area of about 0.1 to
0.2, with a slightly more precisely estimated elasticity for H than for PG. The elasticities with
respect to the spatially weighted average of lit area in neighboring regions are larger, at
between 0.3 and 0.4, and the spatial lag of the poverty rate has an elasticity of 0.3. Allowing
for the spillover to neighbors and the feedback effects shown in equation (7), the total effect
of growth in lit area on H has an elasticity of -0.6 and on PG has an elasticity of almost -0.9.
These indirect effects will have both local and global components, given that  2 k  0 and

  0.
         When the average DN value is used, either solely in columns (2) and (6), or jointly
with lit area in columns (3) and (7), it has no statistically significant association with the
poverty gap index, and a positive relationship with rural headcount poverty (albeit one that is
not significant when lit area is also in the model). In contrast to the mixed and imprecise


22
   Chandigarh and Delhi lit area includes Union Territory (UT) area that is not part of our data set of 19 major
states. The omitted area averages 7.6% of all big city area. In sensitivity analyses we apportion the UT area into
the neighboring NSS regions, according to each region’s share of the Delhi or Chandigarh lit area agglomeration
in the particular year. The differences in effect of big city growth and smaller town growth on rural poverty are
somewhat more precisely estimated in these analyses, while the qualitative pattern of results is unchanged.
23
   When urban growth is split into big city and smaller town components not all regions have a big city and the
logarithm of zero is undefined. To address this problem, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation
whereby ihs( x )  ln( x  ( x  1) ) which is shown in Appendix Table 1 to give identical results to using
                               2    0.5


logarithms.


                                                       16
evidence for average DN values, the significant negative effect of lit area on rural poverty is
almost the same regardless of whether average DN values are included in the model.
         As noted in Section IV, our assumption that night lights are exogenous to rural
poverty can be questioned. Recall that long-run cross-sectional differences that would
otherwise be a threat to identification will be picked up by the fixed effect. The main
remaining threat to identification is likely to be shocks to agricultural productivity that spill
over into urban areas. However, one would expect to see brightness being more closely
associated with rural poverty reduction than is lit area. Yet we find the opposite.24
         The last results reported in Table 2 (columns (4) and (8)) use the sum of lights within
each region, by multiplying lit area by the average DN value within lit areas; by comparing
results in column (4) with (1) and column (8) with (5), it is clear that just using lit area is
sufficient to capture this combined effect. In other words, it is the expansion of India’s cities
and other urban areas on their extensive margin that seems to have the most significant
relationship with rural poverty reduction. We use this finding to guide our specifications for
comparing the effects of growth of the big cities with that of the smaller towns, which we
proxy for by using either the lit area or the sum of lights.25

5.2      Direct Effects of City and Town Expansion on Rural Poverty

         The results in Table 2 consider the lit area (or the sum of lights) within an NSS
region, irrespective of whether it is part of a big city or smaller town. In Table 3 we
distinguish growth in lit area (or in the sum of lights) into the component from big cities and
the component from smaller towns.
         The instantaneous elasticity of the rural headcount index with respect to the lit area of
smaller towns within an NSS region is -0.13, and for big cities it is -0.04. Total elasticities are
higher, both direct and indirect, with the latter being larger (in absolute value). Specifically,
the total effect shows an elasticity of H with respect to smaller town lit area of -0.55 (with a
standard error of 0.09) while the elasticity with respect to big city area is a statistically
insignificant -0.09. For the poverty gap index the elasticity w.r.t. secondary town area is even
larger, at -0.85, than for H, reflecting gains below the poverty line, while the elasticity w.r.t.
big city area is insignificantly different from zero. A statistically significantly larger town


24
   A related sensitivity analysis used time fixed effects, which reduced the precision of the results somewhat
while not causing much change in the magnitude of the elasticities.
25
   The same pattern is also clear, although a little less precisely estimated, if the 30 percent threshold is used to
distinguish urban areas from non-urban areas (Appendix Table 1).


                                                          17
effect than big city effect is apparent in the test statistics reported at the foot of Table 3,
especially for the poverty gap index and in the indirect and total effects.
        These differences between big city effects and smaller town effects are not an artefact
of less brightly lit fringe areas of big cities being counted as part of the smaller, more dimly
lit, towns. If a fixed mask approach is used that excludes areas that ultimately become part of
the big city from being ever counted as part of small towns, the results are largely the same
(columns (3) and (4)). The elasticities have slightly smaller magnitude than under the variable
mask approach in columns (1) and (2) but the dominance of small town over big city effects
is just as apparent. Another sensitivity analysis is to use the sum of lights approach, by
multiplying lit area by the average DN within that area and the results in columns (5) to (8)
confirm significantly larger secondary town effects. The results also hold if the distinction
between smaller towns and rural areas is based on a 30% luminosity threshold rather than the
20% threshold used in Table 3 (Appendix Table 2 has these sensitivity analyses).
        It might be argued that the “town effect” we identify may be in large part an indirect
“city effect,” i.e., that city growth drives town growth, which then helps drive rural poverty
reduction. Table 4 takes this argument seriously by providing analogous results to Table 3 but
dropping the variables for towns and only reporting results for H since the results have
similar patterns to those for PG. (For balance, the table also gives the results when we drop
the city lights variables.) We find a total effect of the area of city lights of -0.715. Combined
with the results of Table 3, this suggests that 87% of the total big city effect is via induced
town growth, and 13% is direct. However, it should also be noted that the R2 has fallen from
0.631 to 0.546 in comparing columns 1 of Tables 3 and 4. This suggests there is a sizeable
share of the variance that may be a direct effect of town growth, independently of city
growth. Moreover, the tests of the nesting restrictions needed to derive the ‘big city only’ or
‘small town only’ models show that the models that drop the variables for smaller towns are
not consistent with the data, whereas one would not reject the restrictions needed for
dropping the big city variables.
        To summarize, our key finding is that the lights data indicate that the effects of urban
economic growth on rural poverty are almost entirely attributable to towns rather than cities.

5.3     Distributional Effects of City and Town Expansion

        Do the effects we have seen on rural poverty measures entail significant systematic
changes in the extent of inequality within rural areas? A simple test for such effects is to



                                                 18
replace the dependent variable in our SDM in equation (3) by estimates of the Gini index of
consumption inequality from the same NSS data.
       Table 5 provides the results. Whether we use illuminated area or total light, or
variable or fixed masks, we find no sign of significant effects on inequality. The effects of
urban growth on rural poverty appear to be transmitted entirely via growth in mean rural
consumption. This result does not differ between secondary towns or cities.

VI.    Conclusions

       The scope for escaping rural poverty through urban economic growth has been a
longstanding development issue, going back to the classic model of Lewis (1954). We have
revisited this issue, focusing specifically on the question of whether cities or towns are better
generators of rural-poverty reducing growth in India, using data on 59 regions observed four
times from 1993/94 to 2011/12. The rural headcount poverty rate fell by half in this period
and the poverty gap index fell by two-thirds. The pace of poverty reduction was spatially
uneven. Using night lights as the indicator of urban economic activity, we find that the
geographic expansion of urban areas is associated with lower rural poverty measures; these
effects are consistently found using different specifications, while there is little apparent
effect on the rural sector from the brightness of lights coming from urban areas. It is urban
growth on the extensive rather than the intensive margin that matters for rural poverty
reduction.
       When the effects of big-city growth on rural poverty are compared to those of
secondary towns, some consistent associations emerge, indicating that the growth of towns
matters far more than cities to reducing rural poverty in India. This effect is close to
inequality-neutral, in that it was not associated with higher, or lower, inequality within rural
areas. In expectation, the poverty effect is transmitted through mean consumption.
       We remind readers that here we have only studied this question for India, at its stage
of economic development. The pattern we have uncovered may not hold at all stages of
development. Indeed, our theoretical model suggests that cities may eventually take over
from towns as the drivers of rural poverty reduction. For now, however, India should look to
its towns, not its cities, to help reduce rural poverty, on top of promoting agricultural and
rural development.




                                                19
References

Abrahams, Alexei, Nancy Lozano-Gracia, and Christopher Oram (2015) Correcting Over-
       glow in Night-time Lights Data. Unpublished manuscript. Accessed at:
       https://sites.google.com/site/alexeiabrahams2/
Álvarez-Berríos, Nora, Isabel Parés-Ramos, and Mitchell Aide (2013) Contrasting patterns of
       urban expansion in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia between 1992 and
       2009. Ambio 42(1): 29-40.
Anselin, L. (1988) Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
       Publishers.
Belotti, Federico, Gordon Hughes, and Andrea Piano Mortari (2014) XSMLE: Stata module
       for spatial panel data models estimation. Statistical Software Components Boston
       College. https://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s457610.html
Chatterjee, Urmila, Rinku Murgai, and Martin Rama (2015) Job opportunities along the rural-
       urban gradation and female labor force participation in India. World Bank Policy
       Research Working Paper No. 7412.
Collier, Paul (2009) Africa’s Organic Peasantry. Harvard International Review October 26,
       http://hir.harvard.edu/agricultureafrica-s-organic-peasantry/
Datt, Gaurav and Martin Ravallion (2011) Has India’s economic growth become more
       pro-poor in the wake of economic reforms? World Bank Economic Review, 25(2):
       157-189.
Datt, Gaurav, Martin Ravallion, and Rinku Murgai (2016) Growth, Urbanization and Poverty
       Reduction in India. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
       w21983.
Deaton, Angus, and Valerie Kozel (2005) Data and dogma: the great Indian poverty
       debate. The World Bank Research Observer 20(2): 177-199.
Deng, Xiangzheng, Jikun Huang, Scott Rozelle, and Emi Uchida (2010) Economic growth
       and the expansion of urban land in China. Urban Studies 47(4): 813-843.
Elhorst, J. Paul (2012) Dynamic spatial panels: models, methods, and inferences. Journal of
       Geographic Systems 14: 5–28.
Elvidge, Christopher, Daniel Ziskin, Kimberly Baugh, Benjamin Tuttle, Tilottama Ghosh,
       Dee Pack, Edward Erwin, and Mikhail Zhizhin (2009) A fifteen year record of global
       natural gas flaring derived from satellite data. Energies 2(3): 595-622.




                                              20
Ferré, Celine, Francisco Ferreira and Peter Lanjouw (2012) Is There a Metropolitan Bias?
       The relationship between poverty and city size in a selection of developing countries.
       World Bank Economic Review 26(3): 351-382.
Gibson, John, Geua Boe-Gibson and Glen Stichbury (2015) Urban land expansion in India
       1992-2012. Food Policy 56(1): 100-113.
Harris, John, and Michael Todaro (1970) Migration, Unemployment and Development:
       A Two Sector Analysis. American Economic Review 40: 126-142.
Hendry, David, and Grayham Mizon (1978) Serial Correlation as a Convenient Simplification,
       Not a Nuisance: A Comment on a Study of the Demand for Money by the Bank of
       England. Economic Journal 88(351): 549-563
Hsu, Feng-Chi, Kimberly Baugh, Tilottama Ghosh, Mikhail Zhizhin, and Christopher Elvidge
       (2015) DMSP-OLS Radiance Calibrated Night-time Lights Time Series with
       Intercalibration. Remote Sensing 7(2): 1855-1876.
Lanjouw, Peter and Rinku Murgai (2014) Urban growth and rural poverty in India:
       1983-2005. in N. Hope, A. Kochar, R. Noll, and T.N. Srinivasin (editors) Economic
       Reform in India: Challenges, Prospects, and Lessons pp. 371-404, Cambridge
       University Press, New York.
LeSage, James and Robert Kelley Pace (2009) Introduction to Spatial Econometrics
       Chapman and Hall and CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Lewis, Arthur (1954) Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor, Manchester
       School of Economic and Social Studies 22: 139-191.
Li, Yue and Martin Rama (2015) Households or locations? Cities, catchment areas and
       prosperity in India. World Bank Policy Working Paper No. 7473.
Liu, Zhifeng, Chunyang He, Qiaofeng Zhang, Qingxu Huang, and Yang Yang (2012)
       Extracting the dynamics of urban expansion in China using DMSP-OLS nighttime
       light data from 1992 to 2008. Landscape and Urban Planning 106(1): 62-72.
Ravallion, Martin (2016) The Economics of Poverty: History, Measurement, and Policy. New
       York: Oxford University Press.
Ravallion, Martin and Gaurav Datt (1996) How Important to India's Poor is the Sectoral
       Composition of Economic Growth? World Bank Economic Review 10:1-26.
Small, Christopher, and Christopher Elvidge (2013) Night on Earth: Mapping decadal
       changes of anthropogenic night light in Asia. International Journal of Applied Earth
       Observation and Geoinformation 22(1): 40-52.



                                             21
Tripathi, Sabya (2013) Do large agglomerations lead to economic growth? Evidence from
       urban India. Review of Urban and Regional Development Studies 25(2) 176-200.
Van de Walle, Dominique, Martin Ravallion, Vibhuti Mendiratta and Gayatri Koolwal (2016)
       Long-Term Gains from Electrification in Rural India, World Bank Economic Review.




                                           22
  Table 1: Trends in Rural Poverty Rates, India 1993/94 to 2011/12

                      Unweighted                            Weighted By Rural Population
              Headcount       Poverty                       Headcount      Poverty Gap
                Rate         Gap Index                        Rate             Index
1993/94         0.495          0.123                          0.504            0.125
                0.29            0.44                          0.26              0.39
2004/05          0.417                0.094                    0.422               0.094
                 0.36                  0.56                    0.33                 0.48
2009/10          0.310                0.062                    0.337               0.069
                 0.52                  0.70                    0.45                 0.59
2011/12          0.245                0.045                    0.256               0.047
                 0.58                  0.77                    0.51                 0.66

Note: Based on averages for 59 NSS regions from 19 major States, using the Tendulkur poverty
line. Coefficient of variation in italics.




                                                    23
           Table 2: Effects of Unmasked Regional Lights (at 20% threshold) on Rural Poverty Rates for 59 NSS Regions from 1993/94 to 2011/12
                                                                        ---------------Headcount Poverty Rate---------------                        ------------------Poverty Gap Index------------------
                                                                     (1)                 (2)            (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)              (7)                (8)
Lit area in the NSS region                                        -0.149                             -0.151                                   -0.188                               -0.192
                                                                  (1.75)*                            (1.76)*                                  (1.59)                               (1.61)
Average DN value within lit areas                                                      0.070         -0.129                                                       -0.350           -0.687
                                                                                      (0.16)         (0.32)                                                       (0.59)           (1.21)
Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                                   -0.154                                                                       -0.216
                                                                                                                        (1.88)*                                                                      (1.91)*
W × Lit area in the NSS region                                    -0.267                             -0.271                                   -0.391                               -0.413
                                                                  (2.79)***                          (2.82)***                                (2.94)***                            (3.09)***
W × Average DN value within lit areas                                                  1.168         -0.122                                                        1.945           -0.089
                                                                                      (1.71)*        (0.18)                                                       (2.07)**         (0.10)
W × Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                               -0.272                                                                       -0.384
                                                                                                                        (2.93)***                                                                    (2.97)***
Spatial lag of poverty rate (delta)                                0.318               0.738          0.315              0.314                 0.333               0.752            0.320             0.322
                                                                  (4.01)***          (18.53)***      (3.95)***          (3.94)***             (4.23)***         (19.46)***         (4.00)***         (4.04)***
R-squared (within)                                                 0.629               0.124          0.630              0.630                 0.638               0.117            0.643             0.642
Restrictions to nest spatial lag model (β2 = 0)                    7.80***             2.92*          8.01**             8.57***               8.64***             4.28**           9.57***           8.84***
COMFAC to nest spatial error model (β2 = - β1)                   20.50***             4.14**        20.63***           22.18***              22.29***             4.15**         23.34***           23.30***
Total effects – direct
Lit area in the NSS region                                        -0.175                                -0.178                                -0.227                                 -0.232
                                                                  (2.56)**                              (2.58)***                             (2.41)**                               (2.43)**
Average DN value within lit areas                                                     0.445             -0.110                                                     0.195             -0.668
                                                                                     (1.12)             (0.25)                                                    (0.35)             (1.09)
Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                                      -0.180                                                                       -0.254
                                                                                                                           (2.74)***                                                                    (2.79)***
Total effects – indirect
Lit area in the NSS region                                        -0.435                                -0.444                                -0.642                                 -0.665
                                                                  (5.35)***                             (5.61)***                             (5.67)***                              (6.08)***
Average DN value within lit areas                                                     4.512             -0.227                                                     6.592             -0.437
                                                                                     (1.88)*            (0.27)                                                    (1.87)*            (0.37)
Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                                      -0.441                                                                       -0.633
                                                                                                                           (5.56)***                                                                    (5.75)***
Total effects
Lit area in the NSS region                                        -0.610                                -0.621                                -0.869                                -0.897
                                                                 (13.21)***                            (12.54)***                            (13.26)***                            (13.06)***
Average DN value within lit areas                                                     4.958             -0.337                                                     6.787            -1.105
                                                                                     (1.91)*            (0.38)                                                    (1.78)*           (0.89)
Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                                      -0.621                                                                      -0.887
                                                                                                                          (13.29)***                                                                  (13.54)***
Notes: All variables in logs; all models include fixed effects for 59 NSS regions; nesting tests are chi-sq with 1 df (2 df for col (3), (7)); z-statistics in ( ), ***, **, ** for p<0.01, 0.05, 0.1. N=236.
                    Table 3: Effects of City Growth and Town Growth on Rural Poverty Rates for 59 NSS Regions from 1993/94 to 2011/12
                                                                     -------------------Illuminated Area-------------------                 ------------Sum of Lights (area × average DN)------------
                                                                   Variable Maska                          Fixed Maskb                         Variable Maska                       Fixed Maskb
                                                             Headcount          Poverty Gap        Headcount         Poverty Gap        Headcount         Poverty Gap       Headcount      Poverty Gap
                                                                 (1)                  (2)              (3)                  (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)
Smaller town lit area (or sum of lights)                      -0.127               -0.197           -0.095              -0.128           -0.114            -0.196            -0.078          -0.114
                                                              (1.49)               (1.66)*          (1.13)              (1.10)           (1.45)            (1.79)*           (0.99)          (1.05)
City lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.041                0.000           -0.038               0.002           -0.056            -0.050            -0.053          -0.047
                                                              (0.97)               (0.01)           (0.90)              (0.04)           (2.10)**          (1.35)            (1.96)*         (1.24)
W × Town lit area (or sum of lights)                          -0.245               -0.358           -0.241              -0.381           -0.268            -0.363            -0.269          -0.399
                                                              (2.42)**             (2.52)**         (2.50)**            (2.82)***        (2.87)***         (2.76)***         (2.98)***       (3.15)***
W × City lit area (or sum of lights)                          -0.020               -0.015           -0.015              -0.003            0.013             0.026             0.017           0.035
                                                              (0.27)               (0.15)           (0.20)              (0.03)           (0.27)            (0.40)            (0.36)          (0.55)
Spatial lag of poverty rate (delta)                            0.316                0.339            0.317               0.333            0.323             0.336             0.322           0.330
                                                              (3.96)***            (4.32)***        (3.93)***           (4.18)***        (4.07)***         (4.26)***         (4.01)***       (4.11)***
R-squared (within)                                             0.631                0.637            0.630               0.637            0.634             0.641             0.633           0.641
Total effects – direct
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.151             -0.235            -0.118             -0.165             -0.140            -0.234             -0.103             -0.153
                                                              (2.18)**           (2.45)**          (1.73)*            (1.75)*            (2.20)**          (2.65)***          (1.62)             (1.72)*
City lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.040              0.003            -0.037              0.007             -0.055            -0.047             -0.051             -0.042
                                                              (0.86)             (0.05)            (0.78)             (0.10)             (1.76)*           (1.07)             (1.61)             (0.95)
Total effects – indirect
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.398             -0.612            -0.379             -0.606             -0.430            -0.616             -0.415             -0.623
                                                              (3.88)***          (4.22)***         (3.99)***          (4.54)***          (4.82)***         (4.91)***          (4.97)***          (5.33)***
City lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.050             -0.026            -0.042             -0.007             -0.009             0.012             -0.002              0.027
                                                              (0.48)             (0.18)            (0.40)             (0.05)             (0.14)            (0.12)             (0.02)             (0.28)
Total effects
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                            -0.548           -0.848                -0.496             -0.771             -0.570            -0.851             -0.518             -0.775
                                                            (5.85)***        (6.30)***             (5.74)***          (6.28)***          (7.32)***         (7.70)***          (7.21)***          (7.68)***
City lit area (or sum of lights)                            -0.091           -0.023                -0.079             -0.001             -0.064            -0.035             -0.053             -0.015
                                                            (0.76)           (0.13)                (0.65)             (0.00)             (0.77)            (0.30)             (0.62)             (0.13)
Test of equal total effect on poverty of big city growth versus smaller town growth
 Direct effects                                              1.73             4.21**                0.93               2.21              1.44               3.62*              0.52              1.23
 Indirect effects                                            5.69**           7.98***               5.64**             8.92***          14.26***           15.95***           14.73***          18.50***
 Total effects                                               9.18***        14.40***                7.77***           13.08***          19.64***           25.28***           17.22***          23.19***
Notes: Poverty rates are in logs and other variables are inverse hyperbolic sine transformed so coefficients can be treated as elasticities. Variables interacted with W are spatial lags; all models include
fixed effects for 59 NSS regions; tests for the effect of big city growth versus smaller town growth are chi-sq with 1 degree of freedom; z-statistics in ( ), ***, **, ** for p<0.01, 0.05, 0.1. N=236.
a
  The variable mask approach changes the boundary between big city lit area (using a 50% luminosity threshold) and smaller town lit area (using a 20% threshold) satellite-year by satellite-year.
b
  The fixed mask approach reserves area for the eventual expansion of the big cities based on their boundaries in the satellite-year (F18, 2012) that shows maximum big city area (and thus leaves less
unmasked area available for the measured expansion in lit area of the smaller towns).
                     Table 4: Effects of City Growth or Town Growth on Rural Poverty Rate for 59 NSS Regions from 1993/94 to 2011/12
                                                                   -------------------Illuminated Area-------------------                 ------------Sum of Lights (area × average DN)------------
                                                                   Variable Maska                        Fixed Maskb                          Variable Maska                      Fixed Maskb
                                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)                (4)                 (5)              (6)              (7)             (8)
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                                 -0.148                             -0.117                                -0.151                           -0.111
                                                                                 (1.79)*                            (1.45)                                (1.94)*                          (1.44)
City lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.097                              -0.097                                 -0.106                            -0.106
                                                              (2.36)**                            (2.36)**                               (4.01)***                         (4.01)***
W × Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                             -0.258                             -0.248                                -0.260                           -0.260
                                                                                 (2.77)***                          (2.75)***                             (2.93)***                        (2.98)***
W × City lit area (or sum of lights)                          -0.239                              -0.239                                 -0.120                            -0.120
                                                              (3.76)***                           (3.76)***                              (2.90)***                         (2.90)***
Spatial lag of inequality rate (delta)                         0.530              0.323            0.530             0.320                0.604            0.321            0.604           0.316
                                                              (8.49)***          (4.08)***        (8.49)***         (4.00)***           (11.02)***        (4.05)***       (11.02)***       (3.92)***
R-squared (within)                                             0.546              0.628            0.546             0.627                0.504            0.628            0.504           0.628
Total effects – direct
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                                 -0.174                                -0.140                               -0.176                                -0.135
                                                                                 (2.62)***                             (2.17)**                             (2.84)***                             (2.18)**
City lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.143                                -0.143                               -0.142                                -0.142
                                                              (4.28)***                             (4.28)***                            (6.15)***                             (6.15)***
Total effects – indirect
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                                 -0.427                                -0.396                               -0.429                                -0.408
                                                                                 (5.36)***                             (5.23)***                            (5.62)***                             (5.52)***
City lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.572                                -0.572                               -0.427                                -0.427
                                                              (6.50)***                             (6.50)***                            (5.33)***                             (5.33)***
Total effects
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                                 -0.600                               -0.537                                -0.605                               -0.543
                                                                                (13.08)***                           (13.05)***                            (13.11)***                           (13.12)***
City lit area (or sum of lights)                              -0.715                               -0.715                                -0.569                               -0.569
                                                              (7.82)***                            (7.82)***                             (6.37)***                            (6.37)***
Test of nesting restrictions to derive this modelc            28.26***            1.18             26.63***             0.94             35.52***            4.51             33.71***            4.03
Notes: Dep variable is log of rural headcount index, other variables are inverse hyperbolic sine transformed so coefficients can be treated as elasticities; variables interacted with W are spatial lags; all
models include fixed effects for 59 NSS regions; z-statistics in ( ), ***, **, ** for p<0.01, 0.05, 0.1. N=236.
a
  The variable mask approach changes the boundary between big city lit area (using a 50% luminosity threshold) and smaller town lit area (using a 20% threshold) satellite-year by satellite-year.
b
  The fixed mask approach reserves area for the eventual expansion of the big cities based on their boundaries in the satellite-year (F18, 2012) that shows maximum big city area (and thus leaves less
unmasked area available for the measured expansion in lit area of the smaller towns).
c
  The test of nesting restrictions is a test of zero coefficients on the relevant encompassing models in Table 3 that are needed to derive models that have either big city growth or smaller town growth
as the explanatory variables.
             Table 5: Effects of Big City Growth and Smaller Town Growth on Rural Gini Index for 59 NSS Regions from 1993/94 to 2011/12
                                                                    -------------------Illuminated Area-------------------                  ------------Sum of Lights (area × average DN)------------
                                                                    Variable Maska                        Fixed Maskb                          Variable Maska                      Fixed Maskb
                                                                         (1)                                  (2)                                    (3)                               (4)
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                        -0.036                               -0.027                                  -0.029                           -0.021
                                                                         (1.06)                               (0.81)                                 (0.93)                           (0.67)
City lit area (or sum of lights)                                          0.014                                0.014                                  0.004                             0.004
                                                                         (0.81)                               (0.84)                                 (0.36)                           (0.40)
W × Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                      0.045                                0.028                                  0.030                             0.017
                                                                         (1.18)                               (0.77)                                 (0.87)                           (0.51)
W × City lit area (or sum of lights)                                    -0.008                                 0.001                                  0.015                             0.019
                                                                         (0.26)                               (0.04)                                 (0.81)                           (1.06)
Spatial lag of inequality rate (delta)                                    0.145                                0.143                                  0.145                             0.143
                                                                         (1.46)                               (1.45)                                 (1.46)                           (1.45)
R-squared (within)                                                        0.011                                0.009                                  0.013                             0.011
Total effects – direct
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                         -0.035                               -0.027                                -0.029                               -0.021
                                                                         (1.25)                               (0.97)                                (1.12)                               (0.81)
City lit area (or sum of lights)                                          0.015                                0.016                                 0.005                                0.006
                                                                         (0.80)                               (0.84)                                (0.44)                               (0.49)
Total effects – indirect
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                          0.046                                 0.028                                0.030                                 0.016
                                                                         (1.24)                                (0.80)                               (0.91)                                (0.51)
City lit area (or sum of lights)                                         -0.007                                 0.003                                0.018                                 0.024
                                                                         (0.20)                                (0.09)                               (0.77)                                (1.00)
Total effects
Town lit area (or sum of lights)                                       0.011                                    0.001                                0.001                               -0.005
                                                                      (0.37)                                   (0.04)                               (0.03)                               (0.22)
City lit area (or sum of lights)                                       0.008                                    0.019                                0.023                                0.030
                                                                      (0.19)                                   (0.46)                               (0.82)                               (1.01)
Test of equal total effect on inequality of big city growth versus smaller town growth
 Direct effects                                                         2.20                                    1.62                                 1.43                                  0.90
 Indirect effects                                                       1.05                                    0.23                                 0.08                                  0.04
 Total effects                                                          0.01                                    0.13                                 0.36                                  0.88
Notes: Dep variable is log of rural Gini, other variables inverse hyperbolic sine transformed so coefficients can be treated as elasticities; variables interacted with W are spatial lags; all models include
fixed effects for 59 NSS regions; tests for the effect of big city growth versus smaller town growth are chi-sq with 1 degree of freedom; z-statistics in ( ), ***, **, ** for p<0.01, 0.05, 0.1. N=236.
a
  The variable mask approach changes the boundary between big city lit area (using a 50% luminosity threshold) and smaller town lit area (using a 20% threshold) satellite-year by satellite-year.
b
  The fixed mask approach reserves area for the eventual expansion of the big cities based on their boundaries in the satellite-year (F18, 2012) that shows maximum big city area (and thus leaves less
unmasked area available for the measured expansion in lit area of the smaller towns).
Figure 1: Spatial Patterns in Rural Poverty Rates at Baseline
Figure 2: Spatial Patterns in Rural Poverty Rates at the End of the Sample Period
Figure 3: Spatial Patterns in Rates of Rural Poverty Elimination
Figure 4: Location of Big Cities and NSS Regions
Figure 5: Illustration of Splitting Urban Growth into Big City and Smaller Town Growth
Appendix Table 1: Sensitivity Analyses for Effects of Lights on Rural Headcount Poverty Rates for 59 NSS Regions from 1993/94 to 2011/12: Spatial Durbin Fixed Effects Model
                                                          ---------------Inverse Hyperbolic Sine---------------          --------------Using 30% lights threshold--------------
                                                         (1)                (2)            (3)               (4)        (5)                (6)             (7)              (8)
Lit area in the NSS region                            -0.149                           -0.152                        -0.145                            -0.102
                                                      (1.75)*                          (1.76)*                       (1.85)*                           (1.22)
Average DN value within lit areas                                         0.070        -0.129                                           -0.665         -0.648
                                                                         (0.16)        (0.32)                                           (1.24)         (1.19)
Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                     -0.154                                                         -0.154
                                                                                                          (1.88)*                                                        (2.09)**
W × Lit area in the NSS region                        -0.267                           -0.271                        -0.283                            -0.325
                                                      (2.79)***                        (2.82)***                     (3.13)***                         (3.40)***
W × Average DN value within lit areas                                     1.169        -0.124                                            0.893           0.931
                                                                         (1.71)*       (0.18)                                           (1.03)         (1.09)
W × Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                 -0.272                                                         -0.271
                                                                                                          (2.93)***                                                      (3.15)***
Spatial lag of poverty rate (delta)                    0.318              0.738         0.314              0.314      0.325              0.757           0.326            0.328
                                                      (4.01)***        (18.53)***      (3.94)***          (3.94)***  (4.10)***         (19.93)***      (4.13)***         (4.15)***
R-squared (within)                                     0.629              0.124         0.630              0.630      0.626              0.002           0.628            0.625
Restrictions to nest spatial lag model (β2 = 0)        7.78***            2.92*         7.99**             8.57***    9.80***            1.06          11.66***           9.93***
COMFAC to nest spatial error model (β2 = - β1)      20.46***             4.14**       20.59***          22.18***    24.59***            0.23          25.34***         25.76***
Long-run effects – direct
Lit area in the NSS region                            -0.175                           -0.178                        -0.173                            -0.133
                                                      (2.56)**                         (2.58)***                     (2.75)***                         (1.98)**
Average DN value within lit areas                                         0.446        -0.110                                           -0.522         -0.547
                                                                         (1.12)        (0.25)                                           (0.97)         (0.92)
Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                     -0.180                                                         -0.181
                                                                                                          (2.74)***                                                      (3.07)***
Long-run effects – indirect
Lit area in the NSS region                            -0.435                           -0.443                        -0.461                            -0.507
                                                      (5.35)***                        (5.61)***                     (5.91)***                         (6.48)***
Average DN value within lit areas                                         4.517        -0.229                                            1.814           1.012
                                                                         (1.88)*       (0.27)                                           (0.50)         (0.94)
Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                     -0.441                                                         -0.451
                                                                                                          (5.56)***                                                      (6.04)***
Long-run effects – total
Lit area in the NSS region                            -0.610                           -0.622                        -0.634                            -0.640
                                                    (13.21)***                        (12.55)***                    (13.00)***                        (13.21)***
Average DN value within lit areas                                         4.963        -0.339                                            1.291           0.465
                                                                         (1.91)*       (0.38)                                           (0.33)         (0.39)
Sum of lights (lit area × average DN)                                                                     -0.621                                                         -0.632
                                                                                                        (13.29)***                                                     (12.92)***
Notes: All models include fixed effects for 59 NSS regions; models (5) - (8) use logs; nesting tests are chi-sq with 1 df (2 df for col (3), (7)); z-statistics in ( ), ***, **, ** for p<0.01, 0.05, 0.1. N=236.
                               Appendix Table 2: Sensitivity Analyses for Effects of Big City Growth and Smaller Town Growth on Rural Poverty Rates:
                                                              Using 30% Luminosity Threshold to Measure Smaller Towns
                                                              -------------------Illuminated Area-------------------       ------------Sum of Lights (area × average DN)------------
                                                                                a                                b
                                                              Variable Mask                         Fixed Mask                 Variable Maska                      Fixed Maskb
                                                        Headcount         Poverty Gap       Headcount        Poverty Gap Headcount       Poverty Gap       Headcount      Poverty Gap
                                                            (1)                 (2)             (3)                (4)       (5)              (6)              (7)             (8)
Smaller town lit area (or sum of lights)                 -0.124             -0.230           -0.068            -0.114     -0.101           -0.210           -0.057          -0.112
                                                         (1.61)             (2.15)**         (0.91)            (1.10)     (1.42)           (2.13)**         (0.82)          (1.17)
Big city lit area (or sum of lights)                     -0.054             -0.017           -0.051            -0.013     -0.058           -0.049           -0.055          -0.046
                                                         (1.32)             (0.29)           (1.22)            (0.23)     (2.14)**         (1.29)           (1.97)**        (1.19)
W × Smaller town lit area (or sum of lights)             -0.249             -0.329           -0.256            -0.379     -0.280           -0.354           -0.282          -0.397
                                                         (2.53)**           (2.38)**         (2.83)***         (2.97)***  (3.17)***        (2.84)***        (3.42)***       (3.41)***
W × Big city lit area (or sum of lights)                 -0.026             -0.029           -0.021            -0.014      0.016            0.027            0.021           0.041
                                                         (0.35)             (0.28)           (0.29)            (0.14)     (0.33)           (0.42)           (0.44)          (0.63)
Spatial lag of poverty rate (delta)                       0.316              0.336            0.321             0.335      0.336            0.343            0.337           0.340
                                                         (3.95)***          (4.24)***        (3.98)***         (4.18)***  (4.27)***        (4.37)***        (4.24)***       (4.25)***
R-squared (within)                                        0.630              0.638            0.628             0.635      0.630            0.639            0.628           0.638
Long-run effects – direct
Smaller town lit area (or sum of lights)                 -0.148             -0.266           -0.091            -0.151     -0.129           -0.249           -0.083          -0.151
                                                         (2.37)**           (3.07)***        (1.50)            (1.79)*    (2.25)**         (3.13)***        (1.49)          (1.94)*
Big city lit area (or sum of lights)                     -0.055             -0.016           -0.051            -0.011     -0.056           -0.045           -0.052          -0.041
                                                         (1.20)             (0.25)           (1.09)            (0.17)     (1.79)*          (1.02)           (1.61)          (0.90)
Long-run effects – indirect
Smaller town lit area (or sum of lights)                 -0.402             -0.582           -0.389            -0.598     -0.451           -0.619           -0.434          -0.628
                                                         (3.90)***          (4.01)***        (4.21)***         (4.60)***  (5.06)***        (4.98)***        (5.35)***       (5.57)***
Big city lit area (or sum of lights)                     -0.065             -0.055           -0.058            -0.032     -0.007            0.014            0.002           0.036
                                                         (0.63)             (0.38)           (0.55)            (0.21)     (0.10)           (0.14)           (0.03)          (0.36)
Long-run effects – total
Smaller town lit area (or sum of lights)                 -0.550             -0.849           -0.481            -0.749     -0.580           -0.868           -0.517          -0.780
                                                         (5.76)***          (6.24)***        (5.60)***         (6.16)***  (7.03)***        (7.51)***        (6.87)***       (7.43)***
Big city lit area (or sum of lights)                     -0.120             -0.071           -0.108            -0.043     -0.063           -0.031           -0.050          -0.005
                                                         (1.04)             (0.43)           (0.90)            (0.25)     (0.73)           (0.26)           (0.56)          (0.04)
Test of equal long-run effect on poverty of big city growth versus smaller town growth
 Direct effects                                           1.45               5.42**           0.28              1.73       1.22             5.02*            0.23            1.51
 Indirect effects                                         5.31**             6.53**           5.62**            8.21***  15.45***         16.05***         16.33***        19.48***
 Total effects                                            8.21***           13.22***          6.35**           11.34***  18.70***         24.90***         15.85***        22.34***
Notes: See Table 3 for all notes, except growth of smaller towns in these sensitivity analyses is based on 30% luminosity thresholds instead of the 20% thresholds in the main analyses.
