                                                   WPS7954


Policy Research Working Paper                     7954




         Can Solar Lanterns Improve Youth
              Academic Performance?
            Experimental Evidence from Bangladesh

                                 Yuya Kudo
                               Abu S. Shonchoy
                              Kazushi Takahashi




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7954


  Abstract
 This study conducted an experimental intervention in                               increased study hours and initial improvement in school
 unelectrified areas of northern Bangladesh to investigate                          attendance did not translate into improved academic per-
 the effectiveness of solar products in improving chil-                             formance. Varying the number of solar products within
 dren’s educational achievement. It found that treated                              the treated households did not alter these results. Anal-
 households substituted solar lanterns for kerosene-based                           yses that exploited the school grade treatment intensity
 lighting products, helping to decrease total household                             also provided no evidence suggesting that spillover effects
 expenditure. Solar lanterns increased the children’s home-                         explained the “no academic performance effects.” These
 study hours, particularly at night and before exams. The                           findings suggest that improving the home-study environ-
 solar lanterns initially led to an increase in school atten-                       ment solely through the provision of solar products may
 dance, but this effect diminished over time. However, the                          have a limited impact on children’s educational achievement.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at Yuya_Kudo@ide.go.jp.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
             Can Solar Lanterns Improve Youth Academic Performance?

                               Experimental Evidence from Bangladesh

                            Yuya Kudo∗ Abu S. Shonchoy Kazushi Takahashi




    Keywords: Bangladesh, clean and renewable energy, education, randomized control trials, solar light

    JEL classiﬁcation: I25, O13, Q42




   ∗ Yuya Kudo (corresponding author) is a research fellow at the Institute of Developing Economies, JETRO (IDE-JETRO), Chiba,

Japan; his email address is Yuya Kudo@ide.go.jp. Abu S. Shonchoy is a research fellow at the IDE-JETRO; his email address is
parves.shonchoy@gmail.com. Kazushi Takahashi is an associate professor at Sophia University, Tokyo, Japan; his email address is
kazushi.takahashi@sophia.ac.jp. This work was supported by a research grant provided by the IDE-JETRO. This work also received
generous contributions to procurement of solar devices from the BRAC and social business funds provided by Daiwa Securities through
an online technology market operated by Kopernik. We thank an editor, three anonymous referees, Sudhir Chandra Das, Chishio Fu-
rukawa, Isabel Gunther, Ehsanul Haque, Mahabub Hossain, Katsuo Kogure, Christopher Ksoll, Kim Lehrer, Tomohiro Machikita, Tomoya
Matsumoto, Jonathan Morduch, Kyle Murphy, Toshi Nakamura, Keijiro Otsuka, Adina Rom, Yasuyuki Sawada, Chikako Yamauchi, and
participants at the CEA 2016 and JEA 2015 and seminars at ETH Zurich, GRIPS, and IDE-JETRO for their insightful comments and
suggestions, as well as Nayamat Ullah Tasnim and Helal Uddin for their excellent research assistance. We are also grateful to the BRAC
and Kopernik (and Daiwa Securities) for their generous contributions to our procurement of solar devices and Gana Unnayan Kendra
(GUK) for providing great support for the study’s implementation. Financial support from the IDE-JETRO for this research is also
gratefully acknowledged. The authors have no relevant or material ﬁnancial interests that relate to the research described in this article.
The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this article are entirely those of the authors and do not represent the views of
the IDE-JETRO. All errors are our own.
   One of the core policies of most developing countries has been to improve the educational achievement of children.

Traditionally, increasing school enrollment rates through supply-side interventions (e.g., in providing infrastructure,

teaching support, and learning materials) has attracted widespread attention, and consequently most countries are

on track to achieve universal access to primary education (Millennium Development Goal 2) (Pritchett and Banerji,

2013). As celebrated in United Nations (2015), indeed, the primary school net enrollment rate in the developing

world has reached 91% in 2015. The number of children not attending primary school has also halved between 2000

and 2015. This praiseworthy accomplishment of school enrollment, however, has not necessarily resulted in improved

learning outcomes, which has made the overall eﬀectiveness of formal education questionable and caused many to

rethink alternative educational interventions (Hanushek and Woessmann, 2011). Recent rigorous studies involving

randomized control trials (RCTs) have provided valuable evidence regarding the eﬀectiveness of various interventions

on the quality of education and student learning, such as teachers’ incentives (Duﬂo et al., 2012; Glewwe et al., 2010),

remedial tutors (Banerjee et al., 2007), class size (Duﬂo et al., 2015), and computer-assisted learning (Beuermann

et al., 2015; Mo et al., 2013); however, these studies still center around school inputs.

   An important – but apparently neglected – aspect of previous studies is that students’ learning depends on the

after-school home-study environment, which is based on learning support (such as parental engagement or private

tutoring for homework support) and learning-conducive inputs (such as adequate nighttime lighting for study). It is

generally believed that after-school home-study enhances students’ understanding of what they are taught at school

(Copper et al., 2006; Dang, 2007; Dufur et al., 2013; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2008). As many students in

developing countries are expected to work during the day to help their families, it seems critical that they should use

the nighttime eﬀectively for study.

   Despite the importance of nighttime study, universal access to electricity has been inadequate and challenging

for many low-income countries. As of 2013, the number of people in developing countries who live without access

to electricity numbered 1.3 billion, of whom the majority resided in rural areas (IEA, 2013). Over 80% of these

“energy poor” households, which lack access to reliable energy for lighting, generally depend on biomass- or fuel-based

traditional lighting sources, including kerosene lamps, which are incapable of producing suﬃcient illumination. It

is possible that students with insuﬃcient nighttime lighting could systematically under-perform, as studying under

unreliable and dim lighting conditions could make their learning less productive (Alstone et al., 2010). It could also

be the case that these students have access to irregular and limited opportunities for nighttime study, as biomass fuels

and kerosene are expensive, often comprising approximately 10% of the total household expenditure of the poor (see

Bacon et al., 2010 and Maliti and Mnenwa, 2011). Furthermore, students who study under biomass lighting report

poor visual performance, fatigue, and eye strain (Mills, 2014).


                                                            2
   Portable solar lights have attracted increasing attention as an alternative, aﬀordable lighting source in hard-to-

reach areas (World Bank, 2010). It is expected that children who use them can gain additional study hours that

could contribute to improving their academic performance (Esper et al., 2013). However, empirical studies aimed at

systematically understanding the impact of solar lights are still scarce. This study intends to ﬁll this knowledge gap

by rigorously evaluating the impact of solar lanterns on a range of children’s educational performance, such as time

usage, school attendance, and educational achievement.

   The areas under study are the river islands of Bangladesh, known locally as Chars. These river islands are prone

to cyclical river erosion and ﬂoods, which frequently result in losses in terms of economic activities, possessions, and

homes, thus disrupting families, livelihoods, and earnings. There is no provision of grid electricity in these river islands,

and the Rural Electriﬁcation Board (REB) of Bangladesh has no plan to expand national grid-based electricity to

Chars due to their susceptibility. Moreover, while part of the population have access to a large solar photovoltaic-

panel-based electricity system, known as Solar Home Systems (SHSs), portable solar products were not available in

the study location during the time of this research. These local settings are ideal for our study, less likely to suﬀer

from attenuation of the true solar impacts due to contamination.

   Exploiting this region’s unique condition, we conducted an RCT in Chars located in northern Bangladesh, where

we provided solar lanterns to a randomly selected subset of the population for 16 months (September 2013 to December

2014). Our target population comprised 4th to 8th grade students in primary and junior high schools whose academic

performance was more likely to be aﬀected by the possibility of nighttime study than that of elementary grade children.

We selected 882 sample children and households for our study, and implemented the within-grade randomization at

each school. To diﬀerentiate the treatment intensity, a proportion of the students received a bundle of a main high-

capacity solar device along with two smaller lanterns, another proportion of the students received only one main

high-capacity solar device, and the remainder acted as a control group and received no devices. The ratio of each

group is approximately 5:4:9, respectively. In our experiment, no students that were oﬀered solar products refused to

take the oﬀer.

   While a handful of recent empirical studies have explored the socio-economic impacts of solar products, our exper-

iment displays a striking strength for three reasons. First, our study is the ﬁrst relatively large-scale randomization

to evaluate the impact of better nighttime lighting on education. For example, previous studies have typically been

based on small-scale pilots, and hence suﬀered from low statistical power due to their limited sample sizes: 155 in

Uganda (Furukawa, 2012, 2014), 341 in Kenya (Hassan and Lucchino, 2016), and 300 in Rwanda (Grimm et al., 2016).

Second, in contrast to the previous research conducted in areas that already had an inﬂux of portable solar products

in local markets, our study was situated in a location that was free from potential contamination by portable solar


                                                             3
lighting or grid connection. In addition, the study site was also home to a substantial ultra-poor population that could

be the main target of solar products. Third, in this study, we randomized the intensity of solar lighting by varying

the product amount. Providing multiple solar lanterns reduces the likelihood that other family members exclusively

utilize the products and therefore, discourage children’s nighttime use for study.

   As the empirical analysis will demonstrate, the treated children who received solar lanterns achieved no signiﬁcant

improvements in academic performance as measured by the school-based annual examination results, regardless of

whether they received all three solar products or only one. To detect a possible channel that hindered the eﬀectiveness

of solar lanterns, we further explored whether the treated households actually used the solar lanterns, particularly

for their children’s nighttime study. We found that the treated students signiﬁcantly increased their number of study

hours, particularly at night and before exams and that they relied more on solar lanterns than on kerosene lamps.

Furthermore, their school attendance initially increased for several months after the provision of the solar products;

however, this eﬀect disappeared over time. These increased education inputs (i.e., study hours and attendance rates),

however, did not translate into improved educational achievements. Based on careful ﬁeld observations and empirical

ﬁndings provided by several exercises performed in this study, we provided evidence suggesting that the “no academic

performance eﬀects” are not attributable to the possible misuse of the products and spillover eﬀects resulting from

the within-grade randomization.

   Consequently, an attempt to improve home-study facilities by providing solar lanterns alone did not result in

(at least, short-term) positive impacts on children’s educational achievement. Notably, this ﬁnding was obtained in

our study setting, whereby students’ marginal educational returns to solar products might have been the greatest

due to their limited access to electricity at the time of intervention. This conclusion may suggest that unless other

education-related inputs are also improved, it is diﬃcult to systematically improve children’s academic performance

in the developing world through alleviating only one educational constraint. While we cannot entirely rule out

other possibilities responsible for the absence of the positive academic performance eﬀects, the limited eﬀectiveness

of education-related interventions that insuﬃciently consider complementarity across educational inputs has recently

been widely observed in other settings (e.g., Glewwe et al. 2004; Glewwe et al. 2009; Mo et al. 2013).

   This study is most closely related to Furukawa (2014) and Hassan and Lucchino (2016), wherein RCTs were

conducted and the impact of solar lanterns on children’s education was examined. Like us, Furukawa (2014) found an

increase in study time, but no positive (or even negative) impacts on the test scores of children belonging to the 5th and

7th grades in Uganda. Furukawa (2014) suggested explanations for this ﬁnding: reporting bias resulting from the lack

of any time-keeping device (e.g., a watch or clock) to measure study time at home; a decrease in study productivity

because of a failure to fully re-charge solar products, causing the light to ﬂicker; and intra-household conﬂicts about


                                                            4
the ownership of solar products that might have prevented children from using the lamps to study. By providing

treated households with a clock, a detailed pictorial manual to help them maintain their solar products, and a bundle

of solar lanterns, our experiment was designed to reduce these potential problems while still yielding robust evidence

to support the ﬁnding: “no academic performance eﬀects.”

    By contrast, Hassan and Lucchino (2016) found positive treatment and spillover eﬀects on the educational achieve-

ments of 7th grade students in rural Kenya. The diﬀerence between their results and ours, especially in relation to

spillover eﬀects, may have arisen from the children’s diﬀerent study habits in two diﬀerent experimental settings.

Hassan and Lucchino (2016) highlighted the fact that, after dark, students shared lights at school; this sort of group

learning was less likely to happen in our study setting, because it is quite risky for young children to go out at night

in unelectriﬁed river islands. Our follow-up survey conﬁrmed that only three students in our study shared solar lamps

with non-household members.

    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section I explains the study setting, sampling framework, and

detailed design of the RCT. Section II discusses the summary statistics of the sample households. Section III outlines

the estimation strategy, followed by the estimation results and the associated discussions in Section IV, Section V,

and Section VI. Section VII concludes the paper.




I    Survey and experimental design

This section explains our survey and experimental design.



Study setting

Our study area is the river islands located in northern Bangladesh, which were formed by sediments and silt deposits.

These islands lie a mere few inches above the normal functioning river-water level. As monsoon precipitation coupled

with excessive glacier melting of the Himalayas usually overﬂows the major river channels of Bangladesh, the river

islands are extremely vulnerable to ﬂooding during the rainy season. Most years during the ﬂood, the residents of

Chars are forced to evacuate to the mainland to seek shelter. The major mode of transportation from Chars to the

mainland is via boats, which are poorly managed, unreliable, and susceptible to weather conditions. Therefore, living

in Chars is highly precarious. The provision of electricity through the national grid is rare, and the REB of Bangladesh

has hardly electriﬁed any Chars due to infrastructure challenges associated with these types of geographical locations.

    During our experiment in 2013, the only available sources of lighting, other than biomass- or fuel-based ones, were

small-scale SHSs that were ﬁnanced and operated by some NGOs in the northern Chars. However, the usages and




                                                            5
marketing of such solar products were limited as SHSs are expensive for ultra-poor households residing in Chars.1

Hence, coverage of business activities by these NGOs was minimal. As there exist hardly any alternative sources of

electricity, most Char residents use kerosene-based lighting equipment, such as open-wick lamps and covered-wick

lamps (known as “Hurricane” lanterns), as their main source of nighttime lighting, particularly for activities like

studying and cooking. Some households used battery-powered ﬂashlights for emergencies. However, these ﬂashlights

(also known as “Torch” lights) have very limited power to perform any additional tasks, and the required batteries

are expensive and often unavailable to Char dwellers.



Solar devices

To study the impact of portable solar lanterns on education, we used d.light solar lanterns, which are certiﬁed and

recognized under the World Bank Lighting Global Project (https://www.lightingglobal.org/). We collaborated

with Gana Unnayan Kendra (GUK), a northern-based NGO in Bangladesh, in implementing our research project. In

total, we had 500 units of the d.light S250, along with an additional 300 units of the other two types of product called

the S10 and the S2, with the ﬁnancial support provided by Kopernik, Daiwa Securities and BRAC. The details of

these products are as follows (see also Figure S.1 in the supplemental appendix):


   • S250: The d.light S250 is their ﬂagship product, which provides bright light for a maximum of four hours and

      illuminates a room to the same degree as a 3 to 5-watt compact ﬂuorescent lamp (CFL). This unit also has the

      functionality of charging cellular phones. The S250 has a separate lightweight solar panel that needs to be used

      to recharge the unit.


   • S10: The d.light S10 is a portable solar light-emitting diode (LED) lamp that provides bright light for a maximum

      of four hours. This unit does not possess the functionality of charging mobile phones. The solar panel of the

      S10 is combined with the main unit.


   • S2: The d.light S2 is the simplest and most highly eﬃcient LED; it provides a focused light for a maximum of

      four hours. The illumination capacity of this unit is lower than that of the other two units. Like the S10, this

      unit also lacks the functionality of charging mobile phones. The solar panel of the S2 is also combined with the

      core unit.


   In terms of lighting capacity, the S250 could provide, on average, 110 lumens of light (the lumen is the measure of

light emission) based on the top brightness setting after a full day’s solar charge; the S10 and S2, on the other hand,

  1 The  minimum amount to be paid for a 10-watt panel with a 2.5 LED tube-light or a 5-watt CFL with a two-year installment package
is 8100 taka (approximately 105 USD), which provides lighting for only four hours. See http://www.gshakti.org/index.php?option=com\
 content\&view=article\&id=115\&Itemid=124.


                                                                 6
could provide approximately 29 and 25 lumens of light, respectively. In comparison with traditional lighting devices

used in Bangladesh, the kerosene-based open-wick lamp and the covered-wick lamp (“Hurricane” lantern) produce, on

average, approximately 7.8 and 45 lumens of light, respectively (Mills and Jacobson, 2008).2



Sampling procedures

We selected children who were attending primary and secondary schools as our target population for this study. More

precisely, as very few variations in schooling performance or study hours were expected at the elementary level, we

focused on children who were enrolled in the 4th to 5th grades of primary school and 6th to 8th grades of junior high

school.

   To select children (and their households) to participate in this study, we began by listing all of the primary and

secondary schools located in the Chars of the Gaibandha and Kurigram districts of northern Bangladesh; we then

conducted quick initial inspections of the teachers and School Management Committees of these schools. To obtain

internally valid estimates, without contamination eﬀects, among all 28 schools in the eight Chars listed, we restricted

our sample to 17 schools in two Chars, where SHS services provided limited coverage. Out of 1,665 total students

belonging to the 4th to 8th grades in 17 schools, we initially selected 1,292 children as potential candidates for this

study. The remaining 373 students were excluded, either because their homes (including school dormitories) had

already been electriﬁed, or because a sibling was one of the 1,292 students already chosen (i.e., for each household, we

included only one child in our study sample). Potential participants were also excluded if their school attendance rate

was lower than 80% over the previous four months. After drawing up an initial list of 1,292 students, we interviewed

each child at his or her home to make sure that none of our participants had access to electricity or solar lights. Of

these 1,292 children, we found 911 who had no access to electricity or solar lights at home during the period of our

survey.3 Of those, 882 became eﬀective sample households for this study; the rest of the children in the sample had

dropped out of school to get married or for other practical reasons (e.g., land erosion, resulting in forced migration)

before the detailed baseline household survey was conducted. Figure S.2 in the supplemental appendix illustrates the

detailed timeline for our surveys and interventions, along with Table S.1, which reports on the number of students

selected through the screening process described above.

   During the baseline survey conducted in July and August of 2013, we collected detailed data at the household

level to understand the socio-economic conditions of the sample children and their households. The data included

household demographic characteristics, details of energy use and its sources, expenditure, various income generating


  2 This  does not necessarily mean that the traditional Hurricane lantern provides more brightness than the S2 and S10, because the
former cannot maintain eﬀective brightness/lumen for long hours due to the emission of carbon smoke.
   3 It emerged that the remaining students had access to SHS services, through the support of NGOs.




                                                                 7
activities, durable and nondurable assets, and debts and savings.



Experiment and survey

Once we had completed the baseline household survey, we organized a public lottery to randomly allocate to the

eligible students access to the use of solar lights in two diﬀerent bundles of products for 16 months (September 2013

to December 2014). The ﬁrst treatment bundle (Treatment A) contained all the d.light solar products, i.e., the S250

(solar lantern with mobile recharging), the S10 (general solar lantern with no cellular recharging facility), and the S2

(simple solar lantern), altogether providing approximately 164 lumens of lighting capacity at top brightness settings.

The second treatment bundle (Treatment B) contained only the S250 solar lantern, providing lighting capacity of 110

lumens at the maximum brightness setting. By diﬀerentiating the treatment intensity, we are able to explore whether

the provision of smaller lanterns had any additional impacts, such as facilitating and ensuring intended use of the

main product by the targeted children. For example, other members of the treated households may have wanted the

solar lanterns for their own use (for example, to facilitate cooking), which may have reduced the impact of the solar

lanterns on the targeted students. Hence, bundling additional solar products may have reduced the probability of such

alternative unintended usage by other household members and siblings.

   We held public lotteries, at each sample school, in the presence of parents, teachers, and village elites. Students and

their parents drew a lottery by themselves and were classiﬁed into one of the following three groups accordingly: (1)

Treatment A, (2) Treatment B, and (3) the control group that did not receive any solar lantern. The randomization

was separately implemented at each school for each grade, so that the ratio of Treatment A, Treatment B, and the

control groups was maintained at approximately 5:4:9 for each grade at each school. By allowing each household to

join the lottery only once, we avoided the possibility that siblings from the same household would be simultaneously

in the treatment and control groups. After the public lottery, there were 248 students in Treatment A, 198 students

in Treatment B, and 436 students in the control group (see also Table S.1 in the supplemental appendix). In our

experiment, no treated students refused to use the oﬀered solar products.

   To eﬀectively recharge the solar products, obstructions to sunlight (e.g., walls, trees) needed to be avoided. Fur-

thermore, the tilt angle of the panel was also important for adequately recharging the lanterns under sunlight. To

facilitate proper maintenance and the correct recharging practice, a product manager of a local selling agency was

invited to the study site to train our enumerators, who in turn instructed the survey respondents and their children.

Moreover, to ensure that these sets of instructions were readily available to our sample households, we provided each of

them with a detailed pictorial manual. This manual contained elaborate information on the adequate use/maintenance

and recharge techniques of the solar lanterns. It also included a detailed time diary for maintaining hourly records of


                                                            8
each student’s time use for various activities (e.g., hours of playtime outside of school, study time at home, etc.) (see

Figure S.3 in the supplemental appendix for a sample of the collected time diary). Teachers were held responsible for

regularly checking these time diaries, which were periodically collected by our survey team. Furthermore, to facilitate

accurate time keeping, we gave both the treatment and control students a wall clock and set of batteries.

    After the implementation of the randomized control trial, we periodically visited the schools to collect the monthly

time-use diaries. Moreover, one year after the baseline survey, we implemented a follow-up study of the same children

and their households to construct a picture of any welfare and behavioral changes that had taken place over one year.

During the follow-up phase, we could trace 852 of these households (i.e., 96% of the 882 original sample households),

thus with the minimal rate of sample attrition; the rest had been lost due to attrition for reasons such as relocation or

marriage. Furthermore, we collected the detailed annual examination scores of each student from our sample schools

for both the 2013 and 2014 academic years.

    To comply with ethical concerns, access to solar lights was provided for 16 months and was subject to withdrawal

and re-distribution to our control households following the research. To ensure that this process went smoothly, we

issued legal documentation to each treated household, describing the conditions for access to the solar lights, including

information on proper use, product responsibility, prohibitive practices (e.g., renting or sub-leasing), and withdrawal

requirements.4 In this contract, we made the households responsible for product loss (e.g., theft), which might have

encouraged no such cases occurring in our experiment in the end. However, in the case of product malfunctioning (e.g.,

defects), we replaced the product on veriﬁcation of the malfunction by the sales unit. We believe that this process

reduced the possibility of contaminated data from the product’s unintended use.

    Note that the way a new technology is obtained (whether through free distribution or purchased from a market)

may aﬀect its use and resulting socio-economic impacts (Ashraf et al., 2010; Cohen and Dupas, 2010). Therefore, the

ﬁndings of the current research project are limited by its experimental design and should be viewed with caution when

considering the inﬂuence of provided solar lamps in general.56

   4 Relatedly, we began this research by approaching school headmasters and School Management Committees to explain the project

details and obtain their verbal approval. Next, we visited households to conﬁrm their eligibility and explain the survey and study design;
before starting our baseline survey, we obtained their written (signed) consent. We went through the same steps to obtain the participants’
consent before conducting a follow-up survey. Information on the students’ academic performance was collected directly from the schools,
once all of the parents and School Management Committees had approved this form of data collection. Our survey questionnaire adopted
the standard income and expenditure modules used in the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) Household Income and Expenditure
Survey.
   5 In this study, the solar lanterns were given for free to use for 16 months (cost-free leasing); people who pay to lease such lanterns may

be inﬂuenced by the sunk cost eﬀect to use them more intensively. However, Ashraf et al. (2010) and Cohen and Dupas (2010) provided
no evidence to support such eﬀects in the context of health-related products. In addition, charging non-zero prices for solar lamps or any
other items may encourage those most committed to using the products to purchase them, while reducing the wastage that results from
unused products. While the available evidence is mixed (e.g., Ashraf et al., 2010; Cohen and Dupas, 2010), Ashraf et al. (2010) makes
the point that large up-front costs and the product’s ability to be extensively used for secondary purposes may facilitate such screening
eﬀects. While the market price of solar products may not be particularly high for most households, ultra-poor households may not be
able to aﬀord them. Given that solar lanterns can also function as cellular phone chargers, this modern technology might have been more
intensively used (due to screening eﬀects) if we had leased the lanterns at non-zero prices.
   6 A one-time free distribution of solar products may also aﬀect users’ subsequent purchasing/adoption behavior by altering their reference

points (i.e., anchoring eﬀects) and/or the perceived product beneﬁts (i.e., learning eﬀects) (e.g., Dupas, 2014). Relatedly, a limited time
lease may also encourage users to treat the technology carefully.


                                                                      9
II       Data

Table S.2 in the supplemental appendix provides a description of the key baseline variables of the survey students

(Panel A) and their households (Panel B) by treatment arms. To ensure that the randomization worked well, Table

S.3 reports the regression coeﬃcients of these variables on the treatment arms, where the control arm was used as

a reference group. While only a few variables indicate statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences across the treatment arms,

most variables are reasonably well balanced. Hence, we can reasonably ascertain that the randomization conducted

in this study using public lottery was successful overall.7

     As Table 1 indicates, kerosene-based products (supplemented by ﬂashlights) were the major lighting sources used

in our survey area during the baseline phase. By survey design, no one had access to solar lights during the baseline

survey. Almost all the households owned at least one kerosene lamp or lantern (“Hurricane”), of which approximately

24% were equipped with a kerosene lantern, which was generally more expensive than the lamps (Panel A of Table 1).

On average, the sample households used approximately 4.8 and 6.2 hours per day of kerosene-based lighting sources

in the rainy and oﬀ-rainy seasons, respectively (Panel B of Table 1). Annual expenses on kerosene corresponded to

approximately 2% of total household expenditure, which was also equivalent to approximately 15% of total household

non-food expenditure (exclusive of school fees, medical fees, and expenditure on other energy sources). This suggests

the signiﬁcance of fuel costs in the total budget of our target population (Panel C of Table 1).

     Panel D of Table 1 presents the major activities when using each of the lighting sources. The ﬁgures reﬂect

the proportion of respondents who used each light source as a major source for corresponding activities (reported

through multiple answers). For instance, approximately 98% of households that owned kerosene lamps used them for

both reading/studying and cooking/eating at night as major activities, followed by 68% for walking outside at night.

Similarly, those who owned kerosene lanterns primarily used them for reading/studying activities. It is clear that

ﬂashlights played only a supplemental role in lighting (i.e., for studying, walking at night, or social interaction).




III      Empirical strategy

To identify the causal impacts of the solar lights, we estimated the following reduced-form empirical model of an

education production function (Hanushek, 1979) by ordinary least squares (OLS):



                                             yij = α1 + α2 d1 + α3 d2 + α4 xij + ϵij ,                                          (1)



  7 By  exploiting separate (sub-)samples of the data, we also regressed the treatment status on these variables in Table S.4 in the
supplemental appendix, whereby it was conﬁrmed from column (d) that all coeﬃcients explaining the treatment status were jointly
insigniﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.


                                                                10
where yij is the outcome of interest in the follow-up survey for a student i (or a household i for some outcomes) living

in a village j ; d1 (d2 ) is an indicator for the treated households that received Treatment A (Treatment B); the vector

xij contains several baseline characteristics of the respondents (including school- and village-ﬁxed eﬀects); and ϵij

represents a stochastic error term. Outcome diﬀerences that can be attributed to school inputs are controlled for by

the inclusion of school-ﬁxed eﬀects. The xij includes the variables reported in Table S.2 in the supplemental appendix,

namely students’ age (years), gender (dummy), and completed education (years) (which is almost equivalent to the

child’s grade); household size; the number of males in a household; age of household heads (years), gender (dummy);

completed education (years); and land size.

   Given the preceding observation that most individual or family characteristics are well balanced across the treat-

ment arms, our randomization successfully makes the variables d1 and d2 orthogonal to εij , thereby freeing the

associated estimates from any endogeneity bias. In addition to checking the statistical signiﬁcance of the treatment

eﬀects of α2 and α3 , the equality of these two coeﬃcients as well as the signiﬁcance of the total eﬀects of the two

treatment arms was also tested and the p -values of these tests are reported in the tables presented in this paper.

Furthermore, the mean value of the outcomes that correspond to the control group is also demonstrated at the bottom

of these reported tables.

   Throughout the paper, the standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and adjusted for clustering in grades

within the same school (39 groups) for educational outcomes or in villages (42 groups) for other outcomes relevant

to households. The clustered standard errors at the school-grade level would be appropriate in the present context,

because unobserved error terms are less likely to be correlated across grades within the same school. Compared to

clustering at the school level (17 groups), it would also increase the reliability of the statistical inference while avoiding

a problem arising from exploiting few clusters (Cameron and Miller, 2015).8




IV      Educational achievement

First, we analyzed the impacts of solar products on children’s educational achievement, reported in Table 2. The

dependent variable in Table 2 took the value of one if the students passed the exam in the corresponding year.

This educational achievement indicator was measured by the results of the schools’ annual ﬁnal examinations held

in December of 2013 and 2014. Columns (a)―(c) of Table 2 report the impact of solar lanterns based on the 2013

results, whereas the estimations reported in columns (d)―(f) are based on the 2014 results. Without controlling for

other covariates, columns (a) and (d) of Table 2 report whether the treated students progressed more successfully to



  8 However,   clustering standard errors at the school level barely aﬀected the implications obtained from this research.


                                                                     11
the next grade compared with the control students in 2013 and 2014, respectively.9 Columns (b) and (e) reported the

impact of solar lanterns on academic achievement for 2013 and 2014, after controlling for individual and household-

level observables. Instead of the linear probability model (LPM) reported in these columns, probit estimations and

their corresponding marginal eﬀects (MEs) are reported in columns (c) and (f). The mean grade progression rates

of the control students, who did not receive solar products, were approximately 72 and 64 percentage points in 2013

and 2014, respectively. As is shown by the insigniﬁcant coeﬃcients, the solar products had no statistically signiﬁcant

impact on the treated students’ academic progression compared with the control students, regardless of whether the

students received all or only one of the products.10

    Table 3 also reports the impacts of solar lanterns on the test scores, separately for each year and each subject, i.e.,

Bengali, English, math, general science, Islamic studies, and Bangladesh general studies. For brevity, we suppressed

the coeﬃcients of the baseline controls when reporting the estimation results. Courses and subjects of these annual

examinations varied somewhat across schools and grades. Although such school-level heterogeneity can be mitigated

to some extent by school-ﬁxed eﬀects, the analysis presented here focused on core subjects and estimated the z-scores

of the GPA (ranging from zero to ﬁve), which was constructed based on methods prescribed by the Bangladesh

Ministry of Education.11 The regression outputs in columns (1a)―(1l) are based on the academic performance in the

ﬁnal examination held in 2013 and those in columns (2a)―(2l) are for 2014. For each core subject, we reported two

regressions, with and without baseline controls. Based on the estimations reported in Table 3, we again found no

statistically discernable impact of solar lanterns on the academic performance of our treated students. The impacts

were insigniﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero, and negative if there was any signiﬁcance.

    In Table S.5 in the supplemental appendix, we also performed an additional analysis of interacting the treatment

indicators with the baseline controls xij and estimating their impacts on the children’s progression to the next grade in

the 2013 and 2014 examinations (although the baseline controls could not necessarily be seen as exogenous in aﬀecting

academic performance).12 The analysis reports no distinct heterogeneity of the treatment eﬀects while, again, providing

no support for an improvement of academic performance induced by solar products. The corresponding estimation

results on GPA scores were reported in Table S.6 to Table S.11 in the supplemental appendix.



   9 Based on the academic rules in Bangladesh, students can progress to the next grade if they take the examinations of all the necessary

subjects and achieve GPA scores equal to or greater than one in all subjects.
  10 Given the estimated treatment eﬀects and the associated standard errors, we would also be able to reject the null that students’

progression rate increased by 5―10% at the conventional signiﬁcance level.
  11 For some schools, the language examination (Bengali and English) comprised two parts. For the sake of comparison, in such cases, we

calculated the GPA as the average GPA between the two parts of the same language examination. Furthermore, for students who failed
to take the examination in one or more subjects, the GPA score for those subjects was assumed to take the value of zero. Moreover, in
2014, one school did not hold an annual examination for one of the core subjects (i.e., Bangladesh general studies) for students enrolled in
grade ﬁve (24 observations). In the analysis, it was also assumed that these students received a GPA value of zero in this subject.
  12 Together with the level eﬀects of the treatment indicators, the coeﬃcients on those interaction terms are presented in Table S.5. Note

that the reported level eﬀects are not directly comparable with those demonstrated in Table 2 because those in Table S.5 are evaluated at
the point of the xij taking the value of zero.


                                                                    12
V      Why no improvement?

Apart from possible spillover eﬀects as will be carefully discussed in Section VI, three possibilities may explain the

ﬁndings of the “no academic performance eﬀects” of solar products. First, it is possible that the treated households

did not use solar lanterns due to the products’ malfunctioning. Second, it may be the case that the treated households

used the products for purposes other than education. Third, it is possible that learning under solar lighting is not

systematically more productive compared with the alternatives. The treated households might have used the solar

products for nighttime study, which ensured an essential input for the education production function; however, bright

lighting alone may not be suﬃcient to improve children’s learning and school performance. In what follows, we

examine each possibility in detail to identify why we did not observe signiﬁcant impacts of modern lighting technology

on educational achievement.



Usage of solar lanterns

The estimation results depicted in Table 4 enable us to reject the ﬁrst possibility. In columns (a)―(l), reported in

the ﬁrst two panels of Table 4, we analyzed the average hours of use (per day) of diﬀerent lighting products by the

treated households compared with the control households, separately for the rainy and oﬀ-rainy seasons and each

lighting source.13 As before, for each dependent variable, we reported the regression estimates with and without the

baseline controls. As the results indicate, the provision of solar products signiﬁcantly reduced the use of kerosene

products. This was particularly so for households that received all three solar products. While statistical signiﬁcance

and magnitudes were somewhat weaker compared with the case of kerosene products, similar implications can also be

obtained for ﬂashlights, implying that treated households eﬃciently substituted kerosene products with solar lanterns.

    Columns (m)―(r) of the ﬁnal panel in Table 4 show the impact of solar lanterns on the logarithmic value of

household expenditures. As can be clearly observed from the results in columns (o) and (p), households that received

three (one) solar products reduced their kerosene expenditure by approximately 75% (50%) over the last 12 months of

2013―2014, as compared with the control households. As explained in subsection S.3.1 in the supplemental appendix,

during the follow-up survey, many treated households that reported zero expenditure on kerosene (presumably due

to the substitution of solar lamps for kerosene products) were dropped from the estimations. We assume that the

treatment group reporting on kerosene expenditure during the follow-up included a greater proportion of households

more likely to use kerosene products than the corresponding control group. If this was the case, then the true

treatment impact on kerosene expenditure may be even more negative. Consequently, this signiﬁcant reduction in


  13 Unlike students’ time-use that is analyzed in Table 5 based on a time-diary information, these average hours resulted from information

collected in a follow-up household survey.


                                                                    13
kerosene expenditure contributed to a decline in the total expenditure of treated households by 2 to 6% (reported in

columns (q) and (r), respectively). This decrease in annual expenditure corresponds to approximately 21―63 USD.

The products cost 39.6, 13.6, and 9.7 USD (based on the exchange rate at the end of October 2016) for S250, S10,

and S2, respectively. Given product durability (at least ﬁve years with normal use) and the potential health beneﬁts

resulting from indoor air-quality improvement, solar lamps appear to be cost-eﬀective and to increase household

savings. These ﬁndings make us reasonably conﬁdent that treated households genuinely used the solar products.14



Educational inputs

Given the rejection of the ﬁrst possibility that might explain no positive treatment eﬀects on educational achievement,

this subsection checks the second possibility by investigating the impacts of solar products on students’ educational

inputs in Table 5 and Table 6.

    In Table 5, we ﬁrst estimated the impact of solar products on students’ use of time, with or without baseline

controls. Data on the daily time-use activities of our sample students were periodically collected from September

2013, using time diaries that our research team had asked each household to use to record their daily time-use

activities. Using information drawn from these diaries increased the reliability of our analysis. However, a signiﬁcant

amount of time-use information was unavailable after April 2014, because of several happenings, including a change

in the diary format and the training of those carrying out the survey (May and June), a school holiday for Ramadan

(July), and ﬂoods that caused the temporary evacuation of (some) respondents to shelters (August). This natural

disaster also made it diﬃcult for teachers to ensure that students regularly ﬁlled out their time diaries, once school

resumed in September. For these reasons, we could only use the time diary information gathered between September

2013 and April 2014; the relevant estimation results during this period are detailed in Table 5.

    As the results in Table 5 show, our estimates reveal that, on average during the eight-month period, treated

students signiﬁcantly reallocated the amount of time used for home study, reducing daytime study by approximately

5―8 minutes each day, and increasing nighttime study by 20―25 minutes. The net eﬀect of solar lanterns on study

time at home was found to be statistically signiﬁcant and positive. This net eﬀect can be translated into an increase

of 45―75 hours of home study time over eight months. In addition, comparing the treatment eﬀects in columns (e)

and (k) in Table 5 with the control mean reported at the bottom of these columns and columns (d) and (j), treated

  14 In Table S.12 in the supplemental appendix, we also attempted to assess treatment eﬀects on a household’s willingness to buy solar

products. The dependent variable takes one if the respondent is willing to buy each type of solar lantern. This variable measures subjective
satisfaction; the corresponding information was collected during a follow-up survey. As the results in columns (a) and (e) show, treated
households became more willing to buy solar lamps than those in the control group. We also estimated the willingness of both treatment
and control group households, which showed an interest in purchasing solar products, to buy particular products in columns (b)―(d) and
(f)―(i). Interestingly, treated households were mainly willing to purchase products they had used during the experiment. In other words,
households that had received only one product (S250) generally wanted to purchase S250, whereas three-product users were willing to buy
all three products. The increased satisfaction revealed by these exercises also conﬁrms that the treated households genuinely used the solar
products.


                                                                    14
students substituted solar lamps for kerosene lamps almost completely, in order to study at night. Moreover, there was

no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the treatment eﬀects on children who received three solar products and those who received

only one solar lantern.15 Learning is a process of accumulating knowledge. Compared with kerosene-based products

(that rely on expensive fuels), solar lanterns also provide reliable lighting conditions that supposedly make learning

more productive. Considering these possibilities, the identiﬁed increase in home study time must not be undervalued.

    Figure 1 plots the estimated monthly treatment eﬀects (with 95% conﬁdence intervals) on daily time use during the

eight months. Home-study time increased by approximately 20 hours in November, just before the annual examination

season (December) in Bangladesh. On the other hand, the time spent on other activities (sports, cooking and bathing,

household chores, sleeping and rest, and other activities) declined during that month. This increase in home-study

time in November is not negligible, given that the control students spent approximately 120 hours, as a mean, studying

at home that month; students intensively prepare for an examination in November in order to move up to the next

grade.

    One may challenge the accuracy of the students’ self-reported time use, given the potential for measurement

errors. However, the distinct time-variation associated with the treatment eﬀects helps to alleviate this concern.16 If

the self-reported study hours were entirely noise, it then becomes diﬃcult to explain why they increased just before

the examination season. While the respondents may have over-reported their nighttime study hours, for reasons of

social desirability bias, there is no a priori reason why such a response bias should have led to a reduction in the

number of daytime study hours reported, as seen in columns (c) and (i) in Table 5. Moreover, potential measurement

errors in the dependent variables would have aﬀected the eﬃciency of the estimates, and not (as long as they were

classical) their consistency.17

    The research team made surprise visits to catchment schools in February, April, and August 2014, and checked on

the children’s school attendance. The estimated impacts are reported in columns (a)―(d) (with no baseline controls)

and (e)―(h) (with controls) in Table 6. As the results indicate, treated students who received three solar lamps

(Treatment A, all products) attended school more regularly, as revealed during our ﬁrst two visits in February and

April. However, this positive impact did not last long; it became statistically insigniﬁcant in August 2014. In columns


  15 In Table S.13 in the supplemental appendix, we have disaggregated the treatment eﬀects on student time spent on “other activities”

(estimated in columns (f) and (l) in Table 5) into “sports,” “cooking and bathing,” “household chores,” and “other activities, including
sleeping and rest.” We obtained some (albeit statistically insigniﬁcant) evidence that suggests treated students reduced the time they spent
on “other activities, including sleeping and rest.”
  16 Instead of using a time diary, we could have employed a more sophisticated sensor to measure the students’ time use. However, such

a device would not necessarily have been more accurate than the time diary in measuring the number of hours the students used to study.
There would still have been a concern about the accuracy of measurements unless the research team had been able to monitor the students’
use of the sensor; that would have required precise (and practically impossible) monitoring of the students’ behavior during the experiment.
  17 By treatment arms, Table S.14 in the supplemental appendix provides similar information to that reported in Table 1, collected during

a follow-up household survey. As seen in Panel D of Table S.14 (presenting the proportion of respondents who used each light source to
enable activities through multiple answers), approximately 73% (100%) of households that received three (one) solar products used S250
for reading and studying. Interestingly, compared to households that received three products, households that received only S250 used this
ﬂagship lamp more intensively for reading and studying.


                                                                    15
(d) and (h), we consolidated the three visits into a single estimation, along with the visiting months, as a control. The

results suggest that, overall, the probability that a treated student - receiving Treatment A - would be found attending

school during a surprise visit was approximately 8 percentage points higher than the probability for control students,

whose mean attendance was approximately 54% during the investigation periods. This estimate is comparable to that

provided by Miguel and Kremer (2004) in their de-worming study in Kenya; compared to our study, however, it may

have been harder for the de-worming program to achieve an estimate of a similar magnitude, as the initial attendance

rate was already higher there than in our area of study.

    To further assess the estimates, we carried out a cost-eﬀectiveness analysis, following the method used by Dhaliwal

et al. (2013) and Evans and Popova (2016) (see Section S.1 in the supplemental appendix for the details). To

simplify the analysis, we considered only the cost (prices) of the solar lanterns, ignoring other factors such as research

administration costs, reduced kerosene expenditure, and product maintenance opportunity costs. Assuming that the

life of a solar lantern is ﬁve years, the minimum length of time for which products function eﬀectively in normal

conditions, our intervention raised student participation by 0.59―64 years per 100 USD spent. Referring to Evans

and Popova (2016) (Table 3 in p. 268), this increase can be compared with that revealed in Evans et al. (2008)’s

study, which involved distributing school uniforms in Kenya.18



Educational eﬃciency

Thus far, this study has demonstrated that while providing solar products increased children’s educational inputs

(i.e., hours studied, school-attendance record found on a surprise visit), it did not result in an improvement in their

educational achievement (subject test scores and overall GPA). Thus, we are left with the third possibility that learning

under solar lighting is not as substantially productive and solar lighting alone is not suﬃcient to improve children’s

learning and schooling performance.

    To verify this possibility, in column (a) of Table 7, we exploited the study hours and school attendance (estimated

in the analysis of Table 5 and Table 6) as regressors to explain the likelihood of children progressing to the next grade

after taking the 2014 examination (see Table S.17 to Table S.19 in the supplemental appendix for the corresponding

estimation results on GPA scores). The dependent variable is the same as in Table 2, columns (d)―(f). Surprisingly,

the educational inputs - home-study hours and attendance record - have no signiﬁcant association with children’s

progression to the next grade. Furthermore, including the treatment dummies in Table 7, column (b) shows virtually

no inﬂuence on the estimated relationship between the educational inputs and achievement. Given the signiﬁcant


  18 To check the treatment heterogeneity on educational inputs, in Table S.16 in the supplemental appendix, we also performed similar
exercises to those in Table S.5 for the total study hours from September 2013 to April 2014 and indicators of children’s attendance at our
school visits in February, April, and August in 2014. Overall, no noticeable heterogeneity was found.


                                                                   16
treatment eﬀects on the educational inputs presented in Table 5 and Table 6, this result also conﬁrms no correlation

between the inputs and school performance.19

    One explanation for the absence of a statistically signiﬁcant relationship between the educational inputs and

performance is that the eﬀectiveness of the educational inputs might have been heterogeneous across the treatment

groups. For example, as having solar products made nighttime study more feasible, the treated students might have

substituted daytime study with nighttime study, and, consequently, spent more hours on non-study related activities

(e.g., family business, income-generating activities, or sports). Then, it is certainly possible that these students were

too tired due to their non-study-related activities, which hampered eﬀective study at night, which in turn made their

academic performance no diﬀerent from that of the children who did not receive solar products.

    As found in columns (c) and (i) of Table 5, the daytime study hours for the treated children did, in fact, decrease

due to the use of solar products, thus indicating substitution eﬀects. To check whether the eﬃciency of the educational

inputs varied across treatment arms, in column (c) of Table 7, all the input measures interacted with the treatment

dummies. The results revealed the heterogeneous impact of the measured inputs. For instance, within the group of

treated students who received all three solar products, those who spent more time on daytime study were more likely

to progress to the next grade. Furthermore, a positive inﬂuence of school attendance in August was found in the

examination results for the treated students who received one solar product.

    Admittedly, a strict causal interpretation of these ﬁndings must be discouraged due to the endogeneity of the input

measures.20 For example, the treated students who studied hard during the daytime - despite their access to solar

lamps - or who attended school more frequently, might have had some unobserved family advantages in regard to

their schooling or diligent personalities. Nevertheless, these ﬁndings still suggest that despite the consideration of the

heterogeneous inﬂuence of the educational inputs, their statistical link with students’ educational achievement remains

marginal in general.

    A growing body of empirical research has suggested that relaxing only one educational constraint may not result

in children’s improved school outcomes in the developing world (e.g., Glewwe et al. 2004; Glewwe et al. 2009; Mo

et al. 2013). Given that solar lamps were also expected to address only one factor that encouraged children’s human

capital acquisition, i.e., better nighttime lighting for home study, our ﬁndings are consistent with those provided by

recent studies. Relatedly, complementarity across educational inputs (e.g., textbooks, teacher quality, and home-study

support) may play an important role in determining academic performance. Accordingly, our ﬁndings may imply that


  19 Note that if students study hard due to unobserved personal aptitudes or learning-supportive family attributes, the estimated rela-

tionship between educational inputs and achievement can be seen as causal eﬀects biased upwards. In such a case, the estimation results
in Table 7 suggest that a great educational input might even have reduced the students’ academic performance in our area of study.
  20 Theoretically, it is possible to estimate an education production function by exploiting the treatment indicators as instrumental variables

for the measures of educational inputs. However, this exercise was not undertaken in this paper, because the statistical signiﬁcance of the
treatment eﬀects on the educational inputs was not strong enough to enable this study to do so.


                                                                      17
the solar lanterns had a limited impact on children’s academic performance, while other education-related inputs

remained constant. In Section S.2 in the supplemental appendix, we discussed this possibility more carefully.




VI       Spillover eﬀects

The potential for spillover eﬀects is a threat to the previous ﬁndings.21 In other words, as the randomization was

carried out within a speciﬁc grade level at each sample school, it is certainly possible that a student who did not

receive solar products could have beneﬁted from her friends who did receive the products, or from having access to

SHSs for nighttime study. However, visiting a friend’s home at night in unelectrif ied river islands is quite risky, for

both boys and girls. In fact, in a follow-up household survey, we collected information on whether treated students

shared solar lamps with non-household members, and identiﬁed only three such cases, where solar lamps were shared

with cousins. Hence, this possibility may not have been a valid concern in our setting.

    Other spillover eﬀects could have resulted from interactions in school and during exams. Non-treated students

could have learned from their treated peers in school, minimizing the diﬀerence in outcomes between the treatment

and control groups. However, if such spillover eﬀects artiﬁcially blurred the academic performance gap between the

treatment and control groups, they also may have made it diﬃcult to detect signiﬁcant diﬀerences in educational

inputs among students. Finding signiﬁcant increases in study time and school attendance among treated students

could reduce this concern. However, it is still important to consider this possibility more carefully.22

    Two exercises were conducted. First, we collected information on the average progression rates in one of the studied

districts, Kurigram, in 2012, 2013, and 2014; these were 0.93, 0.98, and 0.97 for primary-school students and 0.83,

0.89, and 0.86 for secondary-school students, respectively (i.e., a marginal increase in the progression rate from 2012

to 2014). In our control group, the progression rates in 2012, 2013, and 2014 were 0.80, 0.78, and 0.70 for 4th to 5th

grade students and 0.67, 0.64, and 0.58 for 6th to 8th grade students, respectively (i.e., a decline in the progression

rate from 2012 to 2014). Thus, we have no evidence to suggest that, on average, the academic performance of our

control students improved in a more pronounced way during the sample periods than did the performance of all the

Kurigram students.

    Second, we exploited the insight obtained from Baird et al. (2014) that the fraction of those oﬀered treatment in

  21 Further threats also exist. First, while the number of households lost in the follow-up survey – due to attrition – was small, the sample

selection associated with the missing outcome data remains an empirical concern. Second, continuous rainfall struck northern Bangladesh
in August 2014 and this weather shock might have made the subsequent learning of all the sample students indiscriminate. Third, in this
study exploring the impacts of two treatment arms on multiple outcomes, we may accidentally have found statistically signiﬁcant treatment
eﬀects for some arms and outcomes, even where true causal eﬀects were absent. These concerns are carefully addressed in Section S.3 in
the supplemental appendix.
  22 On the other hand, it is also possible that the control students were disappointed at losing the lottery, and therefore did not study

as hard during the sample periods. This possible discouraging eﬀect (if any) would have led us to overestimate the treatment eﬀects on
children’s educational achievement. If so, the true performance impact of solar products would be smaller than current estimates, while
further supporting the result of “no academic performance eﬀects” found with modern lighting technology.


                                                                     18
a cluster (i.e., treatment saturation) could be used to estimate the spillover eﬀects on the non-treated population.

Recall from Section I that each grade at each school potentially consisted of four types of students: (whether treated

or not) our study sample, their siblings (note that in each household, only one child was included in our study sample),

those with access to electricity at the baseline, and those with poor attendance. This experimental design enabled us

to explore whether the fraction of treated students and their siblings in each school grade (i.e., treatment intensity)

inﬂuenced the students’ educational achievement, after controlling for the school grade fraction of regularly attending

students with no access to electricity at the baseline (i.e., eligible fraction), whereby both fractions varied across grades

within a school. Note that the latter fraction was endogenous. However, given this control, the former fraction was

expected to have random variation. This approach is similar to that adopted by Miguel and Kremer (2004) and Oster

and Thornton (2012). Having no statistically signiﬁcant relationship between treatment intensity and educational

achievement reduces any concern about spillover eﬀects.

   As detailed in subsection S.3.2 in the supplemental appendix, the relevant estimation results provided no strong

evidence to suggest that the “no academic performance eﬀects” of solar lamps should be attributed to a positive

learning externality. Note that the absence of spillover eﬀects is consistent with both views - that learning interaction

between the treated and remaining students existed or did not exist. Given the absence of signiﬁcant treatment eﬀects,

the former case may suggest that solar lamps did not provide treated students with any educational beneﬁts (in terms

of performance) that could have been transferred from them to the remaining students.




VII      Conclusion

There is a growing public interest in the diﬀusion of aﬀordable modern oﬀ-grid solar lighting to help students in

less-developed countries with their learning. While anecdotal evidence that emphasizes the potential of such modern

technology is accumulating, rigorous empirical evidence remains scant. This study aimed to provide one of the few

rigorous evaluations of the short-term eﬀects of solar products on education in less advanced economies. To meet this

research objective, we conducted a randomized ﬁeld experiment in the river islands (Chars) in northern Bangladesh

that had no access to an electrical grid, where a proportion of the randomly selected students received three solar

products, another proportion of the students received one main solar product, and the rest were kept as a control

group and received no solar products.

   Our study found that households that received solar lamps substituted this modern technology for traditional light

sources, such as kerosene lamps/lanterns. This behavioral change resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in annual kerosene

expenditures, which in turn reduced the total household expenditures. Solar products also increased the net study




                                                             19
hours at home for our treated children by increasing their nighttime study hours and reducing their daytime study

hours. This increase in the net number of study hours was more evident before the examination season, while the

time spent on other activities during that period was reduced (e.g., household chores). Furthermore, we found that

the school attendance rate initially increased due to the provision of solar lanterns, but declined over time. However,

despite these increases in study hours and school attendance, there was no evidence to support the notion that children

who received solar lamps achieved higher examination scores than those who did not receive these supports. These

results hold true irrespective of whether students received all three solar products or only one. To assess the internal

validity of our ﬁndings, we also considered several threats to the ﬁndings (e.g., sample attrition, learning externality,

multiple-hypothesis testing). The exercises performed to address these issues provided additional evidence rejecting

that the above ﬁndings were entirely attributed to erroneous statistical inference (see Section S.3 in the supplemental

appendix for the details). Notably, no improvement of academic performance is less likely to stem from the potential

spillover eﬀects.

   On one hand, our experiment was conducted in a setting where students’ marginal educational returns to solar

products were expected to be the greatest for several reasons. First, access to electricity was highly limited in the

studied areas. Second, we distributed solar lanterns directly to students at schools, which might have given them

priority to use the products over other household members, compared to a case in which the products were provided

for household heads. Furthermore, replacing kerosene lamps with solar products could potentially improve students’

health, such as their respiratory systems, which may, in turn, positively aﬀect academic performance. In this sense,

ﬁnding no improvement in academic performance in our experiment may imply that we cannot expect to see educational

achievement eﬀects from introducing solar products in other modestly disadvantaged settings.

   In contrast, the site studied in this research also had many other educational constraints, such as the availability

of good teachers and households’ ability to aﬀord education. Thus, it is also possible that providing solar products

for students with better educational environments than those in our study area would result in improved educational

outcomes. Whether this is true may depend on the overall quality of educational inputs and complementarity across

them, such as access to light, home learning environment, school facilities, and teacher quality. In fact, an experiment

in such improved settings may prove to boost the educational achievement of all the relevant students. Furthermore,

health improvements may progress very gradually, or there may be a critical age range in terms of solar products

and the noticeable improvement in children’s health. If that is the case, we may observe the positive impacts of solar

lanterns on health only in the long run or for some particular age cohorts, and thus any synergetic eﬀects between

health and education should also be realized only in the long run or for those cohorts. To generalize our ﬁndings in

a much broader context and provide conclusive evidence on the educational eﬀectiveness of solar products, further


                                                           20
empirical research is required.




References

Alstone, P., Jacobson, A., Mills, E., 2010. Illumination suﬃciency survey techniques: In-situ measurements of lighting

  system performance and a user preference survey for illuminance in an oﬀ-grid, African setting. Lumina Project

  Research Note 7.


Ashraf, N., Berry, J., Shapiro, J. M., December 2010. Can higher prices stimulate product use? Evidence from a ﬁeld

  experiment in Zambia. American Economic Review 100 (5), 2383–2413.


Bacon, R., Bhattacharya, S., Kojima, M., June 2010. Expenditures of low-income households on energy: Evidence

  from Africa and Asia. Extractive Industries for Development Series 16, World Bank.

                                     ¨
Baird, S., Bohren, A., McIntosh, C., Ozler, B., March 2014. Designing experiments to measure spillover eﬀects. Policy

  Research Working Paper 6824, World Bank, Development Research Group, Poverty Inequality Team.


Banerjee, A. V., Cole, S., Duﬂo, E., Linden, L., 2007. Remedying education: Evidence from two randomized experi-

  ments in India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3), 1235–1264.


Beuermann, D. W., Cristia, J., Cueto, S., Malamud, O., Cruz-Aguayo, Y., 2015. One laptop per child at home:

  Short-term impacts from a randomized experiment in Peru. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (2),

  53–80.


Cameron, A. C., Miller, D. L., 2015. A practitioner’s guide to cluster-robust inference. Journal of Human Resources

  50 (2), 317–372.


Cohen, J., Dupas, P., February 2010. Free distribution or cost-sharing? Evidence from a randomized malaria prevention

  experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1), 1–45.


Copper, H., Robinson, J. C., Patall, E. A., Spring 2006. Does homework improve academic achievement? A synthesis

  of research, 1987-2003. Review of Educational Research 76 (1), 1–62.


Dang, H.-A., December 2007. The determinants and impact of private tutoring classes in Vietnam. Economics and

  Education Review 26 (6), 683–698.


Dhaliwal, I., Duﬂo, E., Glennerster, R., Tulloch, C., 2013. Comparative Cost-Eﬀectiveness Analysis to Inform Policy

  in Developing Countries: A General Framework with Applications for Education. University Of Chicago Press.,

  Chapter 8 in Education Policy in Developing Countries, edited by Paul Glewwe.


                                                         21
Duﬂo, E., Dupas, P., Kremer, M., March 2015. School governance, teacher incentives, and pupil-teacher ratios: Ex-

  perimental evidence from Kenyan primary schools. Journal of Public Economics 123, 920–110.


Duﬂo, E., Hanna, R., Ryan, S. P., 2012. Incentives work: Getting teachers to come to school. American Economic

  Review 102 (4), 1241–1278.


Dufur, M. J., Parcel, T. L., Troutman, K. P., March 2013. Does capital at home matter more than capital at school?

  Social capital eﬀects on academic achievement. Research in Social Stratiﬁcation and Mobility 31, 1–21.


Dupas, P., January 2014. Short-run subsidies and long-run adoption of new health products: Evidence from a ﬁeld

  experiment. Econometrica 82 (1), 197–228.


Esper, H., London, T., Kanchwala, Y., 2013. Access to clean lighting and its impact on children: An exploration of

  solaraid’s sunnymoney. Child Impact Case Study 4.


Evans, D., Kremer, M., Ngatia, M., 2008. The impact of distributing school uniforms on children’s education in Kenya.

  Washington, DC: Mimeo, World Bank.


Evans, D. K., Popova, A., January 2016. Cost-eﬀectiveness analysis in development: Accounting for local costs and

  noisy impacts. World Development 77, 262–276.


Furukawa, C., 2012. Health and safety beneﬁts of replacing kerosene candles by solar lamps: Evidence from Uganda.

  mimeo.


Furukawa, C., 2014. Do solar lamps help children study? contrary evidence from a pilot study in Uganda. Journal of

  Development Studies 50 (2), 319–341.


Glewwe, P., Ilias, N., Kremer, M., 2010. Teacher incentives. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3),

  205–227.


Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., Moulin, S., 2009. Many children left behind? textbooks and test scores in Kenya. American

  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (1), 112–135.


Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., Moulin, S., Zitzewitz, E., June 2004. Restrospective vs. prospective analyses of school inputs:

  The case of ﬂip charts in Kenya. Journal of Development Economics 74 (1), 251–268.


Grimm, M., Munyehirwe, A., Peters, J., Sievert, M., October 2016. A ﬁrst step up the energy ladder? low cost solar

  kits and household’s welfare in rural Rwanda. World Bank Economic Review.




                                                          22
Hanushek, E. A., 1979. Conceptual and empirical issues in the estimations of educational production functions. Journal

  of Human Resources 14 (3), 351–388.


Hanushek, E. A., Woessmann, L., 2011. The Economics of International Diﬀerences in Educational Achievement.

  North Holland, Chapter 2 in Handbook of the Economics of Education, vol. 3, edited by Eric A. Hanushek,

  Stephen J. Machin and Ludger Woessmann.


Hassan, F., Lucchino, P., July 2016. Powering education. CEP Discussion Paper No. 1438.


IEA, 2013. World energy outlook 2013: Energy access databaseInternational Energy Agency, Paris, France, http:

  //www.worldenergyoutlook.org/resources/energydevelopment/energyaccessdatabase/#d.en.8609.


Maliti, E., Mnenwa, R., 2011. Aﬀordability and expenditure patterns for electricity and kerosene in urban households

  in Tanzania. Research Report 11/2, Dar es Salaam, REPOA.


Miguel, E., Kremer, M., January 2004. Worms: Identifying impacts on education and health in the presence of

  treatment externalities. Econometrica 72 (1), 159–217.


Mills, E., December 2014. Light for life: Identifying and reducing the health and safety impacts of fuel-based lighting.

  UNEP.


Mills, E., Jacobson, A., 2008. The need for independent quality and performance testing for emerging oﬀ-grid white-led

  illumination systems for developing countries. Light & Engineering 16 (2), 5–24.


Mo, D., Swinnen, J., Zhang, L., Yi, H., Qu, Q., Boswell, M., Rozelle, S., June 2013. Can one-to-one computing narrow

  the digital divide and the education gap in China? the case of Beijing migrant schools. World Development 46,

  14–29.


Oster, E., Thornton, R., December 2012. Determinants of technology adoption: Peer eﬀects in menstrual cup take-up.

  Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (6), 1263–1293.


Pritchett, L., Banerji, R., May 2013. Schooling is not education! using assessment to change the politics of non-learning.

  A Report of the Center for Global Development Study Group on Measuring Learning Outcomes.


Stinebrickner, T., Stinebrickner, R., June 2008. The causal eﬀect of studying on academic performance. BE Journal

  of Economic Analysis & Policy 8 (1), 1–55.


United Nations, 2015. The millennium development goals report 2015. 2015 TIME FOR GLOBAL ACTION FOR

  PEOPLE AND PLANET.


World Bank, June 2010. Solar lighting for the base of the pyramid: Overview of an emerging market.


                                                           23
                                                                                              All products
                                       Study at school                                        Study at home (total)                              Study at home (day)
                            60




                                                                                  60




                                                                                                                                         30
                            45




                                                                                  45




                                                                                                                                         15
                            30




                                                                                  30
                 estimate




                                                                    estimate




                                                                                                                              estimate
                            15




                                                                                  15




                                                                                                                                         0
                            0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                         −15
                            −15




                                                                                  −15
                            −30




                                                                                  −30




                                                                                                                                         −30
                                  Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr                           Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr                    Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr


                                   Study at home (night)                                    Study at home (kerosene)                                 Other activities
                                                                           30




                                                                                                                                         90
                            60




                                                                           0
                            45




                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                           −30
                 estimate




                                                                    estimate




                                                                                                                              estimate
                            30




                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                           −60
                            15




                                                                           −90




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                           −180 −150 −120
                            0




                                                                                                                                         −30
                            −15




                                                                                                                                         −60
                            −30




                                  Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr                           Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr                    Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr




                                                                                             One product
                                       Study at school                                        Study at home (total)                              Study at home (day)
                            60




                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                  60
                            45




                                                                                  45




                                                                                                                                         15
                            30
                 estimate




                                                                    estimate




                                                                                                                              estimate
                                                                                  30
                            15




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                  15
                            0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                         −15
                            −15




                                                                                  −15
                            −30




                                                                                  −30




                                                                                                                                         −30




                                  Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr                           Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr                    Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr


                                   Study at home (night)                                    Study at home (kerosene)                                 Other activities
                                                                           30
                            60




                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                         90
                            45




                                                                           −30




                                                                                                                                         60
                 estimate




                                                                    estimate




                                                                                                                              estimate
                            30




                                                                           −60




                                                                                                                                         30
                            15




                                                                           −90
                                                                           −180 −150 −120




                                                                                                                                         0
                            0




                                                                                                                                         −30
                            −15
                            −30




                                                                                                                                         −60




                                  Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr                           Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr                    Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr




                                                  Figure 1: Impacts on children’s time use (per-day minutes)
Notes: (1) This ﬁgure reports α2 and α3 in equation (1) with 95% conﬁdence intervals. (2) Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) Other activities include sports, cooking and bathing, household chores, and some
other activities, including sleeping and rest.




                                                                                                                24
          Table 1: Information on lighting sources at baseline

Panel A: No. of light sources (882 households)
                                 Mean       Std.
Flashlight                       0.11       0.33
Kerosene lantern                 0.24       0.46
Kerosene lamp                    1.67       0.58

Panel B: Per-day usages of lighting sources       (882 households)
                                    Mean           Std.
Flashlight (rainy season)           0.29           0.88
Flashlight (oﬀ-rainy season)        0.41           1.24
Kerosene lanterns (rainy season)    0.62           1.28
Kerosene lanterns (oﬀ-rainy season) 0.78           1.60
Kerosene lamps (rainy season)       4.13           1.78
Kerosene lamps (oﬀ-rainy season)    5.39           2.41

Panel C: Expenditures (in Bangladesh Taka, BDT)
                                Mean      Std.
Food (12 months)                59841.14  26061.42
Education (6 months)            2558.28   1644.94
Medical (12 months)             2172.84   1879.09
Kerosene (12 months)            1620.66   1306.58
Other non-food (12 months)      10993.52  3463.82

Panel D: Major activities by light sources
                                  Flashlight       Kerosene      Kerosene
                                                   lanterns      lamps
Reading/studying                       0.04        0.98          0.98
Social interaction                     0.13        0.17          0.22
Cooking/eating at night                0.01        0.15          0.98
Walking outside at night               0.86        0.48          0.68
Tending livestock                      0.08        0.05          0.13
Income generating activities           0.02        0.00          0.00
Nightlight for security                0.72        0.23          0.30
No. of households                      95          202           875




                                  25
                Table 2: Impacts on children’s educational achievement: progression to the next grade
                Dependent variable:                               One if pass
                                                December 2013                     December 2014
                                        LPM       LPM        Probit        LPM       LPM      Probit
                                                             (ME)                             (ME)
                                          (a)        (b)        (c)           (d)      (e)       (f)
                All products            0.022     0.023      0.024         -0.059    -0.058   -0.058
                                        (0.030) (0.031)      (0.033)       (0.042) (0.042) (0.039)
                One product             0.002     -0.003     -0.012        -0.024    -0.024   -0.022
                                        (0.026) (0.028)      (0.026)       (0.038) (0.038) (0.036)
                Age                     -         0.011      0.014         -         0.005    0.006
                                                  (0.015)    (0.015)                 (0.015) (0.014)
                Education               -         0.211*** 0.223***        -         -0.006   -0.007
                (years)                           (0.029)    (0.021)                 (0.028) (0.026)
                Male                    -         -0.035     -0.040        -         0.003    0.001
                (dummy)                           (0.032)    (0.037)                 (0.062) (0.058)
                Household size          -         -0.016     -0.018        -         0.009    0.008
                                                  (0.013)    (0.013)                 (0.018) (0.017)
                No. of male members     -         -0.000     -0.000        -         -0.002   0.001
                                                  (0.015)    (0.017)                 (0.027) (0.025)
                Head age                -         -0.001     -0.002        -         -0.001   -0.001
                (years)                           (0.002)    (0.002)                 (0.002) (0.002)
                Head education          -         0.002      0.002         -         0.007    0.007
                (years)                           (0.005)    (0.005)                 (0.005) (0.005)
                Head male               -         0.040      0.034         -         0.120* 0.116**
                (dummy)                           (0.045)    (0.045)                 (0.061) (0.054)
                Land size               -         0.001      0.001         -         -0.000   -0.000
                (decimal)                         (0.001)    (0.001)                 (0.001) (0.001)
                All = one (p-val.)      0.485     0.417      0.243         0.389     0.419    0.343
                All + one = 0 (p-val.) 0.612      0.700      0.824         0.236     0.241    0.219
                R-squared               0.217     0.325      0.294         0.139     0.145    0.104
                No. of obs.             850       850        754           845       845      832
                School FE               Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes      Yes
                Village FE              Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes      Yes
                Mean y (control)        0.716     0.716      0.686         0.644     0.644    0.643

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade.




                                                                26
                     Table 3: Impacts on children’s educational achievement: GPA z-scores (OLS)
               Dependent variables:                              GPA z-scores
                                      Bengali Bengali English English Math                  Math

                                               (1a)         (1b)          (1c)      (1d)           (1e)             (1f)
               December 2013
               All products                  -0.046      -0.046       -0.053      -0.056       -0.052           -0.041
                                             (0.080)     (0.086)      (0.062)     (0.064)      (0.057)          (0.058)
               One product                   0.025       0.023        -0.129*     -0.136*      -0.081           -0.087
                                             (0.080)     (0.086)      (0.065)     (0.071)      (0.064)          (0.071)
               All = one (p-val.)            0.369       0.434        0.330       0.350        0.669            0.546
               All + one = 0 (p-val.)        0.881       0.878        0.079       0.077        0.192            0.233
               Mean y (control)              -0.017      -0.017       0.014       0.014        0.009            0.009
               R-squared                     0.161       0.257        0.170       0.253        0.194            0.389
               No. of obs.                   850         850          850         850          850              850
               Dependent variables:          General     General      Islam       Islam        Bangladesh       Bangladesh
                                             science     science      studies     studies      general          general
                                                                                               studies          studies
                                               (1g)         (1h)          (1i)       (1j)          (1k)             (1l)
               December 2013
               All products                  0.048       0.052        0.049       0.055        0.070            0.066
                                             (0.084)     (0.084)      (0.079)     (0.082)      (0.067)          (0.070)
               One product                   0.039       0.037        0.016       0.020        0.126            0.121
                                             (0.076)     (0.078)      (0.077)     (0.079)      (0.084)          (0.089)
               All = one (p-val.)            0.927       0.880        0.694       0.696        0.534            0.577
               All + one = 0 (p-val.)        0.505       0.494        0.629       0.581        0.119            0.148
               Mean y (control)              -0.035      -0.035       -0.041      -0.041       -0.067           -0.067
               R-squared                     0.183       0.297        0.167       0.257        0.143            0.270
               No. of obs.                   850         850          850         850          850              850
               Dependent variables:          Bengali     Bengali      English     English      Math             Math

                                               (2a)         (2b)          (2c)      (2d)           (2e)             (2f)
               December 2014
               All products                  -0.095      -0.085       -0.047      -0.035       -0.112           -0.101
                                             (0.085)     (0.082)      (0.084)     (0.085)      (0.089)          (0.088)
               One product                   0.047       0.056        0.029       0.042        0.031            0.038
                                             (0.094)     (0.091)      (0.085)     (0.085)      (0.090)          (0.087)
               All = one (p-val.)            0.075       0.061        0.364       0.334        0.138            0.141
               All + one = 0 (p-val.)        0.766       0.853        0.901       0.960        0.599            0.674
               Mean y (control)              0.024       0.024        0.012       0.012        0.030            0.030
               R-squared                     0.096       0.114        0.089       0.099        0.140            0.162
               No. of obs.                   846         846          846         846          846              846
               Dependent variables:          General     General      Islam       Islam        Bangladesh       Bangladesh
                                             science     science      studies     studies      general          general
                                                                                               studies          studies
                                               (2g)         (2h)          (2i)       (2j)          (2k)             (2l)
               December 2014
               All products                  -0.116      -0.102       -0.068      -0.059       -0.132           -0.126
                                             (0.084)     (0.082)      (0.092)     (0.088)      (0.092)          (0.091)
               One product                   -0.079      -0.063       0.023       0.041        -0.033           -0.022
                                             (0.092)     (0.091)      (0.099)     (0.098)      (0.094)          (0.090)
               All = one (p-val.)            0.676       0.655        0.232       0.168        0.240            0.187
               All + one = 0 (p-val.)        0.209       0.276        0.798       0.916        0.328            0.369
               Mean y (control)              0.051       0.051        0.021       0.021        0.053            0.053
               R-squared                     0.128       0.148        0.090       0.107        0.109            0.127
               No. of obs.                   846         846          846         846          846              846
               Baseline control              No          Yes          No          Yes          No               Yes
               School FE                     Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes              Yes
               Village FE                    Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes              Yes
Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     27
                         Table 4: Impacts on households’ light sources and expenditures (OLS)
      Dependent variables:           Per-day hours using light sources (sum of all owned & zero if              not own)
                                   Flashlight Flashlight Flashlight Flashlight Kerosene                          Kerosene
                                   (rainy)     (rainy)       (oﬀ-rainy) (oﬀ-rainy) lanterns                      lanterns
                                                                                      (rainy)                    (rainy)
                                       (a)         (b)           (c)          (d)         (e)                        (f)
      All products                 -0.234***   -0.232***     -0.331***    -0.326***   -0.714***                  -0.717***
                                   (0.073)     (0.072)       (0.106)      (0.104)     (0.103)                    (0.114)
      One product                  -0.060      -0.057        -0.028       -0.028      -0.546***                  -0.546***
                                   (0.090)     (0.088)       (0.134)      (0.128)     (0.110)                    (0.116)
      All = one (p-val.)           0.016       0.015         0.004        0.003       0.037                      0.043
      All + one = 0 (p-val.)       0.054       0.054         0.111        0.103       0.000                      0.000
      Mean y (control)             0.316       0.316         0.460        0.460       0.767                      0.767
      R-squared                    0.052       0.060         0.061        0.069       0.148                      0.179
      No. of obs.                  847         847           847          847         847                        847
      Dependent variables:           Per-day hours using light sources (sum of all owned & zero if              not own)
                                   Kerosene    Kerosene      Kerosene     Kerosene    Kerosene                   Kerosene
                                   lanterns    lanterns      lamps        lamps       lamps                      lamps
                                   (oﬀ-rainy) (oﬀ-rainy) (rainy)          (rainy)     (oﬀ-rainy)                 (oﬀ-rainy)
                                       (g)         (h)           (i)          (j)         (k)                        (l)
      All products                 -0.925***   -0.928***     -3.708***    -3.713***   -4.458***                  -4.464***
                                   (0.117)     (0.126)       (0.194)      (0.188)     (0.270)                    (0.256)
      One product                  -0.713***   -0.713***     -1.586***    -1.561***   -1.692***                  -1.667***
                                   (0.129)     (0.131)       (0.210)      (0.201)     (0.213)                    (0.206)
      All = one (p-val.)           0.032       0.035         0.000        0.000       0.000                      0.000
      All + one = 0 (p-val.)       0.000       0.000         0.000        0.000       0.000                      0.000
      Mean y (control)             0.974       0.974         4.265        4.265       5.192                      5.192
      R-squared                    0.145       0.170         0.459        0.484       0.448                      0.468
      No. of obs.                  847         847           847          847         847                        847
      Dependent variables:                                     Log of expenditures
                                   Education Education Kerosene           Kerosene    Total                      Total
                                       (m)         (n)           (o)          (p)         (q)                        (r)
      All products                 0.018       0.016         -1.301***    -1.313***   -0.055***                  -0.059***
                                   (0.040)     (0.034)       (0.127)      (0.135)     (0.020)                    (0.014)
      One product                  0.004       0.036         -0.693***    -0.686***   -0.032*                    -0.016
                                   (0.052)     (0.049)       (0.069)      (0.072)     (0.018)                    (0.017)
      All = one (p-val.)           0.791       0.659         0.000        0.000       0.361                      0.035
      All + one = 0 (p-val.)       0.772       0.476         0.000        0.000       0.003                      0.002
      Mean y (control, not log) 3135.69        3135.69       1600.50      1600.50     81279.41                   81279.41
      R-squared                    0.115       0.220         0.417        0.439       0.091                      0.474
      No. of obs.                  842         842           631          631         847                        847
      HH baseline control          No          Yes           No           Yes         No                         Yes
      Village FE                   Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes                        Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each village. (3) The baseline controls include household size; no. of males; head age
(years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                  28
                         Table 5: Impacts on children’s educational inputs: study time (OLS)
           Dependent variable:          Per-day minutes (average from Sep 2013 to Apr 2014) spent on:
                                    Study                       Study at home                   Other
                                    at school total        day         night        under       activities
                                                                                    kerosene
                                                                                    lamps
                                       (a)         (b)         (c)         (d)           (e)       (f)
           With no baseline controls
           All products             1.263      11.527**    -7.996*** 19.523*** -105.801*** -4.531
                                    (3.049)    (5.439)     (2.807)     (3.512)      (3.247)     (10.997)
           One product              2.913      18.865*** -5.522*       24.387*** -104.483*** -5.565
                                    (3.354)    (6.059)     (2.812)     (3.718)      (3.265)     (9.971)
           All = one (p-val.)       0.668      0.160       0.436       0.084        0.523       0.906
           All + one = 0 (p-val.) 0.422        0.005       0.006       0.000        0.000       0.600
           R-squared                0.122      0.146       0.183       0.198        0.821       0.445
           No. of obs.              620        620         620         620          620         620
                                       (g)         (h)         (i)          (j)         (k)         (l)
           With baseline controls
           All products             1.643      12.950**    -7.029**    19.979*** -105.381*** -4.968
                                    (3.148)    (5.600)     (2.825)     (3.544)      (3.263)     (10.826)
           One product              2.903      19.025*** -5.097*       24.122*** -104.529*** -7.378
                                    (3.449)    (5.979)     (2.749)     (3.653)      (3.348)     (9.332)
           All = one (p-val.)       0.739      0.263       0.537       0.162        0.666       0.804
           All + one = 0 (p-val.) 0.407        0.003       0.012       0.000        0.000       0.490
           R-squared                0.137      0.173       0.212       0.221        0.825       0.451
           No. of obs.              620        620         620         620          620         620
           School FE                Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
           Village FE               Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
           Mean y (control)         197.72     229.54      110.75      118.78       111.03      847.61

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).
(4) Other activities include sports, cooking and bathing, household chores, and some other activities, including sleeping and rest.




                                                                     29
                        Table 6: Impacts on children’s educational inputs: school attendance (OLS)
                            Dependent variable:                     One if attend
                            Timing of visit in 2014:      Feb       April    August      Any
                                                          (a)        (b)       (c)       (d)
                            With no baseline controls
                            All products               0.110*** 0.097** 0.043         0.084***
                                                       (0.040)    (0.036) (0.031) (0.025)
                            One product                0.043      0.089** 0.005       0.045*
                                                       (0.038)    (0.041) (0.032) (0.024)
                            Visit in April             -          -          -        -0.083**
                                                                                      (0.033)
                            Visit in August            -          -          -        0.002
                                                                                      (0.057)
                            All = one (p-val.)         0.133      0.827      0.216    0.108
                            All + one = 0 (p-val.)     0.022      0.008      0.387    0.004
                            R-squared                  0.180      0.188      0.208    0.112
                            No. of obs.                882        882        882      2646
                                                          (e)        (f)       (g)       (h)
                            With baseline controls
                            All products               0.104**    0.093** 0.035       0.077***
                                                       (0.039)    (0.037) (0.031) (0.025)
                            One product                0.043      0.087** 0.002       0.044*
                                                       (0.037)    (0.042) (0.032) (0.024)
                            Visit in April             -          -          -        -0.083**
                                                                                      (0.033)
                            Visit in August            -          -          -        0.002
                                                                                      (0.057)
                            All = one (p-val.)         0.176      0.887      0.295    0.153
                            All + one = 0 (p-val.)     0.024      0.012      0.496    0.007
                            R-squared                  0.241      0.228      0.253    0.155
                            No. of obs.                882        882        882      2646
                            School FE                  Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes
                            Village FE                 Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes
                            Mean y (control)           0.561      0.481      0.589    0.544

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     30
                                      Table 7: Children’s educational eﬃciency (OLS)
                                   Dependent variable:                One if pass
                                                                    December 2014
                                                                (a)      (b)         (c)
                                   All products               -        -0.062     -0.640*
                                                                       (0.049) (0.351)
                                   One product                -        -0.017     -0.446
                                                                       (0.051) (0.346)

                                   Study at school                -0.001     -0.001     -0.001
                                   (per-day minutes)              (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
                                   Study at home                  0.000      -0.000     -0.001
                                   (day, per-day minutes)         (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
                                   Study at home                  0.000      0.001      0.001
                                   (night, per-day minutes)       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
                                   One if attend                  0.073      0.078      0.033
                                   (February)                     (0.048)    (0.047)    (0.078)
                                   One if attend                  -0.072*    -0.069*    -0.076
                                   (April)                        (0.038)    (0.037)    (0.054)
                                   One if attend                  0.010      0.010      -0.073
                                   (August)                       (0.038)    (0.039)    (0.056)

                                   All products
                                   × Study at                     -          -          0.001
                                      school                                            (0.001)
                                   × Study at                     -          -          0.005**
                                      home (day)                                        (0.002)
                                   × Study at                     -          -          -0.002
                                      home (night)                                      (0.002)
                                   × One if attend                -          -          0.110
                                      (February)                                        (0.133)
                                   × One if attend                -          -          0.008
                                      (April)                                           (0.075)
                                   × One if attend                -          -          0.085
                                      (August)                                          (0.099)

                                   One product
                                   × Study at                     -          -          0.000
                                      school                                            (0.002)
                                   × Study at                     -          -          -0.001
                                      home (day)                                        (0.003)
                                   × Study at                     -          -          0.002
                                      home (night)                                      (0.002)
                                   × One if attend                -          -          0.177
                                      (February)                                        (0.120)
                                   × One if attend                -          -          -0.028
                                      (April)                                           (0.125)
                                   × One if attend                -          -          0.214**
                                      (August)                                          (0.088)
                                   R-squared                      0.157      0.159      0.184
                                   No. of obs.                    617        617        617
                                   Baseline control               No         No         No
                                   School FE                      Yes        Yes        Yes
                                   Village FE                     Yes        Yes        Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade.




                                                                31
Supplemental appendix




           32
S.1         Cost-eﬀectiveness analysis of solar lanterns on school attendance

To further assess the estimated impacts on school attendance, we carried out a cost-eﬀectiveness analysis, following

the method used by Dhaliwal et al. (2013) and Evans and Popova (2016). Table S.15 in this supplemental appendix

reports on additional years of education per 100 USD, based on the estimated treatment eﬀects reported in columns

(d) and (h) in Table 6 in the article. To simplify the analysis, we considered only the cost (prices) of the solar lanterns,

ignoring other factors such as research administration costs, reduced kerosene expenditure, and product maintenance

opportunity costs. Assuming that the life of a solar lantern is ﬁve years, the minimum length of time for which

products function eﬀectively in normal conditions, we divided the product prices by ﬁve to estimate annual product

costs. Table S.15 shows that our intervention raised student participation by 0.59 and 0.64 years per 100 USD spent

with and without baseline control.23 This table also shows that providing a bundle of three lanterns is more cost

eﬀective than providing only one solar lamp; however, the estimated solar impacts were only marginally diﬀerent

between the two cases at 10―15% signiﬁcance levels, as reported in Table 6 in the article. While the impact of our

intervention did not last long, this increase of 0.59―64 years per 100 USD still seems remarkable. Referring to Evans

and Popova (2016) (Table 3 in p. 268), this increase can be compared with that revealed in Evans et al. (2008)’s

study, which involved distributing school uniforms in Kenya.




S.2         Discussion: does complementarity matter?

A growing body of empirical research has suggested that relaxing only one educational constraint may not result in

children’s improved school outcomes in the developing world (e.g., Glewwe et al. 2004; Glewwe et al. 2009; Mo et al.

2013). Given that solar lamps were also expected to address only one factor that encouraged children’s human capital

acquisition, i.e., better nighttime lighting for home study, our ﬁndings are consistent with those provided by recent

studies. Our ﬁndings are also in line with the experimental study conducted in Uganda by Furukawa (2014), who also

revealed no improvement in school exam outcomes despite the increased study time induced by the provision of solar

lanterns.24

    Complementarity across educational inputs (e.g., textbooks, teacher quality, and home-study support) may play an

important role in determining academic performance. For example, in the estimations of school attendance performed

in Table 6 in the article, we saw statistically signiﬁcant increases in school attendance in the ﬁrst two visits for the

treated students (mainly for those who received all three solar products). However, during the ﬁnal visit in August,
  23 More precisely, these ﬁgures came to:
  (                                        )  (                                                 )
                                                product prices (USD)
   solar impacts × no. of treated students ÷           5 years
                                                                     × no. of treated students × 100 USD.
  24 Furukawa (2014) indicated that the malfunctioning of the solar products (due to ﬂickering and failure to fully recharge the unit) might

have made nighttime study virtually impossible for the treated students, thus resulting in an insigniﬁcant impact. However, our counterpart
NGO, which had continuous contact with the subjects in the studied area, did not report this problem.


                                                                    33
it was found that this initial enthusiasm for school attendance prompted by solar lanterns disappeared. Moreover,

we found that other educational inputs, measured by the education-related expenditures, were similar among the

treatment and control groups, despite the improved savings on kerosene consumption by the treated households (see

Table 4 in the article, columns (m) and (n)).25 These ﬁndings may suggest that the increased educational demand

was not suﬃciently met by the better learning inputs provided to the treated students by their households, schools,

and teachers. Therefore, the increased study hours and improvements in initial school attendance did not translate

into improved academic performance.26

    To analyze complementarity further, we collected information on school inputs and explored the heterogeneity

of treatment eﬀects on student progress in these dimensions - see Table S.20 in this supplemental appendix. The

information we used included the number of students in each school grade in columns (a) and (g) and several school-

level inputs in the remaining columns.27 As the data on the school-level inputs reﬂected a situation af ter a follow-up

survey, and varied only by the number of schools participating in our project (i.e., 17 schools), the estimation results

should be interpreted in light of these limitations. Along with similar estimation results of each subject’s GPA scores,

as reported in Table S.21 to S.26, no distinct treatment heterogeneity was observed. It is also worth remembering

that no discernible treatment heterogeneity was found across several family characteristics, as seen in Table S.5 (for

progression) and Table S.6 to S.11 (for GPA scores).

    On one hand, the ﬁnding that treatment eﬀects do not vary by educational inputs on either the demand- or the

supply-side of educational production may appear to undermine the view that complementarity matters. However, the

absence of treatment heterogeneity may simply suggest that, in the ultra-poor setting of our study, the quality of other

educational inputs was also low; the low quality therefore did not make any noticeable diﬀerence in the treatment

eﬀects. For example, approximately 80% of household heads had no education (at baseline), with a mean value of 1.27

years (std. 2.83 years) as well as a median of zero years. The high failure rate of students trying to move up to the next

grade (reported at the bottom of Table 2 in the article) also suggests that our chosen site had many education-related

constraints (e.g., ultra-poor families, the limited availability of good teachers). The latter interpretation is consistent

with the aforementioned view that solar-induced educational demand among treated students (e.g., an increase in

school attendance) was not suﬃciently met by families, schools, or teachers.

    In conclusion, it is diﬃcult to prove or disprove the importance of complementarity between solar lamps and other

  25 These education-related expenditures include fees relevant to admission, tuition, examinations, and private schooling; school material

costs (e.g., books and pens); and transportation and food expenses.
  26 Alternatively, the treated students might have regularly attended school in the initial months because they anticipated that they might

receive some additional treatments in the future if they showed high attendance records. However, it may be that it took several months for
them to realize that no additional support was coming from our counterpart NGO. Hence, they changed their expectations and eventually
behaved similarly to the children who belonged to the control group.
  27 The number of students in each school grade was based on the 1,665 students enrolled in the 4th to 8th grades at 17 sample schools

participating in our experiment. Consequently, this number slightly exceeded the number of students who regularly attended school,
because the 1,665 students included some with an attendance rate lower than 80% in the last four months (see Section I in the article).


                                                                    34
education-related inputs from a single study that was not designed to explore this particular aspect.28 Therefore, our

ﬁndings may still imply that the solar lanterns had a limited impact on children’s academic performance, while other

education-related inputs remained constant. While this may not be the only reason for the sizable impacts of solar

lamps on educational inputs but not on achievement, the empirical results should still be considered of the ﬁrst order

of importance, and future research should aim to validate this educated conjecture.29




S.3        Threats to statistical inference

This section discusses several threats to the ﬁndings of this study.



S.3.1      Bounds on treatment eﬀects

While the number of households lost in the follow-up survey – due to attrition – was small, the sample selection

associated with the missing outcome data remains an empirical concern. A possible solution to this problem is to

use a selection correction methodology by explicitly modeling the selection process. However, this approach cannot

be adopted in the current research due to diﬃculties in precisely modeling the selection mechanisms and the lack of

eﬀective instruments that would explain the selection but not the outcomes.

    As an alternative, we estimated the bounds of the treatment eﬀects, based on Lee (2009)’s methodology. However,

it is acknowledged that this approach is not free from limitations. First, it has to be assumed that the treatment

assignment monotonically aﬀects the selection, which cannot clearly be tested. Second, the estimates are the treatment

eﬀects on the sub-population that would always be observed regardless of the treatment assignment; however, they

may not always be the main interest of the study. Nevertheless, it remains useful to assess the already identiﬁed

estimates based on this approach.

    First, Lee (2009) demonstrated that in randomized experimental settings, if the sample attrition rates are similar

between the treatment and control groups, a simple comparison between these groups can still be interpreted as a valid

average treatment eﬀect on the aforementioned local population. With controls of the baseline family characteristics

and village-ﬁxed eﬀects, Table S.27 in this supplemental appendix reports the impacts of the solar products on the

non-attrition probability (which is one if the outcome data are not missing at follow-up) for the relevant previously

estimated outcomes.30 Based on the results, we can see, for example, that the treatment groups were more likely

to provide missing information on kerosene expenditure in the follow-up survey than the control groups. This is

  28 Forexample, other school inputs not explored here may play a signiﬁcant role in improving students’ performance.
  29 Another  possible explanation is that our target population might have been too young to enjoy a noticeable improvement in academic
performance (e.g., Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2008).
  30 Notably, the estimation results of school attendance, reported in Table 6 in the article are free from the selection problem because the

analysis exploited the data that pertained to all 882 respondents.


                                                                     35
probably due to their replacement of kerosene lighting sources with solar products. However, in most cases, the results

reported in Table S.27 provide no strong evidence that indicates signiﬁcant eﬀects of the treatment assignment on the

non-attrition group probability.

    Pooling the two treatment groups into one for reasons of computation, Table S.28 presents 95% conﬁdence intervals

of the treatment eﬀects based on Lee (2009)’s approach. As no controls were exploited in this analysis, the conﬁdence

intervals are quite wide. Nevertheless, it appears that the results provide similar implications to those ﬁndings obtained

from the earlier analysis in this paper.



S.3.2      Spillover eﬀects

The potential for spillover eﬀects is another empirical challenge that we faced in this study. As the randomization

was carried out within a speciﬁc grade level at each sample school, it is certainly possible that a student who did not

receive solar products could have beneﬁted from her friends who did receive the products, or from having access to

SHSs for nighttime study. However, visiting a friend’s home at night in unelectrif ied river islands is quite risky, for

both boys and girls. In fact, in a follow-up household survey, we collected information on whether treated students

shared solar lamps with non-household members, and identiﬁed only three such cases, where solar lamps were shared

with cousins. Hence, this possibility may not have been a valid concern in our setting.

    Other spillover eﬀects could have resulted from interactions in school and during exams. Non-treated students

could have learned from their treated peers in school, minimizing the diﬀerence in outcomes between the treatment

and control groups. However, if such spillover eﬀects artiﬁcially blurred the academic performance gap between the

treatment and control groups, they also may have made it diﬃcult to detect signiﬁcant diﬀerences in educational

inputs among students. Finding signiﬁcant increases in study time and school attendance among treated students

could reduce this concern. However, it is still important to consider this possibility more carefully.31

    Two exercises were conducted. First, we collected information on the average progression rates in one of the studied

districts, Kurigram, in 2012, 2013, and 2014; these were 0.93, 0.98, and 0.97 for primary-school students and 0.83,

0.89, and 0.86 for secondary-school students, respectively (i.e., a marginal increase in the progression rate from 2012

to 2014). In our control group, the progression rates in 2012, 2013, and 2014 were 0.80, 0.78, and 0.70 for 4th to 5th

grade students and 0.67, 0.64, and 0.58 for 6th to 8th grade students, respectively (i.e., a decline in the progression

rate from 2012 to 2014). Thus, we have no evidence to suggest that, on average, the academic performance of our

control students improved in a more pronounced way during the sample periods than did the performance of all the

  31 On the other hand, it is also possible that the control students were disappointed at losing the lottery, and therefore did not study

as hard during the sample periods. This possible discouraging eﬀect (if any) would have led us to overestimate the treatment eﬀects on
children’s educational achievement. If so, the true performance impact of solar products would be smaller than current estimates, while
further supporting the result of “no academic performance eﬀects” found with modern lighting technology.


                                                                   36
Kurigram students.

   Second, we exploited the insight obtained from Baird et al. (2014) that the fraction of those oﬀered treatment in

a cluster (i.e., treatment saturation) could be used to estimate the spillover eﬀects on the non-treated population.

Recall from Section I in the article that in the 17 sample schools that participated in our experiment, 1,665 students

were enrolled in the 4th to 8th grades. We initially selected 1,292 children (belonging to 1,292 diﬀerent households)

among these students. The remaining 373 students were excluded, either because they were known to have access to

electricity, because a sibling was one of the 1,292 students (in each household, only one child was included in our study

sample), or because they were not considered regular students because their school attendance had been lower than

80% during the last four months. From these 1,292 students, we further excluded 381 students who were found to have

access to electricity, when the research team visited their homes, resulting in 911 target students, which eventually

turned into 882 eﬀective sample students.

   Consequently, each grade at each school potentially consisted of four types of students: (whether treated or not)

our study sample, their siblings, those with access to electricity at the baseline, and those with poor attendance. This

experimental design enabled us to explore whether the fraction of treated students and their siblings in each school

grade (i.e., treatment intensity) inﬂuenced the students’ educational achievement, after controlling for the school grade

fraction of regularly attending students with no access to electricity at the baseline (i.e., eligible fraction), whereby

both fractions varied across grades within a school. Note that the latter fraction was endogenous. However, given

this control, the former fraction was expected to have random variation. This approach is similar to that adopted by

Miguel and Kremer (2004) and Oster and Thornton (2012). Having no statistically signiﬁcant relationship between

treatment intensity and educational achievement reduces any concern about spillover eﬀects.32

   To calculate the aforementioned fractions, we needed to know exactly why the 373 students were excluded during

the ﬁrst screening process, as well as the treatment status of their sibling if that sibling was eventually part of our

study sample. Unfortunately, this information was not collected. We therefore considered the following four distinctive

scenarios: (Case A) all 373 students had a sibling belonging to our treatment sample; (Case B) all 373 students had a

sibling belonging to our control sample; (Case C) all 373 students had access to electricity at the baseline; and (Case

D) none of the 373 students were regularly attending school. The treatment intensity takes the mean values of 0.49

(std. 0.09), 0.27 (std. 0.04), 0.27 (std. 0.04), and 0.36 (std. 0.05) in Case A, Case B, Case C, and Case D, respectively,

along with the eligible fraction taking the mean values of 0.77 (std. 0.09), 0.77 (std. 0.09), 0.55 (std. 0.09), and 0.71

(std. 0.10), corresponding to each of the four cases.33 Acknowledging its limitations, considering these cases, and
 32 We   are grateful to one anonymous referee for recommending this exercise.
 33 The   maximum (minimum) value of the treatment intensity was 0.71 (0.23), 0.38 (0.04), 0.38 (0.13), and 0.50 (0.18) in Case A, Case
B, Case C, and Case D, respectively. Similarly, the maximum (minimum) value of the eligible fraction was 1.00 (0.50), 1.00 (0.50), 0.77
(0.23), and 1.00 (0.31) in Case A, Case B, Case C, and Case D, respectively. Note that in order to calculate the treatment intensity, we
included only students who regularly attended school in the total number of students in each school grade (i.e., the denominator).


                                                                  37
checking the sensitivity of the analytical results may help to ensure that the present investigation remains useful.

   The estimation results corresponding to the above four scenarios were reported in the second and third panels of

Table S.29 (for progression) and Table S.30 to Table S.33 (for GPA scores) in this supplemental appendix. Considering

all these estimation results, there is no strong evidence to suggest that the “no academic performance eﬀects” of solar

lamps should be attributed to a positive learning externality. Note that the absence of spillover eﬀects is consistent

with both views - that learning interaction between the treated and remaining students existed or did not exist. Given

the absence of signiﬁcant treatment eﬀects, the former case may suggest that solar lamps did not provide treated

students with any educational beneﬁts (in terms of performance) that could have been transferred from them to the

remaining students.

   Finally, as the measured treatment intensity is unavoidably imprecise, for the reasons mentioned above, it may

not be seen as strictly exogenous, even if the estimated eligible fraction is controlled for. To somewhat alleviate this

concern, we also collected information on students’ academic performance in the ﬁnal examination held in December

2012; we checked for a relationship between this pre-experiment test result and the subsequent treatment intensity in

the ﬁrst panel of Table S.29 (for progression) and Table S.30 to Table S.33 (for GPA scores). This falsiﬁcation test

revealed no relationships that were noticeable in a statistical sense, thereby arguably supporting the assumption that

measured treatment intensity has exogenous variation (given the control of the eligible fraction).



S.3.3       Floods

One remaining concern for the 2014 examination results is that continuous rainfall struck northern Bangladesh in

August 2014, causing ﬂash ﬂoods in our study area. Consequently, some families sought shelter during that time.

This weather shock may explain no improvement of academic performance attributed to the provision of solar products.

This is possible if this (only) temporary shock was suﬃciently large to make the subsequent learning of all the sample

students indiscriminate.

   However, this study sees this concern as less likely for several reasons. First, apparently, the proportion of people

that evacuated to shelters was not so remarkably large. Based on Martin (2014), for example, the population targeted

due to this ﬂood by aid agencies for humanitarian assistance was only less than 12% of the vulnerable population

(i.e., extremely poor people) in the aﬀected district.34 In fact, during our school visit in August, when the area was

already aﬀected by the ﬂood, the rate of children’s attendance (i.e., 61.7%) was comparable to that in the remaining

visits (61.5% and 52.7% in February and April, respectively). Notably, while only less vulnerable students might have

remained in school in August, such family characteristics are likely to be orthogonal to the treatment status, which


 34 See   also http://reliefweb.int/disaster/fl-2014-000117-bgd for the ﬂood issues.


                                                                38
is uncorrelated with the exogenous climate shock. Second, the school operation interrupted during the ﬂood settled

down immediately after the water receded in September. Third, the residents of Char areas are quite accustomed to

this monsoon-based ﬂash ﬂooding as well as to the associated temporary displacement that occurs regularly in these

areas.

    Finally, to mitigate this concern of the ﬂood eﬀect, we also made every eﬀort to collect children’s scores on the mid-

term examination, a non-mandatory exam that aims to conduct a learning regularity check on the enrolled students,

which was held in June 2014 before the ﬂoods occurred. Table S.34 in this supplemental appendix reports the treatment

eﬀects of solar products on the test scores of each subject (GPA z-scores). Unfortunately, the relevant information

could only be collected from some of the sample students.35 Acknowledging a sample selection problem that might

have aﬀected the estimation results for this reason, our headline ﬁnding – “no academic performance eﬀects” of solar

lanterns – remains the same.



S.3.4      Multiple-hypothesis testing

In this study exploring the impacts of two treatment arms on multiple outcomes, we may accidentally have found

statistically signiﬁcant treatment eﬀects for some arms and outcomes, even where true causal eﬀects were absent (e.g.,

List et al., 2015). While this concern about multiple-hypothesis testing does not aﬀect the key ﬁnding, “no academic

performance eﬀects,” it is still important to consider this issue for the remaining outcomes.

    Two common approaches exist to address the multiple-inference problem (e.g., Schochet, 2008). The ﬁrst is to

reduce the number of tests being performed. Accordingly, we merged two treatment arms into one, re-examining only

the selected outcomes reported in Table S.35 in this supplemental appendix. Moving up to the next grade may be

seen as a summary index that reﬂects all test scores [columns (a)―(b)]. In addition, when analyzing the average hours

of use of lighting products, rainy and oﬀ-rainy seasons are aggregated into one season [columns (c)―(e)]. The three

school visits in February, April, and August are also jointly analyzed in column (n), as they were in columns (d) and

(h) in Table 6 in the article. This procedure resulted in 14 tests being conducted in Table S.35.

    The second approach is to adjust the p-values. Table S.35 reports the (pooled) treatment eﬀects, the original

p-values, and the adjusted p-values estimated using a well-known Bonferroni procedure and Holm (1979)’s step-

down adjustment procedure.36 Since these procedures do not account for a dependency structure across tests when

controlling a familywise error rate, they tend to reveal low statistical power.3738 Nevertheless, signiﬁcant solar impacts

  35 The relevant information was available only for 5th ―8th grade students at one school and 4th grade students in all the primary schools,

who attended the examinations.
  36 We exploited a Stata command qqvalue developed by Newson (2010) to calculate these adjusted p-values.
  37 An alternative approach is to control the false discovery rate (e.g., Anderson, 2008; Benjamini et al., 2006). Controlling the familywise

error rate is a more conservative approach than controlling the false discovery rate.
  38 As an approach to controlling the familywise error rate becomes more conservative, it loses more statistical power (e.g., Blakesley

et al., 2009; Sankoh et al., 1997).


                                                                     39
are observed in relation to the time spent using kerosene lanterns/lamps, kerosene-related and total expenditure, study

time at home, and school attendance. Overall, the previous ﬁndings are robust in their consideration of multiple-

hypothesis testing.




S.4      Supplemental ﬁgures and tables

Figures and tables provided in this supplemental appendix are as follows.


   • Figure S.1: Product pictures.


   • Figure S.2: Timeline of interventions and surveys.


   • Figure S.3: Sample of a time diary.


   • Table S.1: The number of students selected in each screening process.


   • Table S.2: Summary statistics at baseline.


   • Table S.3 and Table S.4: Balance tests across treatment conditions.


   • Table S.5 to Table S.11: Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects on children’s educational achievement.


   • Table S.12: Impacts on households’ willingness to buy solar products.


   • Table S.13: In this table, we disaggregated treatment eﬀects on students’ time spent on “other activities” (that

      were examined in columns (f) and (l) in Table 5 in the article) into “sports,” “cooking and bathing,” “household

      chores,” and “other activities, including sleeping and rest.”


   • Table S.14: By treatment arms, this table provides similar information to that reported in Table 1 in the article,

      collected during a follow-up household survey.


   • Table S.15: Cost-eﬀectiveness of solar lanterns on school attendance.


   • Table S.16: Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects on children’s educational inputs.


   • Table S.17 to Table S.19: In these tables, a similar analysis to that conducted for students’ progression to the

      next grade in Table 7 in the article was performed to examine the relationship between educational inputs and

      GPA scores.


   • Table S.20 to Table S.26: Complementarity between solar lamps and school inputs in explaining children’s

      educational achievement.


                                                           40
   • Table S.27: Estimating non-attrition probability.


   • Table S.28: Lee (2009)’s 95% conﬁdence intervals of the treatment eﬀects.


   • Table S.29 to Table S.33: Checking on spillover eﬀects on children’s educational achievement.


   • Table S.34: Impacts on children’s mid-term examination results.


   • Table S.35: Checking on multiple-hypothesis testing.




References

Anderson, M. L., December 2008. Multiple inference and gender diﬀerences in the eﬀects of early intervention: A

  reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry preschool, and early training projects. Journal of the American Statistical

  Association 103 (484), 1481–1495.

                                     ¨
Baird, S., Bohren, A., McIntosh, C., Ozler, B., March 2014. Designing experiments to measure spillover eﬀects. Policy

  Research Working Paper 6824, World Bank, Development Research Group, Poverty Inequality Team.


Benjamini, Y., Krieger, A. M., Yekutieli, D., September 2006. Adaptive linear step-up procedures that control the

  false discovery rate. Biometrika 93 (3), 491–507.


Blakesley, R. E., Mazumdar, S., Dew, M. A., Houck, P. R., Tang, G., III, C. F. R., Butters, M. A., March 2009.

  Comparisons of methods for multiple hypothesis testing in neuropsychological research. Neuropsychology 23 (2),

  255–264.


Dhaliwal, I., Duﬂo, E., Glennerster, R., Tulloch, C., 2013. Comparative Cost-Eﬀectiveness Analysis to Inform Policy

  in Developing Countries: A General Framework with Applications for Education. University Of Chicago Press.,

  Chapter 8 in Education Policy in Developing Countries, edited by Paul Glewwe.


Evans, D., Kremer, M., Ngatia, M., 2008. The impact of distributing school uniforms on children’s education in

  Kenya.Washington, DC: Mimeo, World Bank.


Evans, D. K., Popova, A., January 2016. Cost-eﬀectiveness analysis in development: Accounting for local costs and

  noisy impacts. World Development 77, 262–276.


Furukawa, C., 2014. Do solar lamps help children study? contrary evidence from a pilot study in Uganda. Journal of

  Development Studies 50 (2), 319–341.




                                                         41
Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., Moulin, S., 2009. Many children left behind? textbooks and test scores in Kenya. American

  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (1), 112–135.


Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., Moulin, S., Zitzewitz, E., June 2004. Restrospective vs. prospective analyses of school inputs:

  The case of ﬂip charts in Kenya. Journal of Development Economics 74 (1), 251–268.


Holm, S., 1979. Simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 6 (2), 65–70.


Lee, D. S., 2009. Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treatment eﬀects. Review of

  Economic Studies 76 (3), 1071–1102.


List, J., Shaikh, A. M., Xu, Y., December 2015. Multiple hypothesis testing in experimental economics. mimeo.


Martin, R., September 2014. 2014 strategic response plan: Bangladesh (northwest ﬂood). WFP.


Miguel, E., Kremer, M., January 2004. Worms: Identifying impacts on education and health in the presence of

  treatment externalities. Econometrica 72 (1), 159–217.


Mo, D., Swinnen, J., Zhang, L., Yi, H., Qu, Q., Boswell, M., Rozelle, S., June 2013. Can one-to-one computing narrow

  the digital divide and the education gap in China? the case of Beijing migrant schools. World Development 46,

  14–29.


Newson, R. B., 2010. Frequentist q-values for multiple-test procedures. The Stata Journal 10 (4), 568–584.


Oster, E., Thornton, R., December 2012. Determinants of technology adoption: Peer eﬀects in menstrual cup take-up.

  Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (6), 1263–1293.


Sankoh, A. J., Huque, M. F., Dubey, S. D., November 1997. Some comments on frequently used multiple endpoint

  adjustment methods in clinical trials. Statistics in Medicine 16 (22), 2529–2542.


Schochet, P. Z., May 2008. Technical methods report: Guidelines for multiple testing in impact evaluations. NCEE

  2008-4018, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.

  Department of Education.


Stinebrickner, T., Stinebrickner, R., June 2008. The causal eﬀect of studying on academic performance. BE Journal

  of Economic Analysis & Policy 8 (1), 1–55.




                                                           42
                                                   Figure S.1: Product pictures
Note: The S250, S10, and S2 are displayed in order from the left.




                                                                    43
Figure S.2: Timeline of interventions and surveys




                       44
Figure S.3: Sample of a time diary




               45
                    Table S.1: The number of students selected in each screening process
School                    No. of                                 No. of students
(grade)                   schools enrolled initially eventually in our treated treated          controlled
                                              eligible  eligible      study (all)       (one)
Primary (4th to 5th )     12        823       638       452           438      120      98      220
Junior high (6th to 8th ) 5         842       654       459           444      128      100     216
Total                     17        1665      1292      911           882      248      198     436




                                                   46
                                 Table S.2: Summary statistics (baseline)
                         Treatment A           Treatment B             Control               All
                       (248 households)      (198 households)     (436 households)
                       Mean      Std.        Mean      Std.       Mean      Std.     Mean          Std.
Panel A: Student-level variables (one sample student from each household)
Age (years)            12.34 1.55            12.46 1.61           12.36 1.46         12.38         1.52
Male (dummy)           0.41    0.49          0.42    0.49         0.45    0.49       0.43          0.49
Education (years)      4.64    1.38          4.63    1.42         4.59    1.39       4.61          1.39
Panel B: Household-level variables
Household size         4.94    1.37          4.78    1.10         4.94    1.30       4.90          1.28
No. of males           2.40    1.14          2.30    0.98         2.49    1.12       2.42          1.10
Head age (years)       41.84 9.19            41.98 8.10           41.67 8.49         41.79         8.60
Head education (years) 1.18    2.66          1.19    2.79         1.34    2.94       1.26          2.83
Head male (dummy)      0.91    0.27          0.92    0.25         0.91    0.28       0.91          0.27
Land size (decimal)    10.32 34.58           10.47 21.02          9.82    22.12      10.11         25.99




                                                    47
                                    Table S.3: Balance test across treatment conditions
                                     Treatment A             Treatment B      R-sqd.    No.
        Dependent variables:   Coeﬃcient Std. errors   Coeﬃcient Std. errors          of obs.
        Panel A: Student-level variables (one experimented student for one household)
        Age (years)            -0.020      (0.145)     0.098       (0.134)    0.002   882
        Male (dummy)           -0.045      (0.052)     -0.027      (0.043)    0.000   882
        Education (years)      0.051       (0.096)     0.037       (0.115)    0.002   882
        Panel B: Household-level variables
        Household size         0.007       (0.088)     -0.152**    (0.061)    0.003   882
        No. of males           -0.084      (0.069)     -0.183**    (0.076)    0.004   882
        Head age (years)       0.175       (0.690)     0.318       (0.699)    0.000   882
        Head education (years) -0.159      (0.242)     -0.147      (0.222)    0.001   882
        Head male (dummy)      0.005       (0.028)     0.019       (0.023)    0.001   882
        Land size (decimal)    0.495       (2.781)     0.647       (1.837)    0.000   882

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each village.




                                                                48
                          Table S.4: Additional balance tests across treatment conditions (OLS)

          Dependent variables:                    One if             One if          One if              One if
                                                  Treatment A        Treatment B     Treatment A         any treatment
          Sample:                                 Treatment A        Treatment B     Treatment A         All
                                                  & Control          & Control       & Treatment B
                                                       (a)                (b)               (c)                (d)
          Age                                     -0.016             0.012           -0.027              -0.004
                                                  (0.019)            (0.019)         (0.020)             (0.017)
          Education                               0.019              -0.002          0.020               0.011
          (years)                                 (0.012)            (0.019)         (0.020)             (0.014)
          Male                                    -0.020             0.015           -0.033              -0.004
          (dummy)                                 (0.050)            (0.046)         (0.040)             (0.050)
          Household size                          0.007              -0.014          0.019               -0.002
                                                  (0.021)            (0.018)         (0.020)             (0.019)
          No. of male members                     -0.022             -0.037          0.020               -0.033
                                                  (0.024)            (0.023)         (0.028)             (0.022)
          Head age                                0.000              0.001           -0.000              0.001
          (years)                                 (0.002)            (0.002)         (0.003)             (0.002)
          Head education                          -0.005             -0.004          -0.000              -0.006
          (years)                                 (0.007)            (0.006)         (0.008)             (0.006)
          Head male                               0.022              0.105           -0.092              0.065
          (dummy)                                 (0.091)            (0.067)         (0.116)             (0.069)
          Land size                               0.000              0.000           -0.000              0.000
          (decimal)                               (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.001)             (0.001)
          All coeﬃcients = zero (p-values)        0.724              0.011           0.119               0.323
          R-squared                               0.005              0.013           0.010               0.007
          No. of obs.                             684                634             446                 882

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each village.




                                                                49
                       Table S.5: Impacts on children’s educational achievement: heterogeneity (OLS)
Dependent variable:                                                      One if pass
X:                       Age          Education     Male        Household No. of            Head       Head          Head       Land
                                                                size        male            age        education     male       size
                                                                            members
                            (1a)         (1b)         (1c)          (1d)       (1e)           (1f)        (1g)        (1h)        (1i)
December in 2013
All products             -0.314       0.013         0.046       0.036          0.097        0.113      0.022         0.076      0.035
                         (0.284)      (0.115)       (0.041)     (0.121)        (0.071)      (0.172)    (0.036)       (0.095)    (0.034)
One product              -0.043       0.047         -0.022      0.059          0.097*       -0.010     -0.004        0.045      0.010
                         (0.245)      (0.091)       (0.047)     (0.119)        (0.057)      (0.149)    (0.029)       (0.123)    (0.025)
All products × X         0.027        0.002         -0.056      -0.003         -0.030       -0.002     0.000         -0.059     -0.001
                         (0.022)      (0.021)       (0.061)     (0.022)        (0.026)      (0.004)    (0.014)       (0.098)    (0.001)
One product × X          0.003        -0.011        0.046       -0.013         -0.043*      0.000      0.001         -0.053     -0.001
                         (0.020)      (0.022)       (0.065)     (0.026)        (0.025)      (0.004)    (0.012)       (0.136)    (0.002)
R-squared                0.326        0.325         0.326       0.325          0.327        0.325      0.325         0.325      0.326
No. of obs.              850          850           850         850            850          850        850           850        850
                           (2a)          (2b)         (2c)         (2d)           (2e)        (2f)        (2g)         (2h)       (2i)
December in 2014
All products             -0.701**     -0.253*       0.016       -0.309*        0.004        -0.123     -0.094*       -0.022     -0.054
                         (0.289)      (0.128)       (0.053)     (0.168)        (0.093)      (0.175)    (0.047)       (0.147)    (0.050)
One product              -0.281       -0.019        -0.020      -0.073         0.043        -0.207     -0.043        0.011      -0.042
                         (0.309)      (0.126)       (0.052)     (0.152)        (0.098)      (0.223)    (0.039)       (0.173)    (0.042)
All products × X         0.052**      0.042         -0.173*     0.051*         -0.025       0.002      0.028*        -0.039     -0.000
                         (0.023)      (0.028)       (0.093)     (0.030)        (0.032)      (0.004)    (0.015)       (0.143)    (0.001)
One product × X          0.021        -0.001        -0.005      0.010          -0.028       0.004      0.013         -0.039     0.002
                         (0.024)      (0.023)       (0.068)     (0.031)        (0.038)      (0.005)    (0.013)       (0.187)    (0.002)
R-squared                0.150        0.148         0.151       0.149          0.146        0.146      0.150         0.145      0.147
No. of obs.              845          845           845         845            845          845        845           845        845
Baseline control         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
School FE                Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Village FE               Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes

 Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
 heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
 (dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                      50
                Table S.6: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - Bengali: heterogeneity (OLS)
Dependent variable:                                                 Bengali: GPA z-scores
X:                       Age        Education      Male       Household No. of         Head          Head          Head       Land
                                                              size           male      age           education     male       size
                                                                             members
                           (1a)        (1b)         (1c)          (1d)         (1e)      (1f)           (1g)         (1h)       (1i)
December in 2013
All products             -0.208     0.184          -0.115     0.359          0.274        0.361      -0.036        0.289      -0.048
                         (0.777)    (0.312)        (0.105)    (0.280)        (0.188)      (0.405)    (0.095)       (0.258)    (0.092)
One product              -0.005     0.284          -0.013     0.195          0.064        -0.581*    0.046         0.222      0.017
                         (0.800)    (0.300)        (0.111)    (0.283)        (0.199)      (0.330)    (0.086)       (0.224)    (0.094)
All products × X         0.013      -0.050         0.161      -0.082         -0.132*      -0.010     -0.008        -0.368     0.000
                         (0.060)    (0.059)        (0.176)    (0.052)        (0.071)      (0.009)    (0.036)       (0.265)    (0.002)
One product × X          0.002      -0.057         0.082      -0.035         -0.015       0.014*     -0.018        -0.217     0.001
                         (0.065)    (0.064)        (0.148)    (0.053)        (0.073)      (0.007)    (0.031)       (0.227)    (0.003)
R-squared                0.257      0.258          0.258      0.259          0.261        0.262      0.257         0.259      0.257
No. of obs.              850        850            850        850            850          850        850           850        850
                           (2a)        (2b)          (2c)        (2d)           (2e)        (2f)        (2g)         (2h)       (2i)
December in 2014
All products             -0.491     -0.185         -0.015     -0.644*        -0.106       0.107      -0.106        -0.483     -0.109
                         (0.541)    (0.292)        (0.088)    (0.348)        (0.172)      (0.375)    (0.092)       (0.355)    (0.089)
One product              0.054      0.385          0.073      0.175          0.142        0.237      0.074         -0.020     0.029
                         (0.712)    (0.340)        (0.091)    (0.310)        (0.195)      (0.494)    (0.104)       (0.334)    (0.101)
All products × X         0.033      0.021          -0.163     0.113*         0.009        -0.005     0.017         0.436      0.002
                         (0.044)    (0.058)        (0.188)    (0.062)        (0.061)      (0.009)    (0.030)       (0.343)    (0.003)
One product × X          0.000      -0.071         -0.037     -0.026         -0.037       -0.004     -0.017        0.085      0.003
                         (0.057)    (0.069)        (0.200)    (0.059)        (0.082)      (0.012)    (0.034)       (0.361)    (0.004)
R-squared                0.114      0.116          0.115      0.119          0.114        0.114      0.115         0.117      0.115
No. of obs.              846        846            846        846            846          846        846           846        846
Baseline control         Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
School FE                Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Village FE               Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     51
                   Table S.7: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - English: heterogeneity (OLS)
Dependent variable:                                                  English: GPA z-scores
X:                       Age          Education      Male       Household No. of         Head          Head          Head       Land
                                                                size          male       age           education     male       size
                                                                              members
                            (1a)         (1b)         (1c)          (1d)        (1e)       (1f)           (1g)        (1h)        (1i)
December in 2013
All products             -1.398**     -0.320         -0.076     0.118         0.145         0.437      -0.072        -0.019     -0.070
                         (0.580)      (0.245)        (0.075)    (0.243)       (0.151)       (0.340)    (0.065)       (0.215)    (0.064)
One product              -0.923       -0.322         -0.099     0.197         0.059         -0.105     -0.132*       -0.327     -0.099
                         (0.564)      (0.228)        (0.097)    (0.337)       (0.160)       (0.330)    (0.076)       (0.223)    (0.074)
All products × X         0.109**      0.058          0.051      -0.035        -0.083        -0.012     0.013         -0.040     0.001
                         (0.045)      (0.047)        (0.157)    (0.044)       (0.062)       (0.008)    (0.031)       (0.231)    (0.002)
One product × X          0.064        0.041          -0.088     -0.069        -0.082        -0.001     -0.004        0.208      -0.003
                         (0.047)      (0.053)        (0.142)    (0.069)       (0.066)       (0.008)    (0.035)       (0.241)    (0.005)
R-squared                0.258        0.254          0.254      0.254         0.255         0.255      0.254         0.254      0.255
No. of obs.              850          850            850        850           850           850        850           850        850
                           (2a)          (2b)          (2c)        (2d)          (2e)         (2f)        (2g)         (2h)       (2i)
December in 2014
All products             -0.327       0.099          0.014      -0.424        0.015         -0.099     -0.079        -0.344     -0.044
                         (0.563)      (0.294)        (0.081)    (0.366)       (0.197)       (0.311)    (0.094)       (0.352)    (0.089)
One product              0.557        0.398          0.034      0.070         0.183         0.255      0.026         -0.244     0.056
                         (0.646)      (0.274)        (0.104)    (0.331)       (0.175)       (0.377)    (0.091)       (0.279)    (0.100)
All products × X         0.024        -0.030         -0.115     0.078         -0.020        0.002      0.035         0.339      0.001
                         (0.045)      (0.062)        (0.178)    (0.065)       (0.069)       (0.007)    (0.034)       (0.340)    (0.002)
One product × X          -0.041       -0.078         0.022      -0.006        -0.060        -0.005     0.010         0.313      -0.001
                         (0.050)      (0.055)        (0.169)    (0.068)       (0.072)       (0.009)    (0.036)       (0.280)    (0.004)
R-squared                0.100        0.100          0.099      0.101         0.099         0.099      0.100         0.101      0.099
No. of obs.              846          846            846        846           846           846        846           846        846
Baseline control         Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
School FE                Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Village FE               Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes

 Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
 heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
 (dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                      52
                   Table S.8: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - Math: heterogeneity (OLS)
Dependent variable:                                                 Math: GPA z-scores
X:                       Age        Education      Male       Household No. of       Head            Head          Head       Land
                                                              size        male       age             education     male       size
                                                                          members
                           (1a)         (1b)         (1c)         (1d)      (1e)       (1f)             (1g)         (1h)       (1i)
December in 2013
All products             -0.981*    -0.126         -0.130     0.297          0.105        0.233      -0.030        0.055      -0.034
                         (0.556)    (0.198)        (0.084)    (0.222)        (0.144)      (0.370)    (0.062)       (0.222)    (0.066)
One product              -0.048     0.103          -0.063     -0.055         -0.026       -0.302     -0.050        -0.114     -0.026
                         (0.657)    (0.243)        (0.090)    (0.316)        (0.165)      (0.349)    (0.077)       (0.239)    (0.067)
All products × X         0.076*     0.018          0.212*     -0.068         -0.060       -0.007     -0.008        -0.105     -0.001
                         (0.045)    (0.041)        (0.121)    (0.044)        (0.051)      (0.008)    (0.028)       (0.227)    (0.001)
One product × X          -0.003     -0.041         -0.060     -0.006         -0.025       0.005      -0.030        0.029      -0.006
                         (0.053)    (0.051)        (0.133)    (0.064)        (0.067)      (0.008)    (0.028)       (0.263)    (0.004)
R-squared                0.392      0.390          0.391      0.390          0.390        0.390      0.390         0.389      0.391
No. of obs.              850        850            850        850            850          850        850           850        850
                           (2a)        (2b)          (2c)        (2d)           (2e)        (2f)        (2g)         (2h)       (2i)
December in 2014
All products             -0.633     -0.108         0.028      -0.697*        -0.083       -0.092     -0.138        -0.429     -0.132
                         (0.532)    (0.255)        (0.090)    (0.385)        (0.171)      (0.406)    (0.104)       (0.316)    (0.097)
One product              0.089      0.435          -0.023     -0.076         0.047        -0.362     0.054         -0.275     0.023
                         (0.675)    (0.292)        (0.093)    (0.368)        (0.226)      (0.522)    (0.095)       (0.358)    (0.097)
All products × X         0.043      0.001          -0.308*    0.120*         -0.008       -0.000     0.030         0.361      0.003
                         (0.041)    (0.047)        (0.156)    (0.067)        (0.056)      (0.010)    (0.031)       (0.320)    (0.002)
One product × X          -0.004     -0.086         0.152      0.023          -0.003       0.010      -0.016        0.343      0.002
                         (0.053)    (0.058)        (0.186)    (0.074)        (0.096)      (0.012)    (0.030)       (0.367)    (0.004)
R-squared                0.162      0.164          0.168      0.166          0.162        0.163      0.163         0.164      0.163
No. of obs.              846        846            846        846            846          846        846           846        846
Baseline control         Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
School FE                Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Village FE               Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     53
              Table S.9: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - General science: heterogeneity (OLS)
Dependent variable:                                             General science: GPA z-scores
X:                       Age          Education     Male        Household No. of        Head           Head          Head       Land
                                                                size         male       age            education     male       size
                                                                             members
                            (1a)         (1b)         (1c)          (1d)        (1e)     (1f)             (1g)        (1h)        (1i)
December in 2013
All products             -0.428       0.156         -0.009      0.234         0.206         0.383      0.067         0.068      0.029
                         (0.675)      (0.305)       (0.095)     (0.263)       (0.172)       (0.414)    (0.086)       (0.224)    (0.084)
One product              0.675        0.259         0.017       0.003         0.007         -0.049     0.025         0.056      0.029
                         (0.675)      (0.283)       (0.091)     (0.296)       (0.161)       (0.363)    (0.075)       (0.204)    (0.083)
All products × X         0.039        -0.023        0.144       -0.037        -0.064        -0.008     -0.012        -0.018     0.002
                         (0.052)      (0.058)       (0.126)     (0.048)       (0.056)       (0.010)    (0.034)       (0.234)    (0.002)
One product × X          -0.051       -0.048        0.042       0.007         0.014         0.002      0.011         -0.021     0.001
                         (0.053)      (0.055)       (0.151)     (0.057)       (0.063)       (0.008)    (0.035)       (0.206)    (0.003)
R-squared                0.299        0.298         0.298       0.298         0.298         0.298      0.297         0.297      0.298
No. of obs.              850          850           850         850           850           850        850           850        850
                           (2a)          (2b)         (2c)         (2d)          (2e)         (2f)        (2g)         (2h)       (2i)
December in 2014
All products             -1.166**     -0.303        -0.041      -0.558        -0.080        0.318      -0.132        -0.411     -0.115
                         (0.455)      (0.259)       (0.096)     (0.353)       (0.178)       (0.309)    (0.093)       (0.323)    (0.085)
One product              -0.566       0.083         -0.077      -0.084        -0.035        0.076      -0.077        -0.458*    -0.059
                         (0.671)      (0.305)       (0.116)     (0.346)       (0.207)       (0.463)    (0.112)       (0.254)    (0.104)
All products × X         0.086**      0.044         -0.143      0.092         -0.009        -0.010     0.023         0.341      0.001
                         (0.039)      (0.056)       (0.173)     (0.066)       (0.068)       (0.007)    (0.033)       (0.313)    (0.002)
One product × X          0.041        -0.031        0.037       0.004         -0.012        -0.003     0.010         0.432      -0.000
                         (0.053)      (0.059)       (0.175)     (0.069)       (0.085)       (0.011)    (0.035)       (0.280)    (0.003)
R-squared                0.151        0.150         0.149       0.151         0.148         0.149      0.149         0.151      0.148
No. of obs.              846          846           846         846           846           846        846           846        846
Baseline control         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
School FE                Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Village FE               Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes

 Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
 heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
 (dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                      54
              Table S.10: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - Islam studies: heterogeneity (OLS)
Dependent variable:                                             Islam studies: GPA z-scores
X:                       Age        Education      Male       Household No. of        Head           Head          Head       Land
                                                              size         male       age            education     male       size
                                                                           members
                           (1a)         (1b)         (1c)         (1d)        (1e)      (1f)            (1g)         (1h)       (1i)
December in 2013
All products             0.093      0.234          -0.048     0.304          0.181        0.358      0.038         0.288      0.062
                         (0.699)    (0.290)        (0.112)    (0.280)        (0.177)      (0.402)    (0.088)       (0.237)    (0.087)
One product              0.888      0.560*         -0.072     0.144          -0.020       -0.295     -0.004        0.265      0.076
                         (0.667)    (0.279)        (0.098)    (0.347)        (0.171)      (0.397)    (0.082)       (0.203)    (0.077)
All products × X         -0.003     -0.040         0.239      -0.050         -0.052       -0.007     0.013         -0.256     -0.001
                         (0.055)    (0.057)        (0.156)    (0.050)        (0.063)      (0.009)    (0.028)       (0.242)    (0.001)
One product × X          -0.070     -0.118*        0.209      -0.025         0.018        0.008      0.019         -0.268     -0.005
                         (0.054)    (0.062)        (0.140)    (0.071)        (0.072)      (0.009)    (0.039)       (0.200)    (0.003)
R-squared                0.259      0.261          0.260      0.258          0.258        0.259      0.258         0.258      0.259
No. of obs.              850        850            850        850            850          850        850           850        850
                           (2a)        (2b)          (2c)        (2d)           (2e)        (2f)        (2g)         (2h)       (2i)
December in 2014
All products             -0.928*    -0.225         0.059      -0.568         0.040        0.380      -0.085        -0.387     -0.085
                         (0.527)    (0.274)        (0.095)    (0.355)        (0.172)      (0.326)    (0.105)       (0.280)    (0.097)
One product              0.353      0.309          0.041      0.236          0.101        0.329      0.033         -0.340     0.013
                         (0.611)    (0.307)        (0.117)    (0.337)        (0.200)      (0.469)    (0.115)       (0.345)    (0.116)
All products × X         0.070      0.036          -0.278     0.103          -0.041       -0.011     0.020         0.361      0.003
                         (0.043)    (0.054)        (0.169)    (0.065)        (0.062)      (0.008)    (0.029)       (0.280)    (0.003)
One product × X          -0.025     -0.058         0.006      -0.041         -0.025       -0.007     0.005         0.416      0.003
                         (0.048)    (0.060)        (0.195)    (0.065)        (0.081)      (0.011)    (0.034)       (0.371)    (0.005)
R-squared                0.110      0.109          0.111      0.112          0.108        0.109      0.108         0.110      0.108
No. of obs.              846        846            846        846            846          846        846           846        846
Baseline control         Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
School FE                Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Village FE               Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     55
    Table S.11: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - Bangladesh general studies: heterogeneity (OLS)
Dependent variable:                                    Bangladesh general studies: GPA z-scores
X:                       Age        Education      Male    Household No. of         Head     Head                  Head       Land
                                                           size         male        age      education             male       size
                                                                        members
                           (1a)         (1b)        (1c)       (1d)        (1e)      (1f)       (1g)                 (1h)       (1i)
December in 2013
All products             -0.337     0.082          -0.021     0.236          0.131        0.272      0.085         0.089      0.055
                         (0.519)    (0.220)        (0.072)    (0.258)        (0.153)      (0.405)    (0.078)       (0.195)    (0.072)
One product              0.531      0.438          0.048      0.259          -0.017       -0.145     0.117         -0.038     0.118
                         (0.686)    (0.338)        (0.099)    (0.330)        (0.163)      (0.341)    (0.084)       (0.229)    (0.099)
All products × X         0.033      -0.004         0.202      -0.034         -0.027       -0.005     -0.015        -0.025     0.001
                         (0.041)    (0.042)        (0.134)    (0.050)        (0.059)      (0.010)    (0.030)       (0.209)    (0.002)
One product × X          -0.033     -0.069         0.167      -0.028         0.060        0.006      0.005         0.173      0.000
                         (0.055)    (0.069)        (0.146)    (0.062)        (0.061)      (0.008)    (0.038)       (0.237)    (0.003)
R-squared                0.271      0.271          0.272      0.270          0.271        0.271      0.270         0.270      0.270
No. of obs.              850        850            850        850            850          850        850           850        850
                           (2a)        (2b)          (2c)        (2d)           (2e)        (2f)        (2g)         (2h)       (2i)
December in 2014
All products             -0.864     -0.324         -0.020     -0.287         0.033        0.125      -0.155        -0.355     -0.144
                         (0.647)    (0.306)        (0.103)    (0.309)        (0.190)      (0.338)    (0.104)       (0.283)    (0.096)
One product              0.179      0.365          -0.020     0.457          0.183        0.480      -0.008        0.046      -0.017
                         (0.730)    (0.329)        (0.115)    (0.330)        (0.176)      (0.480)    (0.099)       (0.381)    (0.100)
All products × X         0.060      0.042          -0.251     0.032          -0.065       -0.006     0.023         0.250      0.002
                         (0.051)    (0.060)        (0.162)    (0.053)        (0.065)      (0.008)    (0.030)       (0.270)    (0.003)
One product × X          -0.016     -0.084         0.001      -0.100         -0.087       -0.012     -0.013        -0.073     -0.000
                         (0.057)    (0.067)        (0.206)    (0.065)        (0.076)      (0.011)    (0.029)       (0.395)    (0.003)
R-squared                0.129      0.131          0.130      0.130          0.129        0.128      0.128         0.128      0.128
No. of obs.              846        846            846        846            846          846        846           846        846
Baseline control         Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
School FE                Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Village FE               Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     56
                       Table S.12: Impacts on households’ willingness to buy solar products (OLS)
                        Dependent variable:                     One if willing to buy
                                                   any            S2          S10      S250
                                                   solar
                                                   products
                        Sample:                       All         Those that were willing to buy
                                                      (a)            (b)         (c)      (d)
                        With no HH baseline control
                        All products               0.416***       0.198*** 0.148** 0.094**
                                                   (0.062)        (0.062)     (0.060) (0.044)
                        One product                0.361***       0.043       0.038    0.090*
                                                   (0.065)        (0.061)     (0.061) (0.047)
                        All = one (p-values)       0.170          0.014       0.047    0.793
                        All + one = 0 (p-values) 0.000            0.031       0.096    0.048
                        R-squared                  0.246          0.187       0.177    0.087
                        No. of obs.                847            492         492      492
                                                      (e)            (f)        (g)        (i)
                        With HH baseline control
                        All products               0.420***       0.199*** 0.146** 0.093**
                                                   (0.061)        (0.064)     (0.058) (0.045)
                        One product                0.365***       0.049       0.041    0.091*
                                                   (0.063)        (0.061)     (0.060) (0.046)
                        All = one (p-values)       0.180          0.011       0.044    0.886
                        All + one = 0 (p-values) 0.000            0.032       0.088    0.048
                        R-squared                  0.255          0.197       0.189    0.094
                        No. of obs.                847            492         492      492
                        Village FE                 Yes            Yes         Yes      Yes
                        Mean y (control)           0.378          0.094       0.113    0.886

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each village. (3) The baseline controls include household size; no. of males; head age
(years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                  57
                              Table S.13: Impacts on children’s time use: other activities (OLS)
                             Dependent var.          Per-day minutes (average from Sep 2013
                                                     to Apr 2014) spent on:
                                                     Sports Cooking        Household Other
                                                                and bath chores
                                                       (a)         (b)         (c)           (d)
                             With no baseline controls
                             All products            -0.811     0.130      3.821          -7.672
                                                     (2.196) (1.843)       (4.686)        (11.285)
                             One product             0.958      -2.127     7.523          -11.918
                                                     (2.636) (2.005)       (5.449)        (12.838)
                             All = one (p-val.)      0.558      0.311      0.316          0.665
                             All + one = 0 (p-val.) 0.969       0.531      0.239          0.381
                             R-squared               0.213      0.228      0.159          0.391
                             No. of obs.             620        620        620            620
                                                       (e)          (f)        (g)           (h)
                             With baseline controls
                             All products            0.108      -0.945     3.589          -7.719
                                                     (2.297) (1.899)       (4.670)        (10.812)
                             One product             1.474      -2.325     7.516          -14.044
                                                     (2.590) (1.945)       (5.342)        (12.483)
                             All = one (p-val.)      0.655      0.544      0.315          0.574
                             All + one = 0 (p-val.) 0.682       0.299      0.237          0.295
                             R-squared               0.250      0.284      0.173          0.402
                             No. of obs.             620        620        620            620
                             School FE               Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes
                             Village FE              Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes
                             Mean y (control)        67.28      71.10      123.75         585.46

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     58
                                      Table S.14: Information on lighting sources at follow-up

Panel A: No. of light sources (852 households)
                                Treatment A                          Treatment B                             Control
                           Mean        Std.                     Mean        Std.                      Mean        Std.
Flashlight                 0.04        0.20                     0.10        0.31                      0.12        0.33
Kerosene lanterns          0.02        0.15                     0.07        0.30                      0.27        0.48
Kerosene lamps             0.31        0.61                     1.14        0.61                      1.66        0.83

Panel B: Per-day hours using light sources based on family questionnaires, not a time diary (852 households)
                                  Treatment A                      Treatment B                         Control
                             Mean        Std.                 Mean        Std.                    Mean       Std.
Flashlight (rainy)           0.09        0.52                 0.25        0.77                    0.31       0.90
Flashlight (oﬀ-rainy)        0.13        0.68                 0.41        1.24                    0.46       1.28
Kerosene lanterns (rainy)    0.06        0.42                 0.21        0.91                    0.76       1.39
Kerosene lanterns (oﬀ-rainy) 0.07        0.46                 0.25        1.05                    0.97       1.73
Kerosene lamps (rainy)       0.58        1.22                 2.75        1.97                    4.26       2.03
Kerosene lamps (oﬀ-rainy)    0.77        1.69                 3.57        2.48                    5.19       2.41
S2 (rainy)                   2.12        0.85                 -           -                       -          -
S2 (oﬀ-rainy)                2.76        0.84                 -           -                       -          -
S10 (rainy)                  2.30        0.81                 -           -                       -          -
S10 (oﬀ-rainy)               2.92        0.74                 -           -                       -          -
S250 (rainy)                 2.38        0.87                 2.86        0.85                    -          -
S250 (oﬀ-rainy)              3.09        0.82                 3.17        0.69                    -          -

Panel C: Expenditures (in Bangladesh Taka, BDT)
                               Treatment A                           Treatment B                             Control
                          Mean        Std.                      Mean        Std.                      Mean        Std.
Food (12 mth)             61558.06    20218.79                  61218.47    18070.34                  63414.54    19610.40
School fees (6 mth)       3196.00     1901.03                   3196.26     2035.94                   3105.54     1859.43
Medical fees (12 mth)     1891.12     1589.65                   2045.54     2040.55                   2265.76     4747.81
Kerosene (12 mth)         134.65      358.85                    787.61      587.00                    1542.79     912.75
Other non-food (12 mth)   10537.33    3420.76                   10757.64    2847.53                   10755.38    3285.35

Panel D: Major activities by light sources
                                       Treatment A                           Treatment B                           Control
                             Flashlight Kerosene     Kerosene   Flashlight     Kerosene    Kerosene   Flashlight   Kerosene   Kerosene
                                         lanterns    lamps                     lanterns    lamps                   lanterns   lamps
Reading/studying             0.10        0.50        0.54       -              0.84        0.48       0.14         0.97       0.89
Social interaction           -           0.16        0.06       0.19           0.07        0.17       0.32         0.08       0.17
Cooking/eating at night      -           0.16        0.68       -              0.61        0.84       0.06         0.43       0.94
Walking outside at night     0.90        0.66        0.40       0.85           0.38        0.58       0.84         0.33       0.71
Tending livestock            -           0.16        0.06       0.14           0.15        0.19       0.06         0.07       0.23
Income generating activities -           -           -          -              -           0.00       0.02         0.00       0.02
Nightlight for security      0.80        0.33        0.37       0.71           0.15        0.26       0.58         0.17       0.34
No. of households            10          6           61         21             13          168        50           110        401
                             S2          S10         S250       S2             S10         S250       S2           S10        S250

Reading/studying               0.28     0.07         0.73       -              -           1.00       -            -          -
Social interaction             0.65     0.25         0.18       -              -           0.11       -            -          -
Cooking/eating at night        0.73     0.23         0.50       -              -           0.88       -            -          -
Walking outside at night       0.23     0.66         0.06       -              -           -          -            -          -
Tending livestock              0.06     0.49         0.16       -              -           -          -            -          -
Income generating activities   0.00     0.20         0.19       -              -           -          -            -          -
Nightlight for security        -        0.02         0.10       -              -           -          -            -          -
Recharge cell phone            -        -            0.05       -              -           -          -            -          -
No. of households              238      239          239        -              -           188        -            -          -




                                                                59
                          Table S.15: Cost-eﬀectiveness of solar lanterns on school attendance
                               Percentage point     Additional years of attendance per 100 USD spent
                               gain of attendance Point estimate Lower bound Upper bound
                               rate                                    (90% CI)        (90% CI)
                 With no baseline controls
                 All products 0.084                 0.669              0.341           0.996
                 One product 0.045                  0.568              0.070           1.067
                 Overall       -                    0.635              0.25            1.020
                 With baseline controls
                 All products 0.077                 0.613              0.286           0.94
                 One product 0.044                  0.556              0.057           1.054
                 Overall       -                    0.594              0.209           0.979

Notes: (1) The treatment eﬀects exploited for the cost-eﬀectiveness calculation are based on those shown in columns (d) and (h) in Table
6. (2) The CI stands for “conﬁdence intervals.”




                                                                  60
                         Table S.16: Impacts on children’s educational inputs: heterogeneity (OLS)
Dependent variable:                     Total home study time (per-day minutes, average from Sep 2013 to Apr 2014)
X:                      Age         Education   Male        Household No. of          Head       Head        Head              Land
                                                            size         male         age        education   male              size
                                                                         members
                          (1a)        (1b)        (1c)          (1d)       (1e)         (1f)       (1g)        (1h)               (1i)
December in 2013
All products            -5.511      8.793         22.219***    1.224         22.584*      25.447      14.036***    30.195**    11.254*
                        (41.480)    (20.413)      (6.961)      (16.061)      (11.185)     (28.555)    (5.110)      (14.767)    (5.817)
One product             -46.114     -3.671        26.576***    18.592        40.162*** 20.608         18.024***    36.200      15.769***
                        (40.258)    (18.197)      (8.309)      (20.161)      (13.474)     (23.372)    (5.430)      (26.672)    (5.798)
All products × X        1.510       0.974         -21.588**    2.338         -3.862       -0.298      -0.938       -18.917     0.190
                        (3.203)     (3.970)       (9.060)      (2.872)       (3.422)      (0.646)     (1.809)      (15.171)    (0.189)
One product × X         5.339       5.142         -16.497      0.049         -9.128*      -0.037      0.929        -18.836     0.332
                        (3.350)     (4.057)       (10.597)     (4.313)       (5.122)      (0.545)     (1.577)      (26.654)    (0.232)
R-squared               0.177       0.176         0.181        0.174         0.178        0.174       0.174        0.176       0.176
No. of obs.             620         620           620          620           620          620         620          620         620
Dependent variable:                                                 One if attend in Feb 2014
                          (2a)         (2b)          (2c)         (2d)          (2e)        (2f)         (2g)        (2h)          (2i)
All products            -0.378      -0.126        0.079*       -0.052        -0.035       0.066       0.083*       0.175       0.131***
                        (0.270)     (0.108)       (0.046)      (0.132)       (0.102)      (0.220)     (0.048)      (0.119)     (0.042)
One product             -0.417      -0.068        0.039        -0.030        -0.027       -0.169      0.040        0.113       0.070*
                        (0.276)     (0.118)       (0.052)      (0.153)       (0.080)      (0.200)     (0.044)      (0.144)     (0.039)
All products × X        0.039*      0.051**       0.065        0.032         0.058        0.001       0.018        -0.075      -0.003**
                        (0.022)     (0.022)       (0.088)      (0.025)       (0.041)      (0.005)     (0.014)      (0.128)     (0.001)
One product × X         0.038       0.026         0.020        0.016         0.031        0.005       0.005        -0.070      -0.002
                        (0.023)     (0.026)       (0.082)      (0.031)       (0.029)      (0.005)     (0.017)      (0.150)     (0.001)
R-squared               0.239       0.239         0.236        0.237         0.239        0.236       0.237        0.236       0.239
No. of obs.             850         850           850          850           850          850         850          850         850
Dependent variable:                                                One if attend in April 2014
                          (3a)         (3b)          (3c)         (3d)          (3e)        (3f)         (3g)        (3h)          (3i)
All products            -0.203      0.132         0.120**      0.201*        0.154*       0.190       0.114***     0.108       0.112**
                        (0.358)     (0.126)       (0.049)      (0.107)       (0.077)      (0.218)     (0.037)      (0.125)     (0.042)
One product             0.257       0.228         0.108**      0.237         0.144        0.218       0.109**      0.212       0.092*
                        (0.327)     (0.147)       (0.051)      (0.175)       (0.090)      (0.188)     (0.050)      (0.174)     (0.051)
All products × X        0.024       -0.009        -0.067       -0.022        -0.026       -0.002      -0.017*      -0.019      -0.002
                        (0.029)     (0.028)       (0.085)      (0.019)       (0.027)      (0.005)     (0.009)      (0.122)     (0.002)
One product × X         -0.013      -0.030        -0.043       -0.031        -0.023       -0.003      -0.015       -0.135      -0.000
                        (0.028)     (0.035)       (0.091)      (0.037)       (0.042)      (0.004)     (0.014)      (0.179)     (0.002)
R-squared               0.232       0.231         0.231        0.231         0.231        0.230       0.232        0.231       0.232
No. of obs.             850         850           850          850           850          850         850          850         850
Dependent variable:                                               One if attend in August 2014
                          (4a)         (4b)          (4c)         (4d)          (4e)        (4f)         (4g)        (4h)          (4i)
All products            0.124       -0.120        0.014        -0.235        -0.013       0.213       0.022        -0.123      0.037
                        (0.195)     (0.083)       (0.037)      (0.151)       (0.096)      (0.136)     (0.037)      (0.124)     (0.033)
One product             0.132       -0.066        -0.022       0.240         0.058        0.065       -0.009       -0.083      -0.005
                        (0.211)     (0.095)       (0.042)      (0.152)       (0.103)      (0.183)     (0.036)      (0.139)     (0.041)
All products × X        -0.008      0.031*        0.017        0.052*        0.015        -0.005      0.000        0.160       -0.001
                        (0.016)     (0.016)       (0.064)      (0.030)       (0.036)      (0.003)     (0.014)      (0.134)     (0.001)
One product × X         -0.011      0.014         0.047        -0.051        -0.026       -0.002      0.006        0.090       0.000
                        (0.017)     (0.018)       (0.067)      (0.030)       (0.042)      (0.004)     (0.010)      (0.141)     (0.002)
R-squared               0.262       0.263         0.262        0.270         0.263        0.263       0.262        0.263       0.263
No. of obs.             850         850           850          850           850          850         850          850         850
Baseline control        Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
School FE               Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Village FE              Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     61
                 Table S.17: Children’s educational eﬃciency - GPA z-scores: speciﬁcation (1) (OLS)
             Dependent variables:       Bengali     English Math      General Islam          Bangladesh
                                                                      science     studies    general
                                                                                             studies
                                            (a)       (b)       (c)      (d)         (e)          (f)
             Study at                   -0.001      -0.000   -0.002   0.001       -0.000     -0.001
             school                     (0.001)     (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.001)
             Study at school            0.001       0.001    0.001    0.002       -0.001     0.000
             (per-day minutes)          (0.002)     (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)       (0.002)    (0.002)
             Study at home              -0.002      -0.001   0.000    -0.002      -0.001     -0.002
             (day, per-day minutes)     (0.002)     (0.002) (0.001) (0.002)       (0.002)    (0.002)
             Study at home              0.215**     0.134    0.150    0.182**     0.213**    0.197*
             (night, per-day minutes) (0.101)       (0.092) (0.101) (0.085)       (0.099)    (0.115)
             One if attend              0.215**     0.134    0.150    0.182**     0.213**    0.197*
             (February)                 (0.101)     (0.092) (0.101) (0.085)       (0.099)    (0.115)
             One if attend              -0.245*** -0.206* -0.148      -0.205** -0.207** -0.129
             (April)                    (0.090)     (0.102) (0.093) (0.089)       (0.077)    (0.125)
             One if attend              0.039       -0.001   0.044    0.086       -0.006     -0.030
             (August)                   (0.074)     (0.096) (0.070) (0.079)       (0.088)    (0.097)
             R-squared                  0.135       0.130    0.175    0.166       0.131      0.139
             No. of obs.                618         618      618      618         618        618
             Baseline control           No          No       No       No          No         No
             School FE                  Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes
             Village FE                 Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade.




                                                                62
                 Table S.18: Children’s educational eﬃciency - GPA z-scores: speciﬁcation (2) (OLS)
            Dependent variables:       Bengali     English   Math     General Islam           Bangladesh
                                                                      science    studies      general
                                                                                              studies
                                          (a)         (b)      (c)       (d)         (e)           (f)
            All products               0.028       0.018     -0.085   -0.058     -0.001       -0.085
                                       (0.111)     (0.099)   (0.095) (0.100)     (0.104)      (0.115)
            One product                0.181       0.090     0.069    -0.052     0.121        0.025
                                       (0.118)     (0.107)   (0.108) (0.107)     (0.113)      (0.121)

            Study at school                -0.001        -0.000      -0.002     0.000       -0.000        -0.001
            (per-day minutes)              (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
            Study at home                  0.001         0.001       0.000      0.001       -0.000        -0.000
            (day, per-day minutes)         (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)
            Study at home                  -0.002        -0.001      0.000      -0.002      -0.001        -0.002
            (night, per-day minutes)       (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)
            One if attend                  0.213**       0.133       0.158      0.187**     0.214**       0.205*
            (February)                     (0.100)       (0.092)     (0.099)    (0.085)     (0.099)       (0.114)
            One if attend                  -0.254***     -0.211**    -0.149     -0.201**    -0.213***     -0.127
            (April)                        (0.092)       (0.104)     (0.093)    (0.088)     (0.078)       (0.125)
            One if attend                  0.043         0.001       0.047      0.085       -0.003        -0.029
            (August)                       (0.076)       (0.097)     (0.069)    (0.078)     (0.090)       (0.098)
            R-squared                      0.140         0.131       0.178      0.167       0.133         0.141
            No. of obs.                    618           618         618        618         618           618
            Baseline control               No            No          No         No          No            No
            School FE                      Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
            Village FE                     Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade.




                                                                63
                 Table S.19: Children’s educational eﬃciency - GPA z-scores: speciﬁcation (3) (OLS)
          Dependent variables:       Bengali     English   Math        General     Islam       Bangladesh
                                                                       science     studies     general
                                                                                               studies
                                         (a)        (b)        (c)         (d)         (e)          (f)
          All products               -2.285*** -1.545** -2.363*** -2.445*** -1.832*** -1.635***
                                     (0.747)     (0.637)   (0.582)     (0.665)     (0.643)     (0.566)
          One product                -0.511      0.248     0.108       -0.605      0.066       -0.152
                                     (0.742)     (0.620)   (0.788)     (0.655)     (0.810)     (0.694)

          Study at school                -0.003*       -0.002          -0.004**   -0.001      -0.001        -0.003*
          (per-day minutes)              (0.002)       (0.001)         (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.001)
          Study at home                  -0.001        -0.001          0.000      -0.002      -0.003        -0.002
          (day, per-day minutes)         (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)
          Study at home                  -0.001        0.002           0.001      -0.001      -0.000        0.001
          (night, per-day minutes)       (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)
          One if attend                  0.125         0.032           0.021      0.131       0.187         0.179
          (February)                     (0.127)       (0.134)         (0.144)    (0.116)     (0.126)       (0.136)
          One if attend                  -0.242*       -0.237**        -0.194     -0.175      -0.203        -0.100
          (April)                        (0.120)       (0.112)         (0.123)    (0.119)     (0.127)       (0.134)
          One if attend                  -0.142        -0.269*         -0.023     -0.148      -0.163        -0.276**
          (August)                       (0.108)       (0.137)         (0.105)    (0.120)     (0.118)       (0.136)

          All products
          × Study at                     0.008**       0.005*          0.008***   0.007***    0.005         0.008***
             school                      (0.003)       (0.003)         (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.003)       (0.002)
          × Study at                     0.009**       0.007           0.006      0.011***    0.009**       0.004
             home (day)                  (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)
          × Study at                     -0.003        -0.005          -0.001     -0.003      -0.002        -0.004
             home (night)                (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.004)
          × One if attend                0.372*        0.308           0.459**    0.282       0.175         0.212
             (February)                  (0.206)       (0.215)         (0.219)    (0.185)     (0.193)       (0.202)
          × One if attend                -0.168        -0.069          -0.008     -0.103      -0.108        -0.239
             (April)                     (0.195)       (0.221)         (0.205)    (0.181)     (0.180)       (0.183)
          × One if attend                0.120         0.516**         -0.084     0.242       0.129         0.157
             (August)                    (0.186)       (0.215)         (0.157)    (0.223)     (0.196)       (0.201)

          One product
          × Study at                     0.001         -0.000          0.001      -0.001      -0.001        0.000
             school                      (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.004)
          × Study at                     -0.000        -0.002          -0.009*    0.000       -0.003        -0.001
             home (day)                  (0.005)       (0.005)         (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.005)
          × Study at                     -0.000        -0.004          0.001      0.001       0.000         -0.004
             home (night)                (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)
          × One if attend                0.222         0.288           0.425*     0.190       0.147         0.130
             (February)                  (0.202)       (0.242)         (0.215)    (0.234)     (0.220)       (0.220)
          × One if attend                0.085         0.110           0.120      -0.067      0.020         0.052
             (April)                     (0.274)       (0.251)         (0.255)    (0.239)     (0.268)       (0.246)
          × One if attend                0.506***      0.358*          0.307      0.544***    0.409*        0.724***
             (August)                    (0.179)       (0.178)         (0.201)    (0.197)     (0.211)       (0.212)
          R-squared                      0.180         0.164           0.225      0.209       0.163         0.181
          No. of obs.                    618           618             618        618         618           618
          Baseline control               No            No              No         No          No            No
          School FE                      Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
          Village FE                     Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade.




                                                                  64
                   Table S.20: Impacts on children’s educational achievement: complementarity                    (OLS)
               Dependent variable:                                  One if pass
               X:                     No. of                          School-level ratio of
                                      students no. of        no. of          no. of       no. of                   no. of
                                      in each    teachers blackboards benches fans                                 toilets
                                      school-    to          to              to           to                       to
                                      grade      no. of      no. of          no. of       no. of                   no. of
                                                 students students           students students                     students
                                         (a)        (b)           (c)           (d)          (e)                      (f)
               December in 2013
               All products           -0.083     -0.072      0.099           0.018        0.008                    0.017
                                      (0.067)    (0.124)     (0.105)         (0.107)      (0.032)                  (0.053)
               One product            0.090      -0.002      0.056           0.038        -0.004                   -0.023
                                      (0.066)    (0.087)     (0.064)         (0.092)      (0.027)                  (0.054)
               All products × X       0.002*     3.935       -4.001          0.011        3.444**                  1.474
                                      (0.001)    (4.898)     (4.548)         (0.211)      (1.524)                  (11.093)
               One product × X        -0.002     -0.045      -3.125          -0.094       0.414                    5.329
                                      (0.002)    (4.323)     (3.745)         (0.192)      (3.675)                  (9.225)
               No. of students        -0.004*    -           -               -            -                        -
               in each school-grade (0.002)
               R-squared              0.333      0.325       0.325           0.325        0.326                    0.325
               No. of obs.            849        850         850             850          850                      850
                                         (g)        (h)           (i)           (j)          (k)                      (l)
               December in 2014
               All products           -0.216** -0.106        -0.015          -0.025       -0.057                   -0.026
                                      (0.088)    (0.160)     (0.122)         (0.125)      (0.047)                  (0.080)
               One product            -0.137     -0.106      0.120           0.208        -0.020                   -0.048
                                      (0.110)    (0.160)     (0.120)         (0.170)      (0.041)                  (0.058)
               All products × X       0.003**    2.023       -2.258          -0.075       -0.217                   -8.498
                                      (0.001)    (6.993)     (6.497)         (0.242)      (1.652)                  (14.958)
               One product × X        0.002      3.410       -7.558          -0.527       -0.895                   6.572
                                      (0.002)    (5.996)     (6.081)         (0.369)      (2.894)                  (14.453)
               No. of students        -0.001     -           -               -            -                        -
               in each school-grade (0.002)
               R-squared              0.151      0.146       0.147           0.148        0.145                    0.146
               No. of obs.            844        845         845             845          845                      845
               Baseline control       Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes                      Yes
               School FE              Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes                      Yes
               Village FE             Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes                      Yes
               Mean of X              50.26      0.02        0.01            0.43         0.00                     0.00
               Std. of X              20.97      0.00        0.00            0.12         0.01                     0.00

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).
(4) The reported mean and standard deviation were estimated at the level of the sample respondents.




                                                                     65
              Table S.21: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - Bengali: complementarity (OLS)
               Dependent variable:                           Bengali: GPA z-scores
               X:                    No. of                          School-level ratio of
                                     students     no. of     no. of          no. of      no. of   no. of
                                     in each      teachers blackboards benches fans               toilets
                                     school-      to         to              to          to       to
                                     grade        no. of     no. of          no. of      no. of   no. of
                                                  students students          students students students
                                         (a)         (b)          (c)           (d)         (e)      (f)
               December in 2013
               All products          -0.019       -0.609** -0.366            -0.406      -0.077   -0.087
                                     (0.198)      (0.248)    (0.383)         (0.299)     (0.089)  (0.105)
               One product           0.472**      -0.314     -0.069          0.430       0.046    -0.098
                                     (0.175)      (0.323)    (0.294)         (0.268)     (0.082)  (0.126)
               All products × X      -0.001       23.416** 16.736            0.819       7.229*   10.307
                                     (0.003)      (10.051) (17.402)          (0.606)     (4.210)  (24.454)
               One product × X       -0.009*** 14.169        4.937           -0.922      -4.466   32.113
                                     (0.003)      (14.041) (14.672)          (0.612)     (10.172) (26.922)
               No. of students       -0.008       -          -               -           -        -
               in each school-grade (0.005)
               R-squared             0.268        0.261      0.259           0.263       0.260    0.258
               No. of obs.           849          850        850             850         850      850
                                         (g)         (h)          (i)           (j)         (k)      (l)
               December in 2014
               All products          -0.318*      0.485      0.015           -0.403      -0.052   -0.185
                                     (0.181)      (0.294)    (0.211)         (0.245)     (0.087)  (0.136)
               One product           -0.181       0.554      0.166           -0.120      0.089    -0.147
                                     (0.254)      (0.377)    (0.267)         (0.365)     (0.092)  (0.153)
               All products × X      0.005*       -23.724* -5.259            0.725       -7.669   25.971
                                     (0.003)      (11.772) (11.933)          (0.577)     (6.253)  (26.620)
               One product × X       0.005        -20.832    -5.769          0.402       -7.942   53.571
                                     (0.004)      (14.643) (15.206)          (0.843)     (10.880) (32.760)
               No. of students       0.002        -          -               -           -        -
               in each school-grade (0.003)
               R-squared             0.117        0.119      0.114           0.115       0.116    0.118
               No. of obs.           845          846        846             846         846      846
               Baseline control      Yes          Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes      Yes
               School FE             Yes          Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes      Yes
               Village FE            Yes          Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes      Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     66
              Table S.22: Impacts on children’s        educational achievement - English: complementarity (OLS)
              Dependent variable:                                   English: GPA z-scores
              X:                     No. of                                School-level ratio of
                                     students           no. of      no. of         no. of      no. of  no. of
                                     in each            teachers    blackboards benches fans           toilets
                                     school-            to          to             to          to      to
                                     grade              no. of      no. of         no. of      no. of  no. of
                                                        students    students       students students students
                                              (a)          (b)           (c)          (d)         (e)      (f)
              December in 2013
              All products                 -0.150       -0.652***      -0.153            -0.316       -0.078       0.053
                                           (0.160)      (0.203)        (0.281)           (0.241)      (0.067)      (0.080)
              One product                  0.144        -0.355         0.039             0.194        -0.127*      -0.140
                                           (0.161)      (0.244)        (0.169)           (0.231)      (0.067)      (0.120)
              All products × X             0.002        24.763***      5.024             0.593        5.228        -28.966
                                           (0.002)      (7.792)        (12.761)          (0.491)      (3.273)      (18.708)
              One product × X              -0.005*      9.281          -9.090            -0.748       -1.410       1.732
                                           (0.003)      (10.820)       (9.168)           (0.512)      (8.282)      (21.644)
              No. of students              -0.003       -              -                 -            -            -
              in each school-grade         (0.006)
              R-squared                    0.257        0.258          0.254             0.257        0.254        0.255
              No. of obs.                  849          850            850               850          850          850
                                              (g)          (h)              (i)             (j)          (k)          (l)
              December in 2014
              All products                 -0.325*      0.249          -0.088            -0.329       -0.006       -0.040
                                           (0.186)      (0.303)        (0.201)           (0.252)      (0.096)      (0.158)
              One product                  -0.348       0.587*         0.274             -0.129       0.063        -0.171
                                           (0.257)      (0.330)        (0.328)           (0.361)      (0.093)      (0.148)
              All products × X             0.006**      -11.904        2.726             0.671        -6.847       0.686
                                           (0.003)      (12.544)       (10.811)          (0.533)      (4.111)      (28.945)
              One product × X              0.008*       -22.696*       -12.091           0.390        -5.021       56.656**
                                           (0.004)      (12.311)       (15.837)          (0.765)      (7.026)      (26.429)
              No. of students              0.001        -              -                 -            -            -
              in each school-grade         (0.003)
              R-squared                    0.104        0.102          0.100             0.100        0.100        0.104
              No. of obs.                  845          846            846               846          846          846
              Baseline control             Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes
              School FE                    Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes
              Village FE                   Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     67
              Table S.23: Impacts on children’s         educational achievement - Math: complementarity (OLS)
              Dependent variable:                                    Math: GPA z-scores
              X:                    No. of                                  School-level ratio of
                                    students             no. of     no. of         no. of      no. of no. of
                                    in each              teachers blackboards benches fans            toilets
                                    school-              to         to             to          to     to
                                    grade                no. of     no. of         no. of      no. of no. of
                                                         students students         students students students
                                               (a)          (b)         (c)           (d)         (e)     (f)
              December in 2013
              All products                 -0.062        -0.280        -0.087           -0.201        -0.081       -0.099
                                           (0.144)       (0.209)       (0.179)          (0.272)       (0.056)      (0.090)
              One product                  0.278         0.160         0.208            0.186         -0.059       -0.247**
                                           (0.168)       (0.294)       (0.185)          (0.275)       (0.072)      (0.109)
              All products × X             0.000         9.840         2.330            0.365         9.327***     14.852
                                           (0.003)       (8.425)       (8.381)          (0.558)       (3.057)      (19.291)
              One product × X              -0.007**      -10.176       -15.387          -0.618        -5.285       42.326*
                                           (0.004)       (12.191)      (9.600)          (0.575)       (6.503)      (23.927)
              No. of students              -0.006        -             -                -             -            -
              in each school-grade         (0.007)
              R-squared                    0.396         0.391         0.391            0.391         0.393        0.391
              No. of obs.                  849           850           850              850           850          850
                                               (g)          (h)             (i)            (j)           (k)          (l)
              December in 2014
              All products                 -0.523***     0.264         0.004            -0.572**      -0.096       -0.209
                                           (0.178)       (0.331)       (0.256)          (0.268)       (0.097)      (0.154)
              One product                  -0.065        0.529         0.134            -0.161        0.048        -0.221
                                           (0.268)       (0.342)       (0.247)          (0.395)       (0.096)      (0.150)
              All products × X             0.008***      -15.263       -5.505           1.075*        -1.258       27.739
                                           (0.003)       (12.771)      (13.381)         (0.627)       (3.131)      (29.134)
              One product × X              0.002         -20.467       -5.047           0.455         -2.238       68.518**
                                           (0.004)       (13.163)      (13.439)         (0.849)       (5.679)      (32.891)
              No. of students              -0.001        -             -                -             -            -
              in each school-grade         (0.004)
              R-squared                    0.167         0.165         0.162            0.165         0.162        0.168
              No. of obs.                  845           846           846              846           846          846
              Baseline control             Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes
              School FE                    Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes
              Village FE                   Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     68
         Table S.24: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - General science: complementarity (OLS)
              Dependent variable:                       General science: GPA z-scores
              X:                     No. of                         School-level ratio of
                                     students no. of       no. of          no. of      no. of  no. of
                                     in each    teachers blackboards benches fans              toilets
                                     school-    to         to              to          to      to
                                     grade      no. of     no. of          no. of      no. of  no. of
                                                students students          students students students
                                        (a)        (b)          (c)           (d)         (e)      (f)
              December in 2013
              All products           0.122      -0.316     0.036           0.183       0.012   -0.054
                                     (0.214)    (0.298)    (0.365)         (0.391)     (0.086) (0.098)
              One product            0.412**    0.062      0.269           0.553*      0.065   -0.134
                                     (0.167)    (0.302)    (0.270)         (0.281)     (0.077) (0.117)
              All products × X       -0.001     15.216     0.768           -0.300      9.201** 27.496
                                     (0.003)    (11.079) (16.472)          (0.808)     (4.047) (26.193)
              One product × X        -0.007** -0.934       -12.144         -1.173*     -5.425  45.031*
                                     (0.003)    (12.333) (13.003)          (0.599)     (7.647) (26.201)
              No. of students        -0.005     -          -               -           -       -
              in each school-grade (0.006)
              R-squared              0.303      0.299      0.298           0.300       0.301   0.300
              No. of obs.            849        850        850             850         850     850
                                        (g)        (h)          (i)           (j)         (k)      (l)
              December in 2014
              All products           -0.281     0.110      0.126           -0.319      -0.101  -0.178
                                     (0.209)    (0.302)    (0.226)         (0.223)     (0.091) (0.142)
              One product            -0.239     0.203      0.176           -0.168      -0.053  -0.296**
                                     (0.268)    (0.397)    (0.318)         (0.367)     (0.098) (0.139)
              All products × X       0.004      -8.855     -11.964         0.496       -0.099  19.661
                                     (0.003)    (12.302) (11.357)          (0.450)     (3.506) (27.584)
              One product × X        0.003      -11.066    -12.549         0.241       -2.046  61.741**
                                     (0.005)    (14.569) (14.982)          (0.797)     (8.351) (30.417)
              No. of students        -0.002     -          -               -           -       -
              in each school-grade (0.004)
              R-squared              0.150      0.149      0.150           0.149       0.148   0.153
              No. of obs.            845        846        846             846         846     846
              Baseline control       Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes     Yes
              School FE              Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes     Yes
              Village FE             Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes     Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     69
          Table S.25: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - Islam studies: complementarity (OLS)
             Dependent variable:                         Islam studies: GPA z-scores
             X:                      No. of                          School-level ratio of
                                     students no. of        no. of          no. of      no. of  no. of
                                     in each    teachers blackboards benches fans               toilets
                                     school-    to          to              to          to      to
                                     grade      no. of      no. of          no. of      no. of  no. of
                                                students students           students students students
                                        (a)        (b)           (c)           (d)         (e)      (f)
             December in 2013
             All products            0.020      -0.244      0.034           -0.112      0.021   0.016
                                     (0.203)    (0.342)     (0.330)         (0.361)     (0.087) (0.111)
             One product             0.419**    0.264       0.201           0.315       0.051   -0.143
                                     (0.166)    (0.338)     (0.225)         (0.335)     (0.078) (0.130)
             All products × X        0.001      12.312      1.021           0.381       7.859** 9.782
                                     (0.003)    (12.422) (14.292)           (0.750)     (3.196) (28.159)
             One product × X         -0.008** -10.056       -9.442          -0.670      -6.260  43.198
                                     (0.003)    (14.348) (11.508)           (0.735)     (9.018) (26.084)
             No. of students         -0.008     -           -               -           -       -
             in each school-grade (0.006)
             R-squared               0.267      0.260       0.258           0.259       0.261   0.260
             No. of obs.             849        850         850             850         850     850
                                        (g)        (h)           (i)           (j)         (k)      (l)
             December in 2014
             All products            -0.289     0.282       0.084           -0.252      -0.033  -0.176
                                     (0.210)    (0.346)     (0.249)         (0.291)     (0.095) (0.162)
             One product             -0.207     0.577       0.366           0.012       0.078   -0.231
                                     (0.290)    (0.374)     (0.294)         (0.359)     (0.104) (0.177)
             All products × X        0.005      -14.241     -7.577          0.440       -6.024  30.325
                                     (0.003)    (13.749) (12.760)           (0.609)     (5.255) (31.724)
             One product × X         0.005      -22.343     -17.042         0.067       -8.751  71.661**
                                     (0.005)    (14.165) (15.323)           (0.816)     (9.306) (34.321)
             No. of students         0.001      -           -               -           -       -
             in each school-grade (0.004)
             R-squared               0.110      0.111       0.109           0.108       0.109   0.114
             No. of obs.             845        846         846             846         846     846
             Baseline control        Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes     Yes
             School FE               Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes     Yes
             Village FE              Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes     Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     70
  Table S.26: Impacts on children’s educational achievement - Bangladesh general studies: complementarity (OLS)
            Dependent variable:                  Bangladesh general studies: GPA z-scores
            X:                     No. of                          School-level ratio of
                                   students    no. of    no. of           no. of       no. of   no. of
                                   in each     teachers blackboards benches            fans     toilets
                                   school-     to        to               to           to       to
                                   grade       no. of    no. of           no. of       no. of   no. of
                                               students students          students     students students
                                       (a)        (b)         (c)             (d)         (e)      (f)
            December in 2013
            All products           0.082       -0.421*   -0.085           0.094        0.035    0.079
                                   (0.182)     (0.232)   (0.248)          (0.277)      (0.070)  (0.095)
            One product            0.645***    -0.054    0.218            0.977***     0.154    -0.041
                                   (0.191)     (0.346)   (0.316)          (0.289)      (0.092)  (0.124)
            All products × X       -0.000      20.199** 7.891             -0.064       7.221*   -4.123
                                   (0.003)     (8.743)   (11.756)         (0.596)      (3.713)  (21.890)
            One product × X        -0.010*** 7.378       -4.991           -1.944*** -6.654      43.299
                                   (0.003)     (13.510) (14.799)          (0.614)      (9.324)  (27.714)
            No. of students        -0.001      -         -                -            -        -
            in each school-grade (0.005)
            R-squared              0.279       0.273     0.270            0.279        0.273    0.273
            No. of obs.            849         850       850              850          850      850
                                       (g)        (h)          (i)            (j)         (k)      (l)
            December in 2014
            All products           -0.469**    -0.026    -0.187           -0.645**     -0.100   -0.128
                                   (0.193)     (0.351)   (0.292)          (0.293)      (0.099)  (0.155)
            One product            -0.227      0.236     -0.049           -0.179       -0.002   -0.249
                                   (0.264)     (0.340)   (0.308)          (0.335)      (0.099)  (0.164)
            All products × X       0.007**     -4.234    3.205            1.184*       -6.201   -0.391
                                   (0.003)     (13.329) (14.375)          (0.629)      (5.100)  (29.385)
            One product × X        0.004       -10.735   1.406            0.359        -4.828   60.456*
                                   (0.004)     (12.820) (15.980)          (0.773)      (8.137)  (30.786)
            No. of students        -0.007      -         -                -            -        -
            in each school-grade (0.005)
            R-squared              0.131       0.128     0.127            0.131        0.128    0.133
            No. of obs.            845         846       846              846          846      846
            Baseline control       Yes         Yes       Yes              Yes          Yes      Yes
            School FE              Yes         Yes       Yes              Yes          Yes      Yes
            Village FE             Yes         Yes       Yes              Yes          Yes      Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     71
                                Table S.27: Estimating non-attrition probability (OLS)
           Dependent variable:                     One if the outcome data are not missing
           Outcomes of           Exam      Exam       Children’s Per-day       Log of expenditures (BDT)
           interest:             results   results    time use    hours     Education Kerosene Total
                                 in 2013 in 2014                  using
                                                                  light
                                                                  sources
                                   (a)       (b)          (c)        (d)        (e)          (f)       (g)
           All products          0.016     0.010      0.008       0.016     0.010        -0.696*** 0.016
                                 (0.011) (0.012) (0.034)          (0.012)   (0.013)      (0.060)     (0.012)
           One product           0.024     0.029** -0.000         0.020     0.029*       -0.053**    0.020
                                 (0.016) (0.014) (0.041)          (0.016)   (0.017)      (0.025)     (0.016)
           HH baseline control Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes
           Village FE            Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes
           R-squared             0.094     0.084      0.075       0.088     0.088        0.499       0.088
           No. of obs.           882       882        882         882       882          882         882
           No. of obs. having non-missing values at follow up
                                 850       845        620         847       842          631         847

Notes: (1) A dependent variable is one if the outcome data are not missing at follow-up and zero otherwise. (2) Figures ( ) are standard
errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (3) Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals
within each village. (4) The baseline controls include household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender
(dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                    72
Table S.28: Lee (2009)’s 95% conﬁdence intervals of the treatment eﬀects

                                    Conﬁdence interval     No. of obs.
                                    Lower   Upper          having
                                    bound   bound          non-missing
                                                           values
                                                           at follow-up
  Examination results (2013)
     Progression                    -0.031    0.099        850
     Bengali                        -0.094    0.220        850
     English                        -0.206    0.101        850
     Math                           -0.425    0.099        850
     General science                -0.239    0.195        850
     Islamic studies                -0.042    0.265        850
     Bangladesh general studies     0.005     0.311        850
  Examination results (2014)
     Progression                    -0.104    0.035        845
     Bengali                        -0.210    0.484        846
     English                        -0.214    0.099        846
     Math                           -0.203    0.079        846
     General science                -0.420    0.421        846
     Islamic studies                -0.160    0.473        846
     Bangladesh general studies     -0.268    0.023        846
  Per-day minutes (average from Sep 2013 to   Apr 2014)   spent on:
     Study at school                -8.079    9.242        620
     Study at home (total)          -1.265    25.375       620
     Study at home (day)            -16.008   -2.208       620
     Study at home (night)          11.719    29.442       620
     Other activities               -38.530   29.535       620
  Per-day hours using light sources
     Flashlight (rainy)             -0.319    -0.054       847
     Flashlight (oﬀ-rainy)          -0.442    -0.061       847
     Kerosene lanterns (rainy)      -0.850    -0.503       847
     Kerosene lanterns (oﬀ-rainy) -1.070      -0.657       847
     Kerosene lamps (rainy)         -3.072    -2.450       847
     Kerosene lamps (oﬀ-rainy)      -3.645    -2.845       847
  Log of expenditures (BDT)
     Education                      -0.088    0.119        842
     Kerosene                       -1.207    -0.626       631
     Total                          -0.092    0.006        847




                                  73
                                         Table S.29: Checking on spillover eﬀects (OLS)
               Dependent variable:                                            One if pass
                                                                Case A     Case B     Case C                Case D
                                                                  (a)        (b)        (c)                  (d)
               December 2012
               Share of treated students and their                    -1.771*     0.826         -1.242      -0.854
               siblings in each school-grade                          (1.044)     (1.025)       (2.320)     (1.797)
               Share of students in each school-grade that            0.976       -0.497        1.084       0.375
               had no access to electricity at baseline               (0.965)     (0.545)       (1.195)     (0.860)
               All products                                           0.001       -0.003        0.000       -0.000
                                                                      (0.030)     (0.030)       (0.030)     (0.030)
               One product                                            -0.008      -0.014        -0.010      -0.012
                                                                      (0.040)     (0.040)       (0.040)     (0.040)
               R-squared                                              0.222       0.215         0.216       0.213
               No. of obs.                                            849         849           849         849
                                                                        (e)          (f)          (g)         (h)
               December 2013
               Share of treated students and their                    0.698       -0.162        0.667       0.486
               siblings in each school-grade                          (0.887)     (0.622)       (1.399)     (0.982)
               Share of students in each school-grade that            -0.034      0.505         -0.283      0.042
               had no access to electricity at baseline               (0.703)     (0.461)       (0.905)     (0.656)
               All products                                           0.022       0.023         0.022       0.022
                                                                      (0.031)     (0.031)       (0.031)     (0.031)
               One product                                            -0.005      -0.003        -0.004      -0.003
                                                                      (0.029)     (0.029)       (0.029)     (0.029)
               R-squared                                              0.329       0.327         0.325       0.326
               No. of obs.                                            849         849           849         849
                                                                         (i)         (j)          (k)          (l)
               December 2014
               Share of treated students and their                    0.764       -0.333        0.341       0.287
               siblings in each school-grade                          (0.679)     (0.397)       (1.151)     (0.799)
               Share of students in each school-grade that            0.134       0.764***      -0.057      0.285
               had no access to electricity at baseline               (0.531)     (0.280)       (0.744)     (0.457)
               All products                                           -0.058      -0.057        -0.058      -0.057
                                                                      (0.042)     (0.042)       (0.042)     (0.042)
               One product                                            -0.031      -0.028        -0.028      -0.028
                                                                      (0.039)     (0.039)       (0.038)     (0.038)
               R-squared                                              0.154       0.153         0.148       0.150
               No. of obs.                                            844         844           844         844
               Baseline control                                       Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
               School FE                                              Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
               Village FE                                             Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     74
                      Table S.30: Checking on spillover eﬀects - GPA z-scores: Case A (OLS)
    Dependent variables:                                                 GPA z-scores
                                               Bengali English      Math       General   Islam                             Bangladesh
                                                                               science   studies                           general
                                                                                                                           studies
                                                             (1a)         (1b)        (1c)         (1d)          (1e)          (1f)
    December 2012
    Share of treated students and their                    -4.573*     -3.062       -4.573*     -3.494         -4.011      -2.085
    siblings in each school-grade                          (2.568)     (2.290)      (2.366)     (2.395)        (2.852)     (1.734)
    Share of students in each school-grade that            3.451       2.352        3.349       2.844          2.444       1.690
    had no access to electricity at baseline               (2.389)     (2.424)      (2.451)     (2.386)        (2.751)     (1.638)
    All products                                           -0.018      -0.035       0.005       -0.032         -0.095      -0.078
                                                           (0.080)     (0.078)      (0.070)     (0.073)        (0.072)     (0.089)
    One product                                            -0.019      0.006        0.022       -0.004         -0.107      -0.086
                                                           (0.096)     (0.081)      (0.096)     (0.105)        (0.087)     (0.095)
    R-squared                                              0.232       0.220        0.218       0.217          0.231       0.225
    No. of obs.                                            849         849          849         849            849         849
                                                             (2a)        (2b)         (2c)         (2d)          (2e)          (2f)
    December 2013
    Share of treated students and their                    -1.546      3.335        -4.084*     -6.019***      -3.535      0.317
    siblings in each school-grade                          (2.009)     (2.385)      (2.187)     (1.892)        (2.155)     (1.678)
    Share of students in each school-grade that            0.324       -3.599       2.413       3.287*         3.441*      -0.075
    had no access to electricity at baseline               (1.889)     (2.429)      (2.054)     (1.752)        (1.999)     (1.715)
    All products                                           -0.044      -0.062       -0.034      0.062          0.061       0.065
                                                           (0.085)     (0.063)      (0.058)     (0.084)        (0.081)     (0.069)
    One product                                            0.029       -0.145**     -0.068      0.059          0.033       0.128
                                                           (0.085)     (0.069)      (0.071)     (0.078)        (0.078)     (0.089)
    R-squared                                              0.260       0.263        0.398       0.318          0.266       0.272
    No. of obs.                                            849         849          849         849            849         849
                                                             (3a)        (3b)         (3c)         (3d)          (3e)          (3f)
    December 2014
    Share of treated students and their                    0.499       0.273        1.239       1.548          0.714       2.043*
    siblings in each school-grade                          (1.033)     (1.052)      (1.359)     (1.126)        (1.010)     (1.170)
    Share of students in each school-grade that            0.360       0.340        -0.133      -0.791         0.207       -0.819
    had no access to electricity at baseline               (0.972)     (0.914)      (1.127)     (0.995)        (0.897)     (0.908)
    All products                                           -0.085      -0.035       -0.103      -0.104         -0.059      -0.129
                                                           (0.082)     (0.085)      (0.087)     (0.081)        (0.088)     (0.090)
    One product                                            0.051       0.041        0.033       -0.073         0.032       -0.036
                                                           (0.092)     (0.086)      (0.089)     (0.092)        (0.100)     (0.092)
    R-squared                                              0.115       0.099        0.164       0.150          0.109       0.130
    No. of obs.                                            845         845          845         845            845         845
    Baseline control                                       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
    School FE                                              Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
    Village FE                                             Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     75
                     Table S.31: Checking on spillover eﬀects - GPA z-scores: Case B (OLS)
   Dependent variables:                                                 GPA z-scores
                                              Bengali      English Math       General Islam                                Bangladesh
                                                                              science  studies                             general
                                                                                                                           studies
                                                              (1a)         (1b)        (1c)        (1d)         (1e)           (1f)
   December 2012
   Share of treated students and their                    1.067           2.626      2.822       0.408        -0.467       -0.826
   siblings in each school-grade                          (1.851)         (2.218)    (2.505)     (2.753)      (2.036)      (1.362)
   Share of students in each school-grade that            -0.082          -0.498     -0.627      0.248        -0.300       0.411
   had no access to electricity at baseline               (1.208)         (1.539)    (1.423)     (1.486)      (1.278)      (0.836)
   All products                                           -0.027          -0.042     -0.006      -0.038       -0.102       -0.081
                                                          (0.080)         (0.077)    (0.069)     (0.073)      (0.072)      (0.089)
   One product                                            -0.035          -0.004     0.006       -0.017       -0.121       -0.093
                                                          (0.095)         (0.080)    (0.095)     (0.104)      (0.085)      (0.094)
   R-squared                                              0.222           0.219      0.212       0.211        0.223        0.223
   No. of obs.                                            849             849        849         849          849          849
                                                             (2a)           (2b)       (2c)        (2d)          (2e)          (2f)
   December 2013
   Share of treated students and their                    1.319           -0.586     3.618*      3.584*       1.880        -1.158
   siblings in each school-grade                          (1.988)         (3.003)    (1.904)     (1.927)      (2.022)      (1.869)
   Share of students in each school-grade that            -1.113          -1.072     -1.416      -1.915       0.443        0.445
   had no access to electricity at baseline               (1.482)         (1.878)    (1.237)     (1.482)      (1.323)      (1.501)
   All products                                           -0.048          -0.056     -0.044      0.049        0.054        0.066
                                                          (0.087)         (0.064)    (0.058)     (0.084)      (0.083)      (0.070)
   One product                                            0.024           -0.133*    -0.081      0.039        0.022        0.128
                                                          (0.086)         (0.071)    (0.072)     (0.078)      (0.079)      (0.089)
   R-squared                                              0.259           0.257      0.398       0.308        0.262        0.272
   No. of obs.                                            849             849        849         849          849          849
                                                             (3a)           (3b)       (3c)        (3d)         (3e)           (3f)
   December 2014
   Share of treated students and their                    -2.826***       0.394      0.660       -1.869       -2.793*      -4.240***
   siblings in each school-grade                          (0.884)         (0.817)    (1.256)     (1.182)      (1.402)      (1.292)
   Share of students in each school-grade that            1.429***        0.435      0.585       0.787        1.422***     1.711***
   had no access to electricity at baseline               (0.414)         (0.437)    (0.637)     (0.507)      (0.516)      (0.547)
   All products                                           -0.082          -0.035     -0.101      -0.100       -0.056       -0.122
                                                          (0.082)         (0.085)    (0.088)     (0.081)      (0.088)      (0.091)
   One product                                            0.052           0.043      0.038       -0.068       0.033        -0.030
                                                          (0.092)         (0.086)    (0.088)     (0.092)      (0.099)      (0.093)
   R-squared                                              0.120           0.100      0.163       0.152        0.113        0.139
   No. of obs.                                            845             845        845         845          845          845
   Baseline control                                       Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
   School FE                                              Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
   Village FE                                             Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     76
                     Table S.32: Checking on spillover eﬀects - GPA z-scores: Case C (OLS)
   Dependent variables:                                                 GPA z-scores
                                              Bengali     English   Math      General Islam                                Bangladesh
                                                                              science  studies                             general
                                                                                                                           studies
                                                             (1a)           (1b)       (1c)        (1d)         (1e)           (1f)
   December 2012
   Share of treated students and their                     -5.774         -0.015     -2.177      -5.327       -7.649**     -5.339**
   siblings in each school-grade                           (3.885)        (4.967)    (5.418)     (6.261)      (3.592)      (2.519)
   Share of students in each school-grade that             4.358*         1.452      2.904       3.809        4.469*       3.105*
   had no access to electricity at baseline                (2.393)        (2.938)    (2.866)     (3.143)      (2.519)      (1.537)
   All products                                            -0.017         -0.039     0.002       -0.030       -0.092       -0.075
                                                           (0.081)        (0.078)    (0.069)     (0.072)      (0.073)      (0.089)
   One product                                             -0.020         0.001      0.016       -0.004       -0.106       -0.083
                                                           (0.096)        (0.080)    (0.095)     (0.104)      (0.086)      (0.094)
   R-squared                                               0.231          0.220      0.215       0.217        0.232        0.227
   No. of obs.                                             849            849        849         849          849          849
                                                             (2a)           (2b)       (2c)        (2d)         (2e)           (2f)
   December 2013
   Share of treated students and their                     0.356          5.075      0.529       -2.639       -2.667       -1.866
   siblings in each school-grade                           (3.980)        (4.789)    (3.952)     (4.018)      (4.251)      (4.197)
   Share of students in each school-grade that             0.069          -4.168     1.286       3.055        3.142        0.675
   had no access to electricity at baseline                (2.418)        (2.926)    (2.321)     (2.336)      (2.451)      (2.475)
   All products                                            -0.046         -0.064     -0.040      0.057        0.060        0.067
                                                           (0.087)        (0.064)    (0.058)     (0.084)      (0.082)      (0.069)
   One product                                             0.024          -0.147**   -0.077      0.050        0.032        0.131
                                                           (0.087)        (0.069)    (0.072)     (0.079)      (0.080)      (0.090)
   R-squared                                               0.257          0.263      0.395       0.305        0.266        0.272
   No. of obs.                                             849            849        849         849          849          849
                                                             (3a)           (3b)       (3c)        (3d)         (3e)           (3f)
   December 2014
   Share of treated students and their                     -5.178**       1.034      3.136       -1.262       -4.742**     -5.355**
   siblings in each school-grade                           (1.951)        (1.861)    (2.725)     (2.142)      (2.195)      (2.577)
   Share of students in each school-grade that             2.217*         -0.197     -1.304      -0.002       1.955*       1.560
   had no access to electricity at baseline                (1.238)        (1.155)    (1.611)     (1.211)      (1.084)      (1.335)
   All products                                            -0.078         -0.036     -0.105      -0.101       -0.053       -0.120
                                                           (0.082)        (0.085)    (0.088)     (0.081)      (0.089)      (0.090)
   One product                                             0.059          0.042      0.033       -0.068       0.040        -0.025
                                                           (0.092)        (0.086)    (0.088)     (0.092)      (0.099)      (0.092)
   R-squared                                               0.118          0.099      0.163       0.150        0.111        0.135
   No. of obs.                                             845            845        845         845          845          845
   Baseline control                                        Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
   School FE                                               Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
   Village FE                                              Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     77
                     Table S.33: Checking on spillover eﬀects - GPA z-scores: Case D (OLS)
   Dependent variables:                                                 GPA z-scores
                                              Bengali      English Math        General Islam                               Bangladesh
                                                                               science studies                             general
                                                                                                                           studies
                                                              (1a)         (1b)        (1c)        (1d)         (1e)           (1f)
   December 2012
   Share of treated students and their                     -3.558         0.400      -1.481      -4.135       -5.630**     -3.723*
   siblings in each school-grade                           (3.030)        (3.709)    (4.182)     (4.717)      (2.669)      (1.956)
   Share of students in each school-grade that             2.176          0.156      1.149       2.460        2.406        2.073*
   had no access to electricity at baseline                (1.624)        (2.301)    (2.156)     (2.387)      (1.753)      (1.080)
   All products                                            -0.020         -0.041     -0.001      -0.031       -0.094       -0.076
                                                           (0.081)        (0.078)    (0.069)     (0.072)      (0.072)      (0.089)
   One product                                             -0.027         -0.005     0.009       -0.007       -0.110       -0.085
                                                           (0.095)        (0.078)    (0.093)     (0.103)      (0.085)      (0.094)
   R-squared                                               0.225          0.215      0.208       0.216        0.231        0.226
   No. of obs.                                             849            849        849         849          849          849
                                                              (2a)          (2b)       (2c)        (2d)         (2e)           (2f)
   December 2013
   Share of treated students and their                     0.214          3.376      1.312       -0.948       -1.473       -1.442
   siblings in each school-grade                           (3.019)        (3.542)    (3.182)     (3.334)      (3.254)      (3.025)
   Share of students in each school-grade that             -0.552         -3.034     -0.422      0.385        1.791        0.711
   had no access to electricity at baseline                (2.004)        (2.628)    (1.705)     (1.973)      (1.878)      (2.148)
   All products                                            -0.047         -0.063     -0.043      0.053        0.058        0.068
                                                           (0.087)        (0.064)    (0.057)     (0.084)      (0.082)      (0.069)
   One product                                             0.022          -0.142*    -0.084      0.040        0.026        0.132
                                                           (0.088)        (0.070)    (0.072)     (0.079)      (0.081)      (0.090)
   R-squared                                               0.258          0.263      0.390       0.297        0.262        0.272
   No. of obs.                                             849            849        849         849          849          849
                                                              (3a)          (3b)       (3c)        (3d)         (3e)           (3f)
   December 2014
   Share of treated students and their                     -4.198***      0.829      2.445       -1.269       -3.809**     -4.219**
   siblings in each school-grade                           (1.519)        (1.410)    (1.943)     (1.772)      (1.790)      (2.031)
   Share of students in each school-grade that             2.304**        -0.043     -0.695      0.575        2.136**      2.215*
   had no access to electricity at baseline                (0.913)        (0.838)    (1.150)     (0.928)      (0.900)      (1.133)
   All products                                            -0.077         -0.036     -0.104      -0.099       -0.051       -0.118
                                                           (0.082)        (0.085)    (0.087)     (0.081)      (0.089)      (0.090)
   One product                                             0.062          0.041      0.033       -0.065       0.043        -0.020
                                                           (0.092)        (0.086)    (0.087)     (0.091)      (0.099)      (0.092)
   R-squared                                               0.119          0.099      0.164       0.149        0.111        0.131
   No. of obs.                                             845            845        845         845          845          845
   Baseline control                                        Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
   School FE                                               Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
   Village FE                                              Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     78
            Table S.34: Impacts on children’s educational achievement: mid-term examination results (OLS)
              Dependent variables:                               GPA z-scores
                                       Bengali Bengali English English Math                Math

                                                (a)         (b)           (c)        (d)            (e)              (f)
               June 2014
               All products                  0.048       0.048        -0.018      0.019        -0.017           -0.006
                                             (0.185)     (0.151)      (0.141)     (0.134)      (0.143)          (0.141)
               One product                   0.157       0.100        0.029       0.035        -0.036           -0.042
                                             (0.170)     (0.171)      (0.112)     (0.126)      (0.151)          (0.170)
               All = one (p-val.)            0.550       0.775        0.754       0.922        0.897            0.836
               All + one = 0 (p-val.)        0.511       0.585        0.957       0.787        0.840            0.858
               Mean y (control)              -0.042      -0.042       -0.034      -0.034       0.028            0.028
               R-squared                     0.293       0.391        0.393       0.440        0.355            0.363
               No. of obs.                   284         284          284         284          283              283
               Dependent var.                General     General      Islam       Islam        Bangladesh       Bangladesh
                                             science     science      studies     studies      general          general
                                                                                               studies          studies
                                                (g)         (h)           (i)        (j)           (k)               (l)
               June 2014
               All products                  -0.392*     -0.397*      0.010       -0.023       0.041            0.034
                                             (0.201)     (0.191)      (0.172)     (0.175)      (0.161)          (0.164)
               One product                   -0.281      -0.363*      0.068       -0.006       0.062            0.046
                                             (0.205)     (0.182)      (0.136)     (0.144)      (0.189)          (0.216)
               All = one (p-val.)            0.371       0.808        0.730       0.933        0.897            0.955
               All + one = 0 (p-val.)        0.101       0.042        0.768       0.908        0.745            0.809
               Mean y (control)              0.165       0.165        0.014       0.014        0.001            0.001
               R-squared                     0.213       0.319        0.329       0.393        0.219            0.241
               No. of obs.                   283         283          284         284          284              284
               Baseline control              No          Yes          No          Yes          No               Yes
               School FE                     Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes              Yes
               Village FE                    Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes              Yes

Notes: (1) Figures ( ) are standard errors. *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. (2) Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each school-grade. (3) The baseline controls include age (years); education (years); gender
(dummy); household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender (dummy); and land size (natural number).




                                                                     79
                                      Table S.35:   Checking on multiple-hypothesis testing
         Dependent variables:             One if    pass
                                     Dec.           Dec.
                                     2013           2014

                                         (a)             (b)
         Any product                 0.011           -0.043
         Original p-values           (0.660)         (0.226)
         Adjusted p-values
            Bonferroni               (1.000)     (1.000)
            Holm (1979)              (1.000)     (1.000)
         R-squared                   0.324       0.145
         No. of obs.                 850         845
         Dependent variables:         Per-day hours using light sources                      Log of expenditures
                                     Flashlight Kerosene      Kerosene               Education Kerosene        Total
                                     (total)     lanterns     lamps
                                                 (total)      (total)
                                         (c)         (d)          (e)                    (f)             (g)               (h)
         Any product                 -0.349*     -1.474*** -5.986***                 0.025           -0.829***         -0.040***
         Original p-values           (0.059)     (0.000)      (0.000)                (0.483)         (0.000)           (0.001)
         Adjusted p-values
            Bonferroni               (0.820)    (0.000)      (0.000)       (1.000)     (0.000)                         (0.015)
            Holm (1979)              (0.351)    (0.000)      (0.000)       (1.000)     (0.000)                         (0.010)
         R-squared                   0.058      0.175        0.383         0.220       0.390                           0.472
         No. of obs.                 847        847          847           842         631                             847
         Dependent variables:        Per-day minutes (average from Sep 2013 to Apr 2014)                               One if
                                     spent on:                                                                         attend
                                     Study at   Study at     Study at      Study at    Other
                                     school     home         home          home
                                                (total)      (day)         (night)
                                         (i)        (j)          (k)           (l)        (m)                             (n)
         Any product                 2.198      15.628*** -6.177**         21.805*** -6.031                            0.063***
         Original p-values           (0.420)    (0.004)      (0.011)       (0.000)     (0.506)                         (0.006)
         Adjusted p-values
            Bonferroni               (1.000)         (0.056)        (0.159)          (0.000)         (1.000)           (0.089)
            Holm (1979)              (1.000)         (0.036)        (0.079)          (0.000)         (1.000)           (0.051)
         R-squared                   0.137           0.172          0.211            0.219           0.451             0.154
         No. of obs.                 620             620            620              620             620               2646
         Baseline control            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
         School FE                   Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
         Village FE                  Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes

Notes: (1) *** denotes signiﬁcance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%, corresponding to the original p-values based on standard errors robust
to heteroskedasticity and clustered residuals within each village in columns (c) to (h) and within school-grade in the remaining columns.
(2) In columns (c) to (h), the baseline controls include household size; no. of males; head age (years); head education (years); head gender
(dummy); and land size (natural number). In the remaining columns, the baseline controls additionally include age (years); education
(years); and gender (dummy).




                                                                    80
