                                                             WPS7997


Policy Research Working Paper                               7997




     Municipal Asset Management in China’s
            Small Cities and Towns
                     Findings and Strategies Ahead

                               Alessandra Campanaro
                                    Joanna Masic




Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice Group
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7997


  Abstract
  Chinese municipalities have developed a large stock of                             considerably more advanced for land than for buildings
  capital assets during a period of rapid growth and urban-                          and infrastructure. Key deficiencies in data availability
  ization, but have yet to modernize asset management                                and reporting, governance, capacity, and financial man-
  practices. Cities face challenges such as premature decline                        agement indicate increased risks for local government
  of fixed assets and spiking liabilities related to operating and                   finance and the delivery of public services. For small cities
  maintaining assets. This paper evaluates the asset manage-                         and towns where public revenues are often uncertain and
  ment practices in three selected small cities and towns in                         limited, urban public services will be at risk of deteriora-
  China, using a benchmarking assessment tool followed by                            tion unless good asset management practices are put in
  an in-depth field assessment. The paper finds that overall                         place. The paper recommends strategic actions for upper
  performance is below half the international benchmark for                          and lower levels of government, to advance local asset
  good practice in all three cities. Management practices are                        management practices and facilitate the reform agenda.




  This paper is a product of the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at acampanaro@worldbank.org or jmasic@world.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
     Municipal Asset Management in China’s Small Cities and Towns

                                   Findings and Strategies Ahead


                                       Alessandra Campanaro1
                                            Joanna Masic2




JEL-codes: C83, H7, R51, R53


Key Words
Asset Management, municipal assets, small cities and towns, China, benchmarking assessment




1
  Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice, World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
<acampanaro@worldbank.org>
2
  Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice, World Bank, Beijing, China <jmasic@worldbank.org>
Acknowledgements
The principal authors of this study were Alessandra Campanaro (Senior Urban Specialist, GSU08)
and Joanna Mclean Masic (Senior Urban Specialist, GSU08), with consulting support from Olga
Kaganova (Lead Asset Management Specialist, consultant), Eddie Hum (Senior Municipal
Engineer, consultant), Hazem Mohamed Kamaleldin Abdelfattah Mohamed (Urban Development
Specialist, consultant) and Hongye Fan (Urban transport Analyst, consultant). Additional research
and editorial support was provided by Taotao Luo (Urban Analyst, consultant).

Peer reviewers were Jens Christian Helbech Hede (Senior Transport Specialist, GTI02), Zhao Min
(Senior Economist, GGO14) , Catherine Farvacque (Lead Urban Specialist, GSURR), Vickram
Cuttaree (Sr. Transport Specialist, GTIDR). Operational support in working with selected cities
was provided by Guangming Yan (Senior Urban Development Specialist, GSU08) and Sing Cho
(Senior Water & Sanitation Specialist). Administrative assistance provided by Huiying Guo
(Program Assistant, EACCF) and Inneke Herawati Ross (Senior Program Assistant, GSU08).

This study benefited from guidance offered by the managerial team composed by Paul Procee
(Program Leader, LCC5C), Abhas Kumar Jha (Practice Manager for East Asia and Pacific Region
Urban and Disaster Risk Management, GSU08), Bert Hofman (Country Director for China and
Mongolia, EACCF) and Mara Warwick (Operations Manager, EACCF).




                                               2
1. Introduction
Chinese cities have developed large stocks of capital assets during a period of rapid growth and
urbanization, but have neglected to update their asset management practices. This has created
massive current and future expense liabilities related to operating and maintaining these assets.
Cities face premature deterioration of their fixed assets and, consequently, may require early
investment in capital repair or replacement unless asset management is modernized. Furthermore,
given the uncertainty and limitations on public revenues3 in small towns and cities, if good asset
management practices are not put in place, urban public services will be at risk of deterioration
unless financial assistance by national governments is assured.

Asset management is a process of making and implementing decisions regarding the operation,
maintenance, refurbishment, acquisition, and disposal of fixed assets in a cost-effective manner
and with the objective of providing the best possible service to local citizens (Kaganova & Kopanyi
2014). It is a key piece of municipal finance and shows increasing importance in developing
countries, where local authorities often have limited flexibility to raise tax rates or impose new
taxes to increase public revenues. Studies have suggested that one of the main drivers behind asset
management reforms is the recognition of the financial payoff of better public asset management
(Kaganova and McKellar 2006). This paper considers immovable fixed (capital) assets4 under the
ownership and management of local governments and their state-owned enterprises (SOE’s).
These include three major categories: buildings, land, and municipal infrastructure.5

China has recognized the necessity of medium- and long-term budgeting of public finances, and
in 2014 adopted a new budget law that provides for the introduction of modern asset management
practices (such as multi-year capital investment plans). The law specifically requires better
financial management of fixed assets. Key features call for consolidated budgeting of all
government revenues and spending and improved budgetary performance and spending, especially
for the delivery of better public services (most of which require fixed assets). The law also
encourages local governments to adopt more sustainable mechanisms for investing in
infrastructure through rigorous on-budget management of capital investments and a long-term
view of financial management. China’s Ministry of Finance (MoF) also notes the importance of
planning and managing operating costs associated with government assets (MoF 2014). All of
these measures explicitly call on cities to improve the financial aspects of asset management.

Towns and town districts are important connecting points of China’s urban-rural dual economy
and are expected to become the focal point of the next wave of urbanization. The number of towns
in China grew from 2,173 in 1978 to 20,401 in 2014. The total population living in town districts—
the urban core of towns—reached 312 million in 2014; this is 42 percent of China’s urban
population and 23 percent of its national population. Towns absorb rural surplus labor and mitigate
the migration pressure on large cities, which are absorbing 40 percent of the country’s rural-urban

3
  A central element of revenue generation in China has been the acquisition and rezoning of rural land and the auction
of the municipal land rights for this land. This has severe future limitations given the finite availability of land to
acquire.
4
  Fixed assets for the purposes of this report are buildings and infrastructure, that is, roads, bridges, water systems,
utilities, housing, hospitals, schools, parks, etc.
5
  Movable fixed assets, such as a transportation fleet, are not included because they are usually managed together with
immovable assets or constitute a smaller value than immovable assets.

                                                           3
migrants and employing up to 70 percent of the labor force. Towns are expected to play an
important role as settlements for newly urbanized populations, especially those located close to
large metropolitan regions, thus fostering agglomeration and creating a virtuous cycle for
economic growth and social transformation. This new urbanization trajectory that strengthens
agglomeration economies will require comprehensive reforms in land and financial sector policies,
fiscal policies, and measures to allow market forces to do more in allocating factors of production,
particularly land and capital (World Bank and Development Research Center 2014b). Currently,
Chinese city and county governments use three types of development plans to advance urban
development: the five-year plan (FYP) of socio-economic development; the city master plan; and
the land use plan (see box 1.1).
 Box 1.1 Planning for Capital Investment in China
 Chinese city and county governments rely on three major plans to advance urban development: (1) the
 five-year plan (FYP) of socio-economic development; (2) the city master plan; and (3) the land use plan
 (table B1.1.1). Different government divisions are responsible for the development, revision, and
 implementation of these three plans. Each of the plans serves a different purpose with regard to capital
 investment. The FYP determines the types of projects to be developed and their respective objectives.
 The city master plan decides where to build these projects and their spatial allocations. The land use plan
 allocates land slots among competing projects, subject to the aggregate land supply quota.

              Table B1.1.1 Overview of China’s Planning and Budgeting Process
   Name of the         Government          Time horizon                   Relationship with Capital
   document            division                                           Investment
   FYP of socio-       Development &       5 years                        Development strategies;
   economic            Reform                                             prioritization of investment projects,
   development         Committee                                          objectives of service delivery
   City master plan    Urban Planning      20 years for master plan;      Project identification and spatial
                       Bureau              5 years for near-term          arrangement
                                           construction plan
   Land use plan       Land and Natural    15 years for master plan;      Land acquisition and concession
                       Resource Bureau     yearly for land supply plan

 Sector bureaus and divisions make sector work plans under the framework set by the FYP, city master
 plan, and land use plan. Often the sector work plan is made every year, and it identifies key projects or
 major investments for that year. Based on the work plan, a sector bureau prepares a project investment
 plan, project funding and a financing plan, and a project land use plan when applicable. Before
 implementing a project, the sector bureau or division needs to get approval of the project investment plan
 from the local development and reform commission, project funding and approval of the financing plan
 from the local finance bureau, and approval of the project land use plan from the land bureau. For
 instance, if a transport division of the construction bureau wants to build a new road, the transport division
 first needs to ensure the road is compliant with all three major city plans, and then has to identify the
 investment scale, as well as financial and technical details in the specific plans, to get approval from the
 respective bureaus.


As asset management is crucial to local governments’ finance and their ability to provide good
quality of urban public service, it is time to take a look at the current status of municipal asset
management in small cities and towns in China and identify strategies to advance their practices.
The main objectives of this paper are threefold: (1) to identify why updating municipal asset

                                                       4
management practices is important by benchmarking asset management practices in three small
cities and towns in China against international good practices; (2) to outline very practical
recommendations regarding what cities can do to start improving their management of assets based
on evaluation results; and (3) to suggest strategic actions on the part of the upper levels of the
government to facilitate and sustain local governments’ asset management reform agendas. 6

2. Methodology
This paper is based on an assessment of current municipal asset management practices in three
selected cities and towns: Linshui County Town in Sichuan Province, Chengcheng County Town
in Shaanxi Province, and Laibin City in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region (see figure 2.1).
The rationale behind this selection is that they are fairly representative of western provinces in the
south, south-middle, and north and also good examples of small cities and towns in China.7

                           Figure 2.1: Location of Selected Cities and Towns




                                                 Source: World Bank


6
  Given the increasing importance of successful municipal asset management in future urban sustainability and
municipal finance initiatives, the World Bank is developing a more comprehensive and systematic approach to
municipal asset management, transforming international good practices and methodologies into tools and training
materials to create a critical mass of knowledge and support for the World Bank’s China portfolio. It is hoped that
these good practices will eventually be shared with other cities and towns. In parallel, other World Bank teams are
advancing efforts related to the new budget law, including municipal finance, multi-year capital budgeting, fixed asset
accounting, public-private partnerships, etc.
7
  The average per capita income of urban residents in the three towns in 2014 ranged from RMB 23,703 to RMB
27,374 (rural resident income ranged from RMB 7691 to RMB 9365). In comparison, the average per capita income
in China was RMB 28,844 in 2014.

                                                          5
Linshui County is administratively under the prefecture-level city of Guang'an in eastern Sichuan
province,8 with a population of 1.03 million and located within a 90-minute drive of Chongqing’s
urban core. It has a well-established county town with a population of 139,000 and an industrial
zone that is expanding to the south. In 2014, the total gross domestic product (GDP) of Linshui
County was RMB 18.07 billion; total fixed asset investment was RMB 16.22 billion.9 Chengcheng
County is under the jurisdiction of Weinan prefecture-level city in Shaanxi province. Located in
the northeast of Guangzhong Plain, 180 km from Xi’an, the town has 135,000 urban residents, and
its traditional agriculture-dominated economy has become more industrial over the last decade.
Driven by the robust industrialization process, it is envisaged that the county will gain an additional
55,000 new urban residents by 2020. In 2014, the total GDP of Chengcheng County was RMB
8.53 billion, up 10 percent from 2013; total fixed asset investment was RMB 14.13 billion.10 Laibin
is a prefecture-level city in the central part of the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region
(“Guangxi”) in southern China, among the least developed areas in the country. Laibin includes
one district, one county-level city and four counties with a total population of approximately 2.5
million people. About 200,000 people live in the main urban center of the city. Laibin is a
significant transportation hub comprised of several regional and national highways, important rail
lines, and shipping along the Hongshui River to Hong Kong SAR, China; Macau; and Guangzhou.
In 2014, the total GDP of Laibin was RMB 55.1 billion.11

2.1 Benchmarking Assessment for Local Governments
The methodology includes the use of a new rapid assessment tool followed by an in-depth field
assessment of asset management in the three cities and towns. Unlike other assessments that focus
on assets of one sector (such as water or roads), the methodology deployed here covers all three
major categories of fixed assets owned and managed by local governments and their SOE’s:
buildings, land, and infrastructure. The in-depth assessment concentrated on evaluating property
and infrastructure portfolios, financial performance (in particular, approaches for planning and
budgeting capital investments as well as operation and maintenance of fixed assets), and
institutional arrangements. Based on all of the findings, recommendations are proposed for
advancing and improving municipal asset management in small cities and towns in China through
a range of short-, medium-, and long-term actions at the central and local government levels.

The diagnostic tool was developed and deployed in the form of a survey of key aspects of
municipal asset management.12 The tool combines several important elements: it defines a set of
characteristics, based on international good practices,13 that include knowing what assets you have
(inventorying), why the assets are needed (classification), and what is the market value of the
capital assets (for good decision making and transactions). The tool also captures the need for good

8
  A prefectural level city is often not a "city" in the usual sense of the term (i.e., a large continuous urban settlement),
but instead an administrative unit comprising a main central urban area (the city) and a larger surrounding rural area
containing many smaller cities, towns and villages.
9
   http://www.scls.gov.cn/E_ReadNews.asp?NewsID=10480
10
   http://www.weinan.gov.cn/gk/gzbg/zfgzbg/xzfgzbg/448557.htm
11
   http://www.gxzf.gov.cn/zwgk/gzbg/gsgbmbg/dfzfgzbg_lbs/201104/t20110417_312787.htm
12
   It was developed by the National Opinion Research Center (NORC) at the University of Chicago.
13
   They were selected after an extensive study and comparison of good practices in countries and cities recognized for
their advancement in asset management, in particular, Australia, Canada, continental Europe, the United Kingdom,
and some cities in the United States.

                                                             6
governance and transparency based on the use of auctions for allocating assets to the private sector
and how these revenues are used. Other characteristics that are considered include the presence of
a unified citywide framework for asset management, strategic asset management planning, training
opportunities for staff, life-cycle costing and management, and capital investment planning and
asset-related annual expense planning.

The survey results are converted into scoring and hence allow benchmarking performance over
time and across entities. Each of the surveyed characteristics is converted into a question for local
governments, and answers are scored on a scale from 0 to 1.14 This converts qualitative answers
to a comparable quantitative score representing a local government’s level of advancement in asset
management. Finally, a composite summary score is developed for each of the three groups of
assets. The composite score is split into two sub-components measuring “basic asset management”
and “advanced asset management” for buildings and infrastructure to provide additional guidance
for decision makers. The output of this tool is an asset management scorecard for each city that
displays color-coded quantitative scores for each characteristic.

The information and data collected through the survey and the scorecard results help policy makers
and asset managers to benchmark their achievements and identify and prioritize improvements;
the survey improves the accuracy and completeness of data collection and can be repeated over
time to measure progress on reforms. It can also be a useful approach for disseminating best
practices and peer learning among cities in the same country, which is especially beneficial since
benchmarking is becoming a mainstream of good asset management (Biagi 2014; Towers 2013).
At the same time, applying generic international operations and maintenance (O&M) assumptions
and benchmarks in an assessment of whether these cities plan and spend enough for good asset
maintenance carries the risk of underestimating or overestimating resource requirements.15 While
these have been accounted for in the study, such estimates should be used cautiously and only
when more reliable assessments of asset condition and needs are not feasible (NORC 2013).
Furthermore, most recommendations are relevant for large cities in China as well as small ones.
However, separate assessments may be needed for an asset management improvement agenda for
large cities.

2.2 Review of Literature and International Best Practices
Asset management enables local governments to assess how their assets can contribute to better
service delivery, greater accountability, and improved long-term financial health. These elements
are crucial for China's small city and town governments, especially when they are facing
challenges such as equalizing social services for migrants and local residents (hukou holders),16

14
   Note that the survey focuses on systems of asset management, not specific holdings themselves; the survey does not
deal with quantitative characteristics of asset holdings. This part of the assessment is covered by the in-depth technical
assessment.
15
   The methodology includes special measures to mitigate the risk that the use of generic international parameters for
O&M and depreciation costs would result in irrelevant or misleading data for the cities or conclusions of the report in
general. On each occasion when such international parameters are used, the most conservative (i.e. low- to mid-end)
numbers are applied, so that gaps in funding O&M and depreciation in the participating cities are not overestimated.
Further, when relevant and feasible, geographic adjustment to China of international parameters of O&M costs are
made or mentioned. These instances are carefully noted in the text.
16
   A hukou is a record in the household registration system.

                                                            7
increasing land acquisition and fiscal balance issues, and larger demand for infrastructure to
facilitate urbanization-driven development.

The development of conceptual frameworks for government asset management originated during
the 1980s and 1990s in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. This came
about as an attempt to address economic inefficiencies and the lack of accountability associated
with poor government property management (Kaganova and McKellar, 2006) and in reaction to
the privatization of former public utilities (IWR 2013). Professional organizations and
governments began to formalize rules of asset management to optimize the mix of cost, risk, and
performance over the life of their capital assets (IAM 2014).

International frameworks developed to facilitate the implementation of good municipal asset
management by providing checklists of elements and implementation guidance. Widely used
standards include Public Available Specification 55 (PAS 55), which was published by the British
Standards Institution in 2004 and then transformed into an international standard, the ISO 55000
series;17 International Infrastructure Management Manual, which was developed by New Zealand
and Australia; and Assessment of Tangible Capital Assets (PSAB 3150), which was developed by
Canada. Cities that choose to adopt these standards commit to be compliant with a set of
requirements in the relevant checklists. For instance, the ISO 55001: 2014 provides 71
requirements for good asset management,18 which are aligned with six subject groups—strategy
and planning, asset information, asset management decision making, lifecycle delivery,
organization and people, and risk review—covering a total of 39 subjects.19

Two main concepts are embedded in these standards. First, good asset management should be
strategic, systematic, and fact-based. An organization should design an asset management system
that is aligned with its strategic goals, and make asset management decisions based on accurate
and in-time information. This requires an asset strategy that includes financial planning, a clear
inventory, a good governance structure, and an advanced information system. The second key
concept is life-cycle management. Since the expense of operating, maintaining, and reconstructing
property and infrastructure has a life-cycle pattern and accounts for an important part of municipal
finance allocation, tracking and proactively maintaining an asset during its entire useful life has
financial and practical implications for municipalities.

Despite differences in institutional contexts, good asset management practices of local
governments across the world share some core features: good inventory, strategic financial
planning, institutional structure with clear responsibilities, transparency, optimizing maintenance,
and market-based evaluation (Kaganova and McKellar 2006).

Good Inventory. Asset management begins with an understanding of an entity’s assets, that is, the
establishment of a comprehensive and updated inventory and rational classification. To make
efficient, fact-based, and long-term decisions for assets, it is essential to develop and maintain

17
   ISO 55001 series sets out requirements of an asset management system; ISO 55002 provides additional useful
guidance for applying ISO 55001; ISO 55000 gives an overview of the subject and sets out principles and terminology.
18
   A specific requirement can be, for example, that “an organization’s asset management system shall include
documented information for applicable legal and regulatory requirements” (IAM 2014).
19
   The full list of subjects is provided in the appendix.

                                                         8
comprehensive records of municipal properties. However, in developing countries including
China, most local governments lack a good inventory system of municipal assets.

Advanced inventory and information management systems can be facilitated by accounting
reforms in the public sector. For instance, following New Zealand’s public sector reforms in the
1990s, government agencies became compliant with generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP) and were required to keep good records of their assets and up-to-date accurate valuation.
Information on location, plan, market valuation, acquisition, ownership, and current condition
must be included in an asset register (Kaganova and McKellar 2006). In Canada, similarly, cities
that adopt PSAB 3150 need to conduct initial valuation of all municipal tangible capital assets; the
framework stipulates that local governments record comprehensive information on their asset
portfolio, its value and its remaining useful life. This information also enables governments to
identify any overall infrastructure deficit and to develop long-term plans to address that deficit
(Jamer 2015).

Strategic financial planning. A strategic approach, including strategic financial planning, is
crucial to maximize extraction of value from assets and deliver cost-effective public services.
Local governments that have medium- or long-term asset strategies often achieve better outcomes,
since asset management can help achieving holistic development goals. Good asset management
can deliver exceptional services for citizens, improve the economic well-being of an area, correctly
maintain built assets, generate efficiency gains, and improve the quality of the public realm (U.K.
Department of Communities and Local Government 2008). Based on an understanding of these
positive benefits, local governments in the United Kingdom were required to submit their asset
management plans to the respective government offices with the aim of incentivizing local
authorities to take a strategic approach and improve the performance of local asset management.20

Institutional structure with clear responsibilities. Fragmentation of governance is not uncommon
across developed and developing countries. This can result in a lack of clear roles and
responsibilities and, ultimately, affect the efficiency of asset management. Though organizational
structures for asset management vary greatly, a key principle is that a senior manager must be
made responsible for asset management across the organization and an “asset champion” to whom
the asset manager reports must exist at board level (Jones and White 2008). Also, a city asset
management group, which is made up of representatives from different departments, should be
established to collaborate on asset management issues and prepare annual reports. This helps to
improve efficiency and minimize the impacts from fragmentation of governance. The city of
Portland, Oregon in the United States provides a good example of this approach (see box 2.1).

Transparency. As a requirement of international standards (ISO 55001) and a common element
in best practices, transparency is a simple, inexpensive, and effective way to facilitate good asset
management and suppress corruption. Public disclosure of asset information not only enables
public monitoring and engagement, but also stimulates governments to cautiously manage assets
so as to avoid a negative image and promote public relations (Kaganova and Kopanyi 2014).
Positive correlations between political integrity and municipal financial performance, especially
in municipal bond sales, have also been studied (Butler et al. 2009). Additionally, improving

20
  The requirement was dropped due to the rise of standards and performance. However, in recent years, there is a
growing bias of “lost interest” in asset management across the United Kingdom.

                                                       9
transparency and curbing corruption will have positive impacts on municipal finances. Therefore,
it is indispensable to review municipalities’ transparency regarding their asset information and to
improve public disclosure of municipal asset reports.

Optimizing infrastructure maintenance. Asset maintenance increases municipalities’ savings in
the long term and improves accountability. There is a bias among public officials toward building
new infrastructure rather than making the most of existing capacity, leading to more expensive and
less sustainable infrastructure solutions (McKinsey 2013; Jamer 2015). However, growing
attention is being paid to optimizing maintenance of existing property and infrastructure. This has
two important benefits: First, good maintenance can lead to the need for less frequent or less
extensive repairs and can raise infrastructure’s capacity and longevity. Second, it reduces long-
term costs due to underinvestment in maintenance.

For instance, it is estimated that if $12 billion had been invested in road maintenance across Africa
in the 1990s, it could have saved the continent $45 billion in reconstruction costs (McKinsey
2013). Additionally, major repair and replacement costs for municipal assets must be planned and
accounted for along with general maintenance. This is exemplified by the city of Tokyo, which
accumulates special funds for asset replacement (see box 2.2). Regularly assessing and cataloging
the condition of infrastructure assets and using a total cost of ownership (TCO) approach to
allocating maintenance budgets are often required for municipalities to avoid losses and capture
savings from improved maintenance operations (McKinsey 2013). This will minimize costs over
the useful life of an asset; tailor maintenance strategies and policies to individual asset objectives
and needs; and dedicate some proportion of funds for maintenance. In addition, the existence of a
citywide multi-year Capital Investment Plan is taken into consideration as a positive factor when
independent rating agencies assign creditworthiness to a city. This can have beneficial implications
for city borrowing costs.

Market-based valuation of property. Market-based valuation enables local governments to be
better informed about their financial status and reduces distortion caused by undervalued
transactions, such as land sales. This has important policy implications for local asset management
in China, especially since local governments have relied heavily on land sales to generate local
revenues; however, local governments are increasingly being called on to move toward a more
market-based approach in general. A good example of this can be seen in New Zealand, where all
crown lands (state-owned lands) are accounted for and transacted at market value. This results in
less distortion in the real estate market and fewer associated inefficiencies in the economy. The
public sector can extract maximum financial benefits when disposing of surplus property. There
are also fewer opportunities for corruption, compared to countries in which public property is sold
at below market prices (Kaganova and McKellar 2006).




                                                 10
Box 2.1 Portland, Oregon (United States)
From Fragmentation and Underinvestment to a Citywide Approach
The city of Portland has made improving asset management an increasingly important priority over the
last 25 years. More than a decade ago, a citywide strategic focus was adopted. Currently, six of
Portland’s infrastructure bureaus—Transportation, Water, Environmental Services, Parks and
Recreation, Development Commission (affordable housing), and Management and Finance—apply
asset management principles to some of their practices. Improving asset management helps the Portland
City Council, bureau managers, and citizens make informed decisions about asset-related services.

In 2002, Portland’s asset managers formed the City Asset Managers Group (CAMG) to collaborate on
asset management issues and prepare an annual report on the city’s physical assets. The report is
presented to the Planning and Development Directors’ Group, which represents the infrastructure
bureaus and the bureaus responsible for development permits, finance, and planning. The Directors’
Group oversees policies and resource allocation, coordinates long-range planning, and manages certain
cross-bureau planning and development initiatives. After reviewing the findings of the annual report,
the Directors’ Group provides recommendations to the City Council. Each asset management report is
presented to the City Council at the start of the annual budget work session.
Although the city’s various infrastructure bureaus continue to use different asset management strategies,
they collaborate actively with the long-term goal of improving asset management practices citywide.
As such, the bureaus use common definitions and terminology, but apply techniques consistent with
their individual organization's structure and the unique needs of their assets. For example, in 2008,
CAMG prepared a multi-year, integrated work plan to build capacity in citywide best practices. Its main
elements (below) display the goal of collaborative progress and recognition of bureaus' respective needs.
 Improve asset management practices: a. Continue with the citywide approach. b. Review service
  levels and pursue community consultation.
 Report status and condition of assets: a. Continue annual reports and improvements.
 Prioritize infrastructure spending: a. Prepare strategies related to service levels, funding
  allocations, and management practices to align revenues with service levels. b. Track local and
  regional discussions related to infrastructure financing. c. Develop a funding strategy to shrink the
  unmet budget needs for infrastructure maintenance.
 Integrate with related planning efforts: a. Integrate asset management into other planning efforts
  including community visioning, strategic planning, and long-term capital planning. b. Track local
  and regional discussions related to infrastructure.
 Prepare a plan to guide continued improvement in citywide asset management best practices:
  a. Complete an evaluation of current citywide asset management practices; b. Identify key gaps based
  on research into best practices and bureau needs. c. Prioritize improvements necessary to achieve
  best practices in asset management. d. Establish implementation steps and schedule.
 Build capacity to implement asset management best practices citywide and within capital
  bureaus: a. Enable bureaus to make continuous improvements to asset management practice based
  on their respective needs.
 Use asset management as a tool to improve decision making: a. Define and revise service levels
  to align service provision with system requirements, community needs, and sustainable funding
  levels. b. Determine appropriate asset management strategies to reduce maintenance liabilities.

(City of Portland 2009; City of Portland 2014)




                                                   11
     Box 2.2 Tokyo: Instruments for Funding Future Asset Replacement Costs
      Reserve Fund for School Facilities, Tokyo’s Chuo Ward
     Chuo Ward, one of the 23 wards of Tokyo’s metropolitan government, keeps a fund for the maintenance,
     rehabilitation, and replacement of school facilities. The ward annually sets aside an amount close to the
     depreciation amount for the 16 elementary schools and 4 lower secondary schools in the ward. The fund
     may be used only for its intended purposes unless the ward council decides otherwise. At the end of
     fiscal year (FY) 2009, the balance of the fund stood at approximately ¥10 billion (US$100 million),
     sufficient to replace three school buildings.
      Tokyo Waterworks: Financing a Water Pipeline Replacement Project
     The Tokyo Waterworks, which serves 12.5 million people in metropolitan Tokyo, has been financing
     its operating expenses and capital expenditures by relying on water tariff revenues. In 10 years, the
     utility will face the daunting task of replacing old water pipes. The total investment required is
     approximately ¥1 trillion (US$10 billion), which represents 40 percent of the utility’s total assets of ¥2.5
     trillion (US$25 billion) in current yen. Tokyo Waterworks started planning for maintenance and
     rehabilitation (M&R) and establishing a detailed construction plan well ahead of time. The utility also
     started accelerating debt repayments so that outstanding debt may be maintained at the current level of
     ¥0.5 trillion even after project financing has been undertaken. The accelerated repayments are being
     covered by water tariff revenues even though the Tokyo metropolitan government lowered the water
     tariff on January 1, 2005. The utility plans to finance the ¥1 trillion replacement project by implementing
     a reasonable tariff adjustment.
     (Suzuki et al. 2010)


3. Findings
3.1 Overview of Results
All three surveyed cities scored fairly similarly in terms of the current state of their asset
management practices, with each showing signs that there is room for considerable improvement
in certain aspects of asset management. The scores benchmark the current asset management
practices in each city against each other and against international good practices. As shown in table
3.1, the cities are roughly within the 45–49 percent range of the international benchmark for good
practices (see detailed results in the Appendix). Notable improvements are needed for each city to
reach international good practice norms in asset management across the different asset types.

Scores for land management are high in all three cities, but there is no consistent trend in asset
management systems for buildings and infrastructure. In Linshui, buildings and infrastructure
management scored the same. In Chengcheng, infrastructure management appears to be somewhat
more advanced than building management, whereas the reverse holds true for Laibin, with building
management more advanced than infrastructure management.

                Table 3.1 Performance of Asset Management Systems in Three Cities21
                 City and Town Performance as Percent of International Benchmark
                                                     Linshui                Chengcheng                 Laibin



21
     This shows performance as of April 15, 2015, the deadline for the survey submission to build the scorecard.

                                                           12
 Buildings                                              44                         38                       43
 Land                                                   60                         77                       65
 Infrastructure                                         44                         41                       31
 Overall Score                                          48                         49                       45
 # of questions without response                       none                       none                     6.29

All three cities scored relatively poorly on how they manage buildings, suggesting there is much
room for improving the management of this asset. A key strength of building asset management
systems in the three cities is that buildings are estimated at market value before decisions are made
about their allocation to the private sector, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), or municipal
enterprises. Allocation of buildings in Linshui and Chengcheng is conducted via public auction.
Linshui and Laibin also reported that they have citywide frameworks in place that set out
approaches to the management of buildings.22 However, these scores are outweighed by the cities’
weaknesses in governance, transparency, and financial management of buildings. Only one city
(Chengcheng) sends reports on buildings to local government. Asset-related financial planning or
long-term projections of capital expenditures for repairs and replacement of existing buildings are
absent in all three cities. The cities also lack strategic management plans for buildings.

Scores for land management in all three cities are substantially higher (60 to 77 percent) than for
buildings (38 to 44 percent) and infrastructure (31 to 44 percent). There is some variation among
cities in scoring on land management: Chengcheng appears to be more advanced than Linshui and
Laibin. Internationally, land is not usually as well managed as buildings and infrastructure. 23
However, this result is consistent with the importance of land in China as a source of local
revenues.

Management of land is based on the market value of properties, and allocation of land in all three
cities is reportedly done by public auction. 24 All three cities also record high transparency in
reporting land transactions. This is better than in many countries transitioning from a centrally
planned system to a more market-based system, where land transactions typically are reported
rarely or are valued at market prices and allocated by public auction. However, strategic plans for
land management are absent in all three cities.

All three cities score poorly on infrastructure management, although Laibin’s score is particularly
low. It is worth noting that when scores for infrastructure are calculated as a percentage of the
possible maximum, all three cities scored worse on "basic asset management" than on “advanced
asset management.” This is because “basic asset management” for infrastructure includes four

22
   The reason is likely that the cities follow policies or procedures for buildings that were introduced by the central
government for management of public buildings, such as Methods of State-Owned Asset Management in
Administrative Units and Methods of State-Owned Asset Management in Public Institutions.
23
   There is no systematic data confirming this, but anecdotal evidence from places as different as Ottawa (Canada) as
well as cities in the United States and Balkan countries confirm this.
24
   These results are directly from what the authorities reported in the survey. However, the data on prices for industrial
land allocated in Linshui show that the price was fixed at a low-level (see Table 3.5) during 2010–2014. In
Chengcheng, it remained nearly the same during the same period. This indicates that industrial land perhaps was not
auctioned, which is allowable under China’s Land Administration Law (2004) for certain types of land use assuming
the approval of higher than county-level government. This would be consistent with general country statistics showing
that during 2001–2012, the share of annual competitive allocations (vs. direct allocations) fluctuated in the range of
47–79 percent of the total allocations (World Bank 2014).

                                                           13
elements, two of which are related to transparency and reporting; if and when these two elements
score at zero, the total score for “basic asset management” is heavily affected. Nonetheless, this
reflects an important finding about the current stage of infrastructure asset management in these
cities: they are still at an engineering-oriented stage of evolution, with less attention paid to good
governance in general and transparency in particular. Preparing proper reports for decision makers
and the public is a sign of maturity in terms of city and asset management (see box 1.1) that the
selected cities have not reached yet. Further, as described below, financial management and
planning is underdeveloped in these cities.

Several weaknesses in the cities’ asset management systems relating to governance and
transparency were identified; these magnify risks for decision makers. Asset reporting to the public
is almost universally absent. None of the cities prepares reports for the public on government
buildings, land, and infrastructure; one partial exception is Laibin, which stated that it provides
periodic reporting on land. Also, reporting on assets to local government decision makers is
limited. Only one city noted that it makes such reports for buildings (Chengcheng); two cities
(Chengcheng and Laibin) advised that they have such reporting for land; and no city said that it
prepares reports on infrastructure. This signals the importance and urgency of shifting to proactive
and well-informed asset management. In buildings and infrastructure management, such an
approach is not yet in place. The lack of information available to the general public and decision
makers on the status of most public assets magnifies the risk of short-sighted or uninformed
decisions being made on the status of current local government assets.

Asset-related financial planning for buildings and, in most cases, for infrastructure, is lacking. All
three cities lack the following elements of good practices: (i) projecting long-term investment
needs related to existing buildings (that is, the need for capital repair and replacement); (ii)
preparing and using a multi-year capital investment plan (as a part of the budgeting system); (iii)
considering future life-cycle costs while planning technical solutions for capital investment in
certain buildings (for example, considering more expensive construction materials or technologies
that would make the construction more expensive but lead to overall savings during the life of the
building due to cheaper operations and maintenance); and (iv) assessing impact of future
operations and maintenance (O&M) costs resulting from planned capital investment in the future
operating budget.

Survey results highlight that these cities have largely ignored the financing of operations,
maintenance, and replacement of existing buildings and infrastructure, as well as the planning of
new ones. Decisions are made with inadequate information, which can only lead to increased
expenditure from municipal budgets in the future. There is insufficient accumulation of
depreciation funds to pay for capital repair and replacement of existing buildings and
infrastructure. For buildings, Laibin does not have such funding at all, while Linshui and
Chengcheng claim they have partial funding for some buildings. For infrastructure, Chengcheng
and Laibin do not have such funding at all, and Linshui claims it has such funding for the majority
of its infrastructure assets. In general, there is difficulty in adequately estimating O&M costs at
the time the technical solutions for projects are selected (Laibin), and reportedly O&M budget
costs are estimated only for some of the planned projects (Chengcheng and Laibin).




                                                 14
Proactive life-cycle management of buildings and records of their condition are absent25 in all of
the cities with a few exceptions in Laibin. Preventive maintenance and scheduled repairs do not
take place; instead, users or managers react to problems and breakages. For infrastructure, some
proactive life-cycle management of existing assets is reported on the scorecards. However, this
conflicts with interview findings, which showed that all maintenance and repairs are being made
in a reactive mode (that is, after breakdowns and problems are reported) with a constant shortage
of funding.

Staffs dealing with asset management have limited opportunities for training and development,
which limits their capacity for prudent asset management. The weakest practices in this regard are
associated with buildings and infrastructure. One city (Laibin) reported a good practice level for
land management.

3.2 Asset Portfolios
Three cities own and control diverse properties (as shown in table 3.2), but inadequate inventory
is identified across all categories of assets. First, the cities hold large stock of buildings, recently
built or under completion,26 while lack complete information about the inventories. The scorecards
show that inventories of buildings (or parts thereof) are complete in Linshui and Laibin, but not in
Chengcheng. However, the in-depth assessment conducted in Linshui casts doubt on the level of
completion of its inventory. In addition, the condition of buildings is not monitored in Linshui and
Chengcheng. In Laibin, the condition of buildings is recorded in less than half the cases.
Furthermore, the size of building portfolios remains imprecise: due to management fragmentation,
building information in all three cities is incomplete. Yet important insights could still be drawn
from some of the information provided during the in-depth assessments, particularly in
Chengcheng where the authorities were able to share a list of 115 buildings. The total floor area of
this portfolio is at least 573,300 square meters (m2), and with the construction cost of public
buildings in Chengcheng being approximately 1,300 RMB per m2, the replacement value of this
portfolio at least 745.3 million RMB (US$118.3 million).

                              Table 3.2 Main Types of Assets by Category
 Asset Category        Main Types (Portfolios) of Assets
 Buildings             Office buildings for administrative use
                       Apartments27
                       Educational facilities (kindergartens, schools, etc.)
                       Healthcare facilities (hospitals and clinics)
                       Commercial properties (shops)
                       Cultural and sports facilities
 Land                  Land for public use on already urbanized territories
                       Land allocated to long-term concessions (up to 40 years for commercial use, up to 50
                       years for industrial use, and up to 70 years for residential use), which requires contract
                       management


25
   This conflicts, though, with the data provided by Chengcheng, which contained a list of 115 public buildings and
defined the condition of all of them as “good.” This example illustrates, again, that data provided by cities often is
conflicting and, unless verified by field inspections and cross-referenced, should not be treated as fully reliable.
26
   For example, the opera house or the museum in Laibin or the vocational school and its dormitory in Linshui.
27
   Local governments have a mandate to provide housing for low-income families.

                                                         15
                     Land for new urbanization, constantly expropriated and converted from rural to urban
 Infrastructure      Water supply systems28
                     Wastewater collection and treatment plants
                     Storm drainage systems
                     Solid waste collection and disposal
                     Streets and roads
                     Parks and public spaces
                     Cemeteries (in Laibin only)29

While public housing represents an important portfolio in terms of asset management, it is not
included in the building inventory maintained by the state-owned asset management offices in
Linshui and Chengcheng. This housing stock, being used entirely for private activities (that is,
families’ residential use), is not subject to the inventorying. This is another significant indicator
that local governments do not recognize the full scope of their asset holdings.

The cities own and control large and growing land holdings but have poor inventory management
systems. Assessed at market value, these holdings would form the largest part of the city
government’s wealth. Only Chengcheng has a complete inventory of land assets. In Laibin and
Linshui, the land bureaus maintain only an inventory of land allocated to different types of users.
By contrast, the Chengcheng land use plan shows unallocated land under government control in
addition to registering land use rights for allocated land.

The scorecard results of the three cities show that the inventories of infrastructure assets are rarely
complete. Only the inventory of streets and roads in Linshui is reported to be whole. In the three
cities, the conditions of infrastructure assets are said to be recorded but to varying degrees. The
conditions of solid waste facilities and of the road network are usually recorded. Overall,
infrastructure management systems in Linshui perform better than those in the other two cities.
Possibly this is explained by the fact that, in Linshui, water and part wastewater systems are not
fully controlled by the county but rather by companies owned by upper levels of government.

3.3. Institutional Settings
The survey results for the three cities reveal a startling amount of institutional fragmentation,
insufficient training and capacity building, and a lack of explicit policies and strategic planning
for asset management. International experiences in asset management indicate that institutional
settings are required to promote overall responsibility and control of assets. Oftentimes
institutional settings are the result of history and reflect layers of past organizational decisions;
hence, they are resistant to change, and it may not be easy to establish effective and efficient
settings. Institutional deficiencies related to asset management are critical areas that require
reform.

Institutional fragmentation is a serious systemic problem. The responsibilities for managing
building and infrastructure assets controlled by each city are dispersed throughout a web of (i)
bureaus, commissions, and offices that constitute the municipal or local government itself; and (ii)

28
   The water supply system in Linshui is not controlled by the county, but rather by Sichuan Linshui AAA Public
Water Co. Ltd., which is owned by the prefectural-level city Guang’an.
29
   In Linshui and Chengcheng, cemeteries are privately owned or operated.

                                                      16
SOEs owned or co-owned by the same-level government (and their subsidiaries where relevant)
or by upper levels of government. Even for the same portfolio or type of assets, responsibilities
are sometimes fragmented across different bureaus and SOEs. This division of roles and
responsibilities usually is not justified by the nature of the assets or their life cycles and
unavoidably results in cost inefficiency, inability to optimize the use of limited resources
throughout a sector (for example, water, wastewater, etc.), and a dangerous mid- and long-term
lack of strategic vision and approach to balancing new investment in systems’ extensions vs.
capital repair of existing assets.30

High fragmentation of management arrangements for infrastructure assets leaves each town
without an entity with overall responsibility for planning, financing, and operating assets. As an
example, consider the transportation sector in Linshui, where responsibilities are split between the
transportation bureau, three SOEs, and two subsidiaries, all owned by the county government.
Along the same lines, the management of wastewater services in Linshui separates sewage
collection from sewage treatment. This effectively guarantees the lack of an entity with overall
responsibility for running the wastewater system (planning, financing, operating), including
frontline responsibility for industrial discharges.31 In contrast, in Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) countries, integrated wastewater utilities, which are often
combined by the water company and considered part of the same service, are the norm (see case
of France in box 3.1). In the selected cities, institutional arrangements hide the true total cost of
wastewater service. Maintenance and depreciation costs can be overlooked by some entities in this
fragmented context,32 especially since not all the entities are using the same accounting approach.
Obscuring the costs also inhibits cost recovery.

There is insufficient capacity and training in the asset management offices in the three cities. The
in-depth assessment uncovered capacity issues: In Linshui, only one out of four officials was able
to run the Asset Management Registration System introduced by the Ministry of Finance in the
state-owned asset management office. In Chengcheng, the officials of the land bureau could not
run the geographic information systems (GIS) application, including maps for the holdings under
their management.

Explicit policies and strategic planning related to asset management are lacking. There is no single
or leading source of asset management policies—rather, implicit policies on asset management
originate, directly and indirectly, from numerous sources such as laws, directives, and previous
administrative practices. Accordingly, there are no comprehensive guidelines on asset
30
   One example is the portfolio of educational facilities in Chengcheng, where the state-owned asset management
office at the finance bureau is responsible for managing asset inventory, acquisition, and disposition, and the education
bureau is in charge of maintenance, but with little or no monitoring of their performance.
31
   In Linshui Town, the operation and maintenance of sewerage is the responsibility of the Urban Management Bureau.
Meanwhile, the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP No. 1) is operated and maintained by Sichuan Linshui Aizhong
Environmental Protection Co. Ltd., a subsidiary of Sichuan Guang’an AAA Public Co., Ltd. Further, the Linshui
Housing and Urban-Rural Development Bureau is the entity responsible for planning, financing, and constructing any
extension to the sewerage network. At the same time, Linshui County Yuanfeng Industry Development Company
(LCYIDC) is in charge of constructing about 13 km of sewage interceptors connecting to the WWTP No. 2. This
company is also responsible for overseeing the construction of the 4,000 m³/day WWTP No.3 and the associated
sewage pipelines and treated effluent pipeline.
32
   When municipal governments face fiscal constraints, many choose not to fully fund the operation, maintenance, and
timely renewal of the wastewater networks (Browder et al. 2007).

                                                           17
management. These are particularly urgent for infrastructure assets. The absence of strategic asset
management plans or similar specialized strategic guidelines can lead to inefficiencies in service
delivery, substantial increases in operations and maintenance costs, and considerable losses in
revenues. The lack of information sharing and integration has resulted in incomplete basic
inventory data on local holdings.33 Such data would be an extremely useful tool for better informed
and modern policy and government decision making.

     Box 3.1 France: Overcoming Fragmentation in Wastewater Management
     Internationally, wastewater systems are typically managed as unified businesses that include collection,
     transmission, and treatment. In France, the private sector is involved in water and wastewater
     management through lease agreements or concession contracts. This started in the mid-19th century
     when cities signed concessions with private water companies for the supply of drinking water. Today,
     according to the French Ministry of Environment, 75 percent of water and 50 percent of sanitation
     services are provided by the private sector, primarily by two firms, Veolia and Suez.
     The typical form of delegated management (gestion déléguée) from the public to the private sector is
     through lease (affermage) contracts for 8 to 15 years. Private workers are responsible for operating and
     maintaining the assets and service. However, the municipality remains the owner of infrastructure assets
     and is responsible for funding and managing investment in these assets. Financing for this investment
     comes from the lease fee that the company-operator pays to the municipality. In some arrangements, the
     operator designs and manages the investment program on the city’s behalf. A critical part is that the
     operator’s costs are recovered and profit is obtained from end-user service fees.
     Concessions get longer-term (20- to 30-year) contracts and may be responsible for some investments,
     as stipulated in concession contracts. Asset ownership still remains with the municipality, and the
     municipality is typically responsible for replacement of larger assets. All assets revert to the
     municipality at the end of the concession period, including assets purchased by the concessionaire. A
     concession covers an entire infrastructure system, and so may include the concessionaire taking over
     existing assets as well as building and operating new assets. In both cases, service tariffs for consumers
     are established by local governments at the level that allows cost recovery, profit for the operator, and
     a fee to the municipality.
     (Salvetti 2014)


3.4. Financial Implications
In the absence of adequate asset management practices, local governments will spend more money
to prematurely repair and replace assets. Proper proactive maintenance and repairs prolong the life
of assets. Preventative asset management is more important for buildings and infrastructure, and
Chinese cities score poorly on asset management for these classes as opposed to land.

From a financial viewpoint, there is a fundamental difference between land as the asset class, on
the one hand, and buildings and infrastructure, on the other. Sales of land concessions on municipal
land (mainly converted from rural to urban) have constituted an important source of net revenues
for local governments over the past 15 years in China. 34 Public buildings and most forms of
33
   One example is the case of Linshui, where the Asset Management Registration System contains some data, albeit
limited, partial and inconsistent.
34
   In other words, the cost of acquiring land has been lower than the revenues obtained when the land is sold for
development. It is less clear whether the balance has always been positive if the cost of infrastructure is factored in.
There is no universal agreement on this. A World Bank report states that the revenues from land allocation always

                                                          18
infrastructure do not generate revenue but rather constitute "cost centers" for local governments.
Even if these assets sometimes generate revenues (for example, income from building rentals or
tariffs for infrastructure services), pricing of services usually does not recover the full cost of
maintenance. Therefore, it is important to understand and quantify financial links between fixed
assets and municipal budgets for the fiscal health and sustainability of local governments.

Overview of Linshui, Chengcheng, and Laibin Revenues35
Total revenues of city and county governments include local fiscal revenues, local non-fiscal
revenues, and transfers from upper-level governments. Tax and non-tax revenues (for instance,
administration fees) make up local fiscal revenues. Non-fiscal revenues include gains from
investments and land revenues. Upper-level government transfers are composed of tax rebates,
general transfers, and earmarked transfers.

For the three cities assessed, intergovernmental fiscal transfers from the central level have been a
dominant source of their total revenues. Fiscal transfers constituted about 68–75 percent of all
revenues for Linshui, as an example (table 3.3). For local financial management, this can be a
blessing and a curse. On the one hand, upper governments can bail out or stabilize local budgets if
their own-source revenues decline. On the other hand, this leaves local governments in perpetual
uncertainty, making financial planning difficult even in the medium term. The second largest
source of local revenues (local fund revenues in Linshui and local fiscal revenues in Chengcheng)
is much smaller and may vary from one year to another.

There are no consistent data on local revenues by source. The data on local non-fiscal revenues
(including land revenues) and the land revenues themselves can conflict, as in the case of Linshui
where the land revenues are shown to be substantially larger than the non-fiscal revenues of which
they are only a part. One reason for this is that the data on land concession revenue are provided
by the land bureau, whereas the land income within the non-fiscal revenue is calculated by the
finance bureau, and their methodologies differ. The land bureau records the land concession
revenue according to contract signing time, while the finance bureau records the land revenue on
a cash-received basis.

The finance bureau’s annual statistics record the actual revenues received by the county
government. The data in the land bureau’s statistics consist of the revenues stipulated on contracts
signed in a particular year, which may not be received immediately.36 However, the discussion of
the land concession revenues below is based on data from the land bureau since data from the
finance bureau was not available. These data, while overstating absolute amounts of the land
revenues (as compared to data showing revenue actually collected), are still useful for
understanding other features, such as volatility, and for identifying the maximum that the land
could generate in a particular year.



recovered the costs of land acquisition, infrastructure provision, and other related expenses and produced a profit
(though the profit has been declining) (World Bank 2014). However, given high indebtedness of local government
SOEs and other vehicles, this account is challenged by some experts.
35
   The time periods covered in this and next sections vary because of differences in the availability of data from the
three counties.
36
   http://stock.jrj.com.cn/2015/04/22160519132503.shtml

                                                         19
       Table 3.3 Revenues of the Linshui Local Government by Source (RMB million)
                                                              Linshui County
                               2008            2009            2010          2011              2012            2013
 Fiscal revenue                 191             241              314          414               489             581
 Non-fiscal
                                118             314             448             534             541             725
 revenue
 Fiscal transfers               925           1,289            1,607          1,939           2,348           2,743
 Total                       1,234          1,844         2,369        2,887          3,378          4,049
Source: Project Appraisal Document of World Bank Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang’an Demonstration Area
Infrastructure Development Project, 2015

Land Concession Revenues37
The share of land concession revenues to total revenues varies from city to city. In Linshui, from
2010 to 2013,38 average land concession revenue was 19 percent of total revenues (table 3.4). This
share fluctuated substantially from 7 percent in 2011 to 25 percent in 2012. Absolute revenues for
land concessions have been volatile as well. Moreover, greater volatility is seen in land prices and
revenues by subsectors (that is, industrial land, and commercial and residential land). While the
price of industrial land has been steady since 2010, the price of commercial and residential land
increased until 2013 with an average growth rate of 46 percent per year. However, in 2014, the
price of commercial and residential land fell by about 70 percent (table 3.5) and with a steep
decline in land area sold, revenue from sales of commercial and residential land dropped even
more sharply.

In Linshui, land-based revenues have been highly unstable. Recent years’ trend may indicate that
the demand for residential and commercial land in Linshui is shrinking. Despite strong growth
rates from 2010–2013, industrial land area leased was 6.4 times higher in 2013 than in 2014, which
may result from a combination of factors including the large accumulated stock of auctioned land;
tightened control policy of land auction; and slowing land conversion from rural to urban. Overall,
land-based revenues declined by more than 95 percent from 2013 to 2014 (see table 3.5, aggregate
land concession revenue). This decline is equivalent to 23 percent of Linshui’s total revenues of
2013.

Table 3.4 Contribution of Land Revenues to Total Revenues in Linshui County, 2010-2013
                                                                   2010          2011           2012          2013
 Total revenues, RMB million                                       2,369         2,887          3,377         4,049
 State-owned land concession revenues, RMB
                                                                       443         214            837           949
 million
 Land concession revenue as share of total
                                                                        19            7            25            23
 disposable revenues, %
 Source: Data provided by Linshui County Government

                      Table 3.5 Linshui Land Concession Revenue, 2010–2014
37
   Land concession revenue is higher than non-fiscal revenue. The land bureau records land concession revenue using
a method that calculates this income according to contract signing time; the money may not yet have been received
by the county. In contrast, non-fiscal revenue is calculated by the finance bureau according to when money is received
(Chinese Business News 2015). http://stock.jrj.com.cn/2015/04/22160519132503.shtml
38
   Which is the last year for which the revenue data were available for this report.

                                                         20
 Item/Year                                                      2010       2011        2012     2013      2014
 Commercial and residential land area                            568        161         494      378        26
 Commercial and residential land price (10,000                    77        119         164      238        70
 RMB/mu)
 Industrial land area sold (mu)                                   144       404         481     868        135
 Industrial land price (10,000 RMB /mu)                             6         6           6       6          6
 Aggregate land concession revenue (RMB million)                  443       214         837     949       25.8
Source: Data provided by Linshui County Government

In Chengcheng County, the total land revenue increased steadily during the past five years, but the
risk of high volatility remains. From 2012 to 2014, land concession revenues averaged 15 percent
of total fiscal revenue, rising from 10 percent to 20 percent (see table 3.6). Land concession
revenue increased 2.8 times from 2010 to 2011, with an average growth rate of 46 percent from
2011 to 2014. Despite the price of industrial land staying constant from 2010 to 2013, the revenues
from industrial land increased by 67 percent in 2013 and dropped a little in 2014. The price of
commercial and residential land has fluctuated during the past five years, with a peak of 730,000
RMB per mu 39 in 2012 (see table 3.7). The area of commercial and residential land leased
increased from 2010 to 2014, while the area of industrial land leased was volatile (Table 3.7): it
increased in 2011, but then dramatically decreased to less than one-eightieth of that in 2012 even
though the price was the same from 2010 to 2012.The drop in land area leased might have resulted
from (i) change in the land supply policy and (ii) reduction in funds available for land acquisition
given growing costs. Total land revenue kept increasing from RMB 40 million in 2010 to RMB
380 million in 2014 (table 3.7) because commercial and residential land is a dominant source of
the land concession revenue. However, similar to Linshui, Chengcheng County may be exposed
to the risk of volatile land revenues in the future.

     Table 3.6 Contribution of Land Revenues to Total Revenues in Chengcheng, 2012–2014
                                                                 2012                  2013            2014
 Total revenues, RMB million                                     1686                  1777            1935
 State-owned land concession revenues, RMB                        176                   262             380
 million
 Land concession revenue as share of total                          10                   15              20
 disposable revenues, %
Source: Data provided by Chengcheng County Government

                     Table 3.7 Chengcheng Land Concession Revenue, 2010–2014
 Item/Year                                                          2010      2011       2012   2013      2014
 Commercial and residential land area sold (mu)                       58       162        239    407       791
 Commercial and residential land price (10,000                        33        47         73     61        47
 RMB/mu)
 Industrial land area sold (mu)                                      258       824         10    120           80
 Industrial land price (10,000 RMB /mu)                                6         6          6     10            8
 Aggregate land concession revenue (RMB million)                      40       123        176    262          380
Source: Data provided by Chengcheng County Government



39
     The mu is a Chinese land measurement. One hectare is equivalent to about 15 mu.

                                                         21
In Laibin, land concession sales account for a substantial and growing, though volatile, share
of total municipal revenues. From 2006 to 2011, land concession revenues averaged 16 percent
of total revenues, growing from 3 percent to 31 percent (table 3.8). As evidence of the volatility of
land revenues, the absolute amount dropped from 2007 to 2008 (table 3.8) and prices of land
dropped sharply in 2012 as compared to 2011 (table 3.9), consistent with a price decline
nationwide.

      Table 3.8 Contribution of Land Revenues to Total Revenues in Laibin, 2006–2011
                                            2006          2007          2008          2009         2010          2011
 Total revenues, 10,000 RMB              112,069       196,320       229,601       281,761      454,595       715,303
 State-owned land concession               3,146        35,302        23,115        34,284      101,830       223,171
 revenues, 10,000 RMB
 Land concession revenue as                      3           18            10            12            22            31
 share of total revenues, %
Source: Laibin Inception Report: Initial Diagnostic and Recommendations, December 2012

                        Table 3.9 Laibin Land Concession Revenue, 2010-2012
 Item/Year                                                             2010               2011          2012 (partial)
 Commercial and residential land area sold (mu)                        1,200              2,325             1,328
 Commercial and residential land price (10,000                           101              187.9              75.3
 RMB/mu)
 Industrial land area sold (mu)                                        5,856              1,400              2,384
 Industrial land price (10,000 RMB /mu)                                  8.4               12.6               10.7
 Aggregate land concession revenue (RMB million)                         1.7                4.5                1.2
Source: Laibin Inception Report: Initial Diagnostic and Recommendations, December 2012

The high volatility of prices and amount of land sold results in unpredictable local revenues from
sales of land concessions. Two cities have already faced sharp declines in these revenue streams.
Linshui’s land revenues dropped from 2013 to 2014 by 25 percent of the total 2013 city revenue
(a catastrophic decline by international standards). Laibin experienced a 73 percent in land
revenues from 2011 to 2012. This may indicate that an unavoidable decline in land concession
revenues is beginning.40

Sustainability is a serious concern: one-time revenues from a finite resource like land cannot be a
sustainable source of recurrent revenues (Peterson 2008). The city’s territory cannot grow forever
by consuming new land for sale, and payable demand for land is not infinite either, especially
given the potential housing affordability gap (that is, the difference between prices that recover
total cost and what buyers might be able to pay). Implications for asset management are that even
when land is managed relatively well, as in the case of all three cities, the revenues from it cannot
be considered a stable source of funding for asset-related expenses, such as capital investment in
buildings and infrastructure.41

40
   Notably, in Laibin, a decline in land sales immediately results in a decline of land concession revenues since the
land concession fee is one-time and payable within 40 days of the sale. Details about Linshui and Chengcheng are
not available for this report. In some other cities, the effect of declining land sale revenues on city budgets would be
buffered because payments are made in installments. For example, in Beijing, buyers of land concessions pay 35
percent up front and the rest in installments, according to You-Tien Hsing (2010).
41
   The instability of this revenue source is magnified, as already mentioned, by the fact that within existing practices,

                                                           22
Asset-Associated Expenses
Cities have five groups of current and future expenses related to fixed assets such as buildings and
infrastructure: (i) capital investment in new buildings and infrastructure; (ii) future annual
operation and maintenance (O&M) expenses related to planned new buildings and infrastructure;
(iii) capital investment in capital repair, renovation, or replacement of existing buildings and
infrastructure; (iv) annual O&M expenses for existing fixed assets; and (v) repayment of debt
incurred in the past for capital investment in such assets. The high indebtedness of local
governments and their debt-bearing SOEs and other entities is a well-known concern, and the three
cities studied are not an exception.42 However, this subject, is beyond the immediate scope of this
report even though it is relevant for Linshui, Chengcheng, and Laibin. The four other types of
expenses listed above are interrelated. For example, future O&M costs roll into current O&M
expenses as soon as new buildings or infrastructure are built and put in operation. For analysis,
though, it is useful to distinguish these four types.

Financial and life-cycle monitoring and management of fixed assets are almost nonexistent based
on the survey findings. Reliable and reasonably complete quantitative estimates of the above four
types of expenses are not possible at this time. However, as shown below, even partial and
illustrative estimates signal that these aspects of asset management need attention if negative
consequences of the current practices are to be avoided or at least managed.

Capital Investment
It is difficult to find information on total capital investment in public property and urban
infrastructure spending in the three cities. In addition, overall planning, delivery, funding, and
financing of public property and infrastructure takes place within what the literature calls fiscal
fragmentation—multiple, intertwined channels—that is typical for all cities in China. Thus, that
not all investment in acquiring or building property and infrastructure is coordinated or prioritized,
and not all investment is reported or even recognizable. The fiscal fragmentation mirrors and
relates directly to the institutional fragmentation already discussed.

The problem is not the use of multiple sources of funding (which is a well-known international
practice) but rather the fragmented decision making, off-budget spending, and liabilities, as well
as the lack of consolidated financial reporting. In particular, the municipal budget is intertwined
with the budgets of SOEs, and as such, a substantial portion of capital investment made with public
funding might be not reflected on municipal budgets. Thus, capital construction by SOEs
themselves is not shown in the municipal budget, while it is funded, at least partly, by subsidies
and transfers from the municipal budget. For example, the shopping, entertainment and hotel mall
that was built in 2012 by Laibin Real Estate Company, a subsidiary of the Laibin
Guizhongshuicheng Development and Investment Co. Ltd., is located on land that was purchased
using a subsidy provided by Laibin City. Furthermore, the private sector’s contribution via various
channels is impossible to estimate. To illustrate the practice, in Chengcheng County Town, the
sources of funding and financing infrastructure, by order of importance, are as follows:43 fiscal

land concession revenues are collected up-front entirely or in a substantial share.
42
   In particular, some of their SOEs have substantial debt compared to their assets.
43
   According to semi-structured interviews with local bureaus.

                                                          23
transfers, local government revenues, loans from the State Development Bank, loans from
international financial institutions (World Bank), land substitution, and advances from contractors
and public-private partnerships (PPPs).44 Typically, each project is financed from two or three
sources maximum. Resettlement projects are financed from the Chengcheng County Housing
Guarantee Fund.

Operation and Maintenance Expense Liabilities
Each town’s growth and investment in construction of new capital assets helps create current GDP,
but it also creates future expense liabilities to manage, operate, maintain, repair, and recapitalize
these assets.45 In turn, this implies annual O&M costs, even if accumulation of recapitalization
funding, similar to Tokyo (box 2.2), is not done. Within good practices, O&M costs need to be
estimated and predicted. For an example, see the case of France (see box 3.1).

Based on current practices in the three cities, O&M costs are usually not budgeted (neither at
conception of investment, nor in a recurrent manner during the lifetime of the asset) and are left
for some future date. Further, as the scorecards show, annual O&M expenses for existing buildings
and infrastructure are not systematically monitored, with the exception of some infrastructure
systems in Linshui and buildings in Laibin. Moreover, there are no established guidelines for
planning O&M expenses for municipal fixed assets, and estimates sometimes used by building
design institutes are insufficient compared to international experiences. The comparison in table
3.10 indicates that current planning and spending practices underinvest in operations and
maintenance of fixed assets, and are, on average, in the magnitude of at least 2-3 times—and
sometimes up to 10 times— lower than international benchmarks for good practices.

             Table 3.10 Annual Asset-Related Expenses in Linshui and Chengcheng
                           as Compared to International Guidelines
 Type of Expenditure          Amount allocated for public          Amount required for          Amount required for
                            buildings and pipeline networks          public buildings             pipeline networks
                            in Linshui and Chengcheng, as              according to                  according to
                               % of initial capital cost:46         international good           international good
                                                                   practice, as % of the        practice, as % of the
                                                                    replacement cost47           replacement cost48
O&M                          1% (in the best case)                         6.8%                        1% - 3%


44
   For more information about the World Bank Group Public-Private Partnership in Infrastructure Resource Center
(PPPIRC), visit its website at http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/.
45
   “Recapitalization” here means supporting the economic value of an asset during its lifetime. In practice, this includes
substantial repair and eventual replacement of an asset. In good practices (e.g., a school district in Tokyo),
recapitalization is funded from specially designated “reserve funds” or “depreciation funds” that accumulate annual
depreciation and are funded, in turn, either from tariffs for services or from annual budgets associated with facilities.
46
   Such percentages (1 percent for buildings and pipelines and 2 percent for roads, etc.) are customary (not mandatory)
norms used by some design institutes in China when they estimate O&M expenses in feasibility studies for
construction projects. In reality, interviews with experts in the selected cities indicated that even these amounts may
be not available at budget allocations.
47
   These numbers assume a 50-year life span of buildings and are calibrated for Washington, DC, and, hence, should
be subject to geographic adjustments. In fact, Whitestone Research indicates that Shanghai may have O&M costs
roughly around one-third of those of Washington, DC. Even with this reduction, costs would still constitute about 2.2
percent, not the 1 percent currently assumed if at all (Kaganova 2011).
48
   The "replacement cost" is the international terminology and approach that reflects inflation over time (NORC 2013).

                                                           24
Accumulated                    For minority of                     2.4 to 2.9%                 Partly included in the
depreciation                 buildings, only; the                                                     above %
                             amount is unknown

O&M expenses are often defined on an ad hoc basis in the general budget regardless of real needs.
In 2012 in Laibin, for example, city technical staff estimated that only about 10 percent of repair
needs were budgeted on average across bureaus (Laibin Inception Report 2012). During 2012–
2014, the city administration in Chengcheng allocated a constant 1.2 percent of the total city
expenditures for O&M for office buildings. 49 While this resulted in the amount increasing
annually, given that the city budget was increasing, it does not imply these were sufficient amounts.

Local governments also substantially underinvest in funding for future capital repair and
replacement. Laibin does not invest in future capital repair and replacement at all; Chengcheng
has such investment in a few cases for buildings and lacks it for infrastructure; and Linshui has
partial funding for buildings and infrastructure. Meanwhile, having sufficient reserve funds is
considered to be the best international practice, similar to Tokyo’s plan for future depreciation of
assets (see box 2.2).

New capital investments do not take into account optimization of the current network. Another
manifestation of underinvestment in maintaining existing infrastructure is that, in Linshui and
Chengcheng, capital investment in water, wastewater, and road systems for 2015–2025 is almost
exclusively planned for new additions or new infrastructure, with few instances planned for capital
repair or replacement of existing structures. Finally, it should be reiterated that multi-year capital
investment planning does not exist in Chinese cities, and all capital planning is done on an annual
basis only.

Oversight of asset O&M has been a vastly diffused and much ignored practice in China. To
summarize, local governments largely do not know the amounts they need for operation and
maintenance (O&M) or future capital repair and replacement of existing and planned assets.
International experience is that these annual costs can be substantial compared to initial capital
costs and annual municipal budgets. Despite fragmented data, it is evident that current spending
on O&M is vastly insufficient. As already mentioned, accumulation of funding for future
replacement of assets is either completely lacking or inadequate. Moreover, capital investment is
made almost exclusively in extensions of systems and new construction, rather than repair or
replacement of existing systems. Thus, it is critical for local governments in China to start
estimating real O&M and repair and replacement needs and to plan for them as part of municipal
budgets.

The current practice exposes cities to multiple risks ranging from the development of unsafe
buildings and infrastructure to financial vulnerability in the long term. Improved asset management
practices, especially if introduced into city budgeting systematically for all buildings and
infrastructure, will be costly. If left unchanged, current practices will result in (i) buildings and
other fixed assets deteriorating prematurely (as illustrated by figure 3.1) and (ii) creation of large

49
  It is not clear what exactly is included in this category, for example, whether educational and cultural buildings are
included or not.

                                                          25
public liabilities for which local governments will be financially unprepared. Experts believe that
assets’ useful lives can be shortened by 33 percent without proper investment in O&M, thus
increasing long-term capital investment needs by one-third. Underinvestment in O&M can also
lead to risks to public safety and an overall decline in the quality and quantity of service delivery.

                             Figure 3.1 Example of Asphalt Road Depreciation




 Source: Drawn from Capital Investment Planning Guide for Ethiopian Cities, Ministry of Urban Development and
                                          Construction, 2011, p. 21.


Asset Age, Condition, and Underinvestment in O&M

Future asset-related financial needs in each city depend on the age of the assets. Expensive
maintenance and replacement work is required when a building reaches a certain age. Refurbishing
building interiors may be required every 8 years; electrical systems need partial replacement every
10 years; and roofs need resurfacing or replacement every 30 years (Whitestone Research 2010).
These costs also depend on asset conditions and how well they were maintained and repaired in
the past (figure 3.1). Thus, it is crucial for cities to know the age and condition of their physical
assets so that they can forecast future capital investment needs and plan corrective and preventive
maintenance and repair.

Such data seem to be almost nonexistent in the selected cities. An exception is building stock data
in Chengcheng, where the government has a list detailing the number of buildings with their age
(figure 3.2), indicating that this stock is relatively young. The local government also believes that
all of these buildings are in good condition, which was not possible to verify independently.50 The
absence of data on initial costs or replacement costs for these buildings makes it impossible to
estimate their O&M expenses according to international good practices.



50
     It is not obvious that this is true, given chronic underinvestment in O&M.

                                                            26
The initial costs or replacement costs of infrastructure assets are usually not known, except for
relatively new assets. Depreciation is not calculated for accounting purposes either.51 As a result,
data for estimating required O&M expenses are lacking. However, an example from Laibin is
instructive. The Guangxi Laibin Water Environment Project, which is being financed with World
Bank assistance, had future O&M costs alone estimated as 3.19 percent of construction costs;
together with depreciation costs, they were estimated at 5.2 percent of the construction cost. In
terms of the city budget, this single project would add 0.5 percent to total city expenses annually
(starting with the city’s budget for 2011).

                   Figure 3.2 Distribution of 115 Public Buildings in Chengcheng by Age

                                     50
                                     45
                                     40
              Numbers of Buildings




                                     35
                                     30
                                     25
                                     20
                                     15
                                     10
                                      5
                                      0
                                          1-10    11-20                21-30             31 and more
                                                        Years of Use

     Source: Chart generated by the World Bank team based on data provided by Chengcheng County Government


Even the limited evidence available indicates that underinvestment in the costs of O&M and repair
and replacement of existing assets is widespread and has four systemic causes. First, neither
mandatory norms for planning O&M expenses nor local good practices of ad hoc planning exist;
meanwhile, the norms occasionally used are too low when compared to international standards of
good practice. Second, even these lower-than-needed O&M expenses are not always budgeted in
practice, due to the shortage of funding and low pricing that does not fully recover costs of use or
service delivery. Third, investment is focused on new assets and funding is insufficient for
maintaining existing assets—a trend driven by a policy environment encouraging the spatial
expansion of cities and short-term goal setting. Fourth, local infrastructure managers interviewed
confirm that O&M costs for new fixed assets are usually unplanned due to high dependence of
budgets on intergovernmental transfers. This results in additional pressure on municipal budgets
and perpetual underinvestment in O&M.

From a technical viewpoint, it remains unclear how local governments estimate O&M needs in
requests for budgetary funding for the succeeding year. A number of questions and issues still need
to be explored including (i) whether O&M costs depend on specific infrastructure configuration

51
  Therefore, the accounting reform did not reach yet a stage of massive reevaluation of fixed assets, and it is not clear
whether it is planned to make valuations of existing assets or, alternatively, only the value of new assets will be
recorded on municipal balance sheets.

                                                           27
(NORC 2013); (ii) whether O&M requested funds depend on the actual condition of assets; (iii)
the size of O&M estimated needs calculated by local technical experts at various levels of local
government and the share actually funded; and (iv) the methodology for estimation of O&M
budget requests (based on previous years’ requests).


4. Conclusions and Recommendations
The findings of this paper underscore the fact that asset management is not yet recognized as an
important and distinctive area of municipal management in China. The results of the survey are
very similar in all three cities when scored against international good practice benchmarks: At 45–
49 percent of the maximum score, there is a lot of room for improvement. Land is managed better
than buildings and infrastructure, which is unusual by international standards, but not surprising
in China given local governments’ reliance on land revenues for their budgets. Similar results
could reasonably be expected to be found in most other small towns and cities in China, and overall
may be applicable to large cities as well. This is typical of a pre-reform state and implies multiple
inefficiencies and weaknesses.

The diagnostics reveal key vulnerabilities in terms of data availability and reporting, governance,
capacity, and financial management. We observed: (i) a lack of periodic reporting on assets, even
for decision makers, which results in decisions being made in the dark, without their implications
being recognized or foreseen; (ii) extreme fragmentation of asset management functions in many
cases, even for single asset classes (such as wastewater infrastructure) leading to multiple
inefficiencies, including cost inefficiency;52 (iii) a lack of sufficient professional capacity for asset
management, which is a highly technical area of knowledge and skills, and lack of adequate
training opportunities, except for land managers; and (iv) poor financial management, signaling
that the financial aspects of asset management are in an embryonic state. In particular, future asset-
related expenses for buildings and infrastructure (for example, future O&M and capital costs) are
not estimated and budgeted, and multi-year citywide capital investment planning does not exist.

Fast growth of all three cities (like other cities and towns in China) and large investments in new
public infrastructure establishes large and growing, but unknown, expense liabilities for local
governments. Even without considering debt repayment obligations, required O&M and
depreciation expenses alone accumulate quickly and require city budgets to grow so as to cover
expenses not covered by user fees. Hidden accumulation of future expense liabilities is further
amplified because proper life-cycle management of buildings and infrastructure is not performed.
In fact, estimates made with very limited data indicate that O&M expenses might be funded at 30–
50 percent of the adequate level in the best case, and may be as low as 10 percent of what is
required. This will lead to premature deterioration of assets and a need to replace them earlier than
with reliable O&M funding, thus increasing future capital expenses. Insufficient spending on
maintaining public buildings and infrastructure, if not rectified, will lead to increased risks to
public safety and declining scope and quality of public services.


52
  Addressing institutional fragmentation of asset management within each sector should be a part of broader sectoral
reforms and proceeded by sector assessment that considers all aspects of service delivery (service scope and
institutional, financial, and operational quality). Hence, the issue is broader than asset management and should be
addressed in its entirety.

                                                        28
City budgets, with their current funding structure relying on intergovernmental transfers and land
revenues, can be unsustainable—even without the additional demands posed by increasing O&M
and depreciation costs. In some cities, a large and volatile share of the city budget comes from land
concession sales, which is not a sustainable source of revenues given its finite nature. As result, a
collision between increasing demands on municipal budgets (from growing portfolios of municipal
capital assets) and declining budget revenues (from land sales) appears inevitable. This puts at risk
the revenue sustainability of cities.

Given the current shift taking place with the introduction of China’s budget law toward increased
transparency, accountability, and use of efficient, market-based principles, the time is ripe to
actively define roles and responsibilities for municipal asset management. The lack of a budget for
recurring costs will fundamentally impact the need for future transfers from central government.
Until now lots of assets have been funded off-budget, but with the current reform process more
assets can come from a clear source of financing and be on the local government’s balance sheets.

One crucial role central government plays in municipal asset management is providing country-
level principles, policy and legislative framework. This translates into a central-level reform that
explicitly defines what common standards local government should take and what rights local
governments can have in regards to their public property. This “top-down and total system
approach mandating change across government” is taken by best practice countries such as
Australia, New Zealand and UK, where municipal asset management is practiced in a context of
strong national government direction dating back to the 1980s. Actions in New Zealand and
Canada included national-level reform in accounting standards for municipalities and creating
clear and written rules that determine the categories of public assets and local governments’
relevant rights. These actions encourage municipalities to record and manage their assets and
enable them to dispose surplus or unproductive assets and acquire new ones according to their
needs (Kaganova and MeKellar 2006; Jamer 2015).

Another crucial role for central governments is to provide knowledge sharing and encourage
transfer of good practices across the country. In the U.K, the Department for Communities and
Local Government commissioned an evaluation of local authorities practice in asset management
and provide comprehensive guidance and case studies to cities (UK Department of Communities
and Local Government, 2008). In a central authority led public asset management initiative, central
government agencies provide guidance to lower level governments. This contrasts to a more
property oriented approach adopted in the U.S.A, where municipalities choose their practices
according to their financial capacity and there are a variety of methods adopted locally. Large cities
can afford to recruit executive talent from the private sector or establish special municipal asset
management leadership, while others decide often to outsource expertise by hiring private sector
consultants on an ad hoc basis (Kaganova and McKellar, 2006).

In practice, central governments may also bear responsibilities towards municipalities in terms of
influence regarding bail-out principles and local finance regulation. Central governments
sometimes could create an environment that tolerates or incentivizes municipal finance moral
hazard and discourages municipalities to improve asset management practices. This occurs
through decisions related to local debts’ impact on the domestic financial system. Municipalities



                                                 29
may become saddled with costly debt as a result. In China for instance, in 2015, local government
debt has risen to more than 30% of GDP (Fortune, 2015).

The vanishing role of local government financing vehicles (LGFP) and declining land sales
revenue, might trigger serious financing shortages, especially for smaller cities and towns.
According to an IMF report on China’s local government financing platforms (Lu & Sun, 2013),
while Chinese local governments have accessed and used LGFP to finance and restructure debt, in
the medium term they may find this route to accessing financing is limited due to the new direction
pointed out by the new State Budget Law. Hence it is increasingly important for the central
government to provide policy guidance that encourages municipalities to establish a strategic
approach to managing municipal assets and physical properties.

In all, modernization of asset management is a long-term process, and it requires leadership and
consistent commitment. Lessons from other countries show that there is no single and universal
path for modernizing asset management. Rather, improving asset management is a process that
takes time. Thus, governments in China need to start acting now, before the risks become an
immediate and clear danger to the sustainability of their cities.

The recommendations presented here focus on which improvements are needed over what time
period (short, medium, or long term), and how to achieve them in a realistic way given the results
of this assessment and lessons from international experiences with asset management
modernization. They are addressed to the upper level governments who can facilitate and
accelerate the modernization, and to local governments who can take practical actions toward
improving the functioning of asset management operations.

Recommendations for Central and Provincial Governments

R1. Set priorities for municipal asset management. Timing: short term. Create policy
consensus and define main goals of a municipal asset management system including: (i) providing
local residents with improved services based on municipal asset use (such as infrastructure, water
systems, parking etc.); (ii) increasing revenues; (iii) moving toward credit ratings for local
governments; (iv) attracting more domestic and foreign investors; (v) improving land valuation
and making land assets attractive for productive and real estate purposes; and (vi) enhancing the
environment and improving the quality of life. An effective asset management system can provide
useful information to city managers as well as other stakeholders regarding a city's assets and their
actual potential net worth.

R2. Develop a toolkit for municipal asset management. Timing: short and medium term.
While specific cities or towns may focus on different elements of asset management, a unified
guidance document is needed from which relevant sections can be chosen. Ideally, this document
would be prepared by a select, interdisciplinary team of Chinese experts with the participation of
international specialists familiar with good practice and lessons learned in countries where asset
management reform has been recently tried and tested. The toolkit should include, but is not
limited to, the following:
●     Key elements of a rationalization of governance and institutional structure within the realm
      of asset management practices (besides broader sectoral reforms that may be needed)

                                                 30
 ●     An asset classification system
 ●     Technical parameters and definitions for an inventory (ideally in open software form, so it
       is easy to transfer and update the data) of existing stock of assets including infrastructure,
       land, and buildings
 ●     A registration system for municipal assets and procedures and policies for its operation
 ●     Financial reporting requirements and methods for valuation and appraisal of existing stock
       of assets, particularly for less liquid assets53
 ●     Parameters and standards for asset maintenance including calculation of O&M costs and
       incorporating O&M costs in recurrent budget preparation; and minimum requirements and
       standards for asset maintenance by class of assets
 ●     Administration and organizational arrangements for municipal asset management including
       ownership rights, uses and limitations, mandates and functions of an asset management
       office, key job descriptions, audit mechanisms; and processes and criteria for acquisition,
       rental, and sale of assets
 ●     Technology for mapping, data gathering, and analysis of flows of people and transactions
       across function systems (assets, financial reporting etc.).

R3. Provide streamlined technical assistance to participating local governments. Timing:
short and medium term. Based on the guidelines developed in R1, and following a diagnostic
like the one carried out in the three selected cities, some streamlined and institutionalized technical
assistance (TA) would be beneficial to local authorities. International experiences in the Balkans
(Croatia, Serbia) demonstrate that, to have a lasting impact, a TA program on municipal asset
management should continue for several years. The activities should be anchored to:
 ●   Facilitating new processes, especially for citywide, cross-agency cooperation (for example,
     creation of an asset management task force, as suggested below)
 ● Providing technical expertise and guidance to facilitate new pilot activities (such as
     preparation of a multi-year capital investment plan)
 ● Transferring general knowledge and expertise to local government staff and local private
     consultants.
Such assistance should be well coordinated with TA aimed at the reform of public accounting,
municipal finance, municipal service delivery and infrastructure, and SOEs.

R4. Provide capacity building and training on asset management, on a rolling basis with
increasingly meaningful content. Timing: short term. Since many practitioners are unaware of
important elements of asset management, a training and capacity-building system should be
developed. To produce significant results and establish a foundation for a sustainable approach,
the system should focus on three distinct groups of trainees:
 ● Local officials and technical staff. An introductory training of two and a half to three days
      can be developed and tested with the participating cities as a follow-up to this assessment.
      The format should combine interactive training and workshops for brainstorming about how
      a city should proceed. Topics to be covered could include notions and definitions; why good
      asset management is important; links between asset management and financial management;

53
  Accounting standards and practices (cash basis versus accrual accounting) determine when and how transactions
and economic events are reflected in the financial statements. The World Bank is working with the Chinese Ministry
of Finance on a separate technical assistance program to support the introduction of accrual based accounting.

                                                       31
         good asset management practices and how to apply them; basics of system performance and
         portfolio performance; basics of life-cycle management and related practical techniques; and
         capital investment planning.
 ●       Local government officials and independent consultants who could assist local
         governments. Establishing a technical training program with certification should be the first
         order of business if the development and sustainability of a cadre of asset management
         experts is a goal. This training can be initially one to two weeks long and then continued by
         learning-by-doing.54
 ●       Municipal asset management auditors. Such training is important to improve the level of
         trust in public performance and service; it is mandated by law in most countries. The core
         structure of the audit can vary, but the fundamental purpose is to ensure the dissemination of
         and wide access to public information. Reporting can be directed to municipal and national
         authorities. However, training for the auditors can be carried out during the second wave of
         activities, that is, over the medium and long term.
     Box 4.1 Membership Organizations for Government Asset Managers: International
     Examples

     Membership organizations constitute a cornerstone of “professional infrastructure” for government
     asset managers and perform as the main engine for formulating and exchanging professional knowledge
     in their countries of origin. They also create networking opportunities for informal communication
     among members.
     The Canadian National Executive Forum on Public Property (NEFPP) is a national non-profit
     organization for the advancement and sharing of best practices in public property and land management.
     Member organizations are public agencies with big property portfolios, including agencies from all
     major cities. Representatives are at the senior executive level in federal, provincial, and municipal
     departments, agencies, public utilities, crown corporations, and development corporations. The Forum
     launches member-driven research and surveys (for example, a benchmarking study on use of office
     space by member agencies) and organizes two conferences per year. (NEFPP 2013)
     The United Kingdom Asset Management Professional Network at the Chartered Institute of Public
     Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA) is the professional body for people in public finance. Its property
     branch specializes in services for managers of public fixed assets including training courses,
     publications, guidance materials, benchmarking surveys of asset management practices, advisory
     services for local governments, conferences, and networking. (CIPFA Property 2012)


To make these efforts sustainable, the training would need to be developed together with the
development of for-profit and not-for-profit professional and educational organizations. A network

54
   However, even a two-week training program is not sufficient for making people “experts.” To develop this
expertise, it may be necessary to arrange for “apprenticeship” opportunities with international experts while they are
in China. Another option is to introduce a cost-sharing program between the World Bank and participating cities after
local people have received some training: The trained consultants will be co-funded by the World Bank and the cities
themselves while they assist those cities on improving AM. The Urban Institute (Washington, DC) had such a program
in Croatia in the early 2000s, and it was a real success. Private consulting practices have been established and are
thriving in several areas of municipal management, including AM. The trained consultants have expanded their
business to assisting central government agencies domestically and abroad.


                                                         32
of such organizations is indispensable for providing municipal staff with opportunities for
continuing professional development. Besides, international experiences show that membership
organizations for government staff engaged in asset management are a highly appreciated and
effective form of knowledge generation and exchange (see box 4.1).

R5. Create incentives for local governments and within local governments to improve asset
management. Timing: short and medium term. In the past, the performance of local
government leaders was incentivized through promotions based on reaching GDP targets. National
government has recognized that new incentives are needed to re-orient local officials toward
longer-term financial planning and sustainability targets. An integral part of this should be better
municipal asset management. Other countries, including Canada and the United Kingdom as well
as some local jurisdictions in the United States, have successfully introduced incentives to improve
asset management (see box 4.2). These incentives can be established by the central government
(as in the case of the United Kingdom) or by local governments within their own jurisdictions (as
in the case of Montgomery County, Maryland, in the United States).55


     Box 4.2 Incentives for Better Asset Management: International Examples

     Canada—Incentives for federal government agencies: The Treasury Board of Canada introduced a
     new policy that provided incentives for disposing of underused and surplus properties held by federal
     agencies and for improving asset management practices. Property holders obtained the right to retain all
     net revenues from selling surplus properties if they complied with three conditions: (i) the agency
     developed a strategic investment framework, including a long-term capital investment plan, approved
     by the Treasury Board; (ii) the sale proceeds were reinvested in the agency’s other properties, consistent
     with the strategic framework; and (iii) the agency met reporting requirements regarding the submission
     of data on the disposed property to the database of federal property (McKellar 2006).

     United Kingdom—Incentives for local governments: In early 2000, the United Kingdom introduced a
     “single pot” concept in which a single grant would cover four key services (education, housing,
     transportation and personal social services). Eighty percent of the total amount would be allocated by a
     need-based formula. However, the other 20 percent would be discretion-based and incentive-linked.
     This portion would be allocated if a local government demonstrated a good corporate strategy for capital
     investment and had a credible asset management plan (Audit Commission 2000).

     Montgomery County (Maryland, United States)—Cost-cutting incentives for staff: In the wake of the
     2009–2012 public finance crisis, Montgomery County introduced monetary incentives for its staff. If a
     staff member or team identified how to save on O&M costs of the county’s assets without jeopardizing
     service quality and asset condition and their proposal was approved and materialized real savings, a
     share of these savings would be paid to the authors of the saving proposal. Creative thinking among
     staff led to multiple cost-savings solutions, from maintenance of the bus fleet to rationalization of
     operation of the air-conditioning system at the Grosvenor performing arts center (Laris 2011).




55
  The Research Institute for Fiscal Science has already been working on this topic, and published a paper on
government asset management at the International Public Procurement Conference 4 in 2010.

                                                        33
R6. Consider establishing an advisory body at the national level (inside or outside central
government, with the latter a preferred option) to facilitate development of an asset
management methodology. Timing: medium term. Its role would be to support better asset
management at the local government level through a multitude of activities, such as
commissioning research, surveying practices, and preparing case studies; developing guidelines
and methodologies; facilitating dissemination of good practices; and providing a forum for
knowledge and experience exchange among practitioners. However, at this time it is not advisable
to create any new central government entity in China with the power of issuing asset management
directives mandatory for local governments, given that the Ministry of Finance has the
responsibility of guiding the asset management modernization. A department within MoF, such as
the Asset Management Department, could potentially be the right organization to take the lead, if
it could be assigned a broader mandate. It would be important to allocate clear responsibility for
this task to a specific unit and to provide necessary technical guidance and support to staff to
advance this agenda.

Recommendations for Local Governments

R7. Establish a temporary inter-agency asset management task force in each participating
town or city. Timing: short term. Such an inter-agency task force is a first step toward breaking
away from fragmentation in vision and practices within the town or city. It could also serve as a
“think tank” where experts from different bureaus and SOEs would together have the knowledge
and capacity to come up with solutions that none of them separately would be able to suggest and
implement. Many cities including the city of Portland, Oregon (United States) have addressed this
issue in a similar fashion (see box 2.1). The task force needs to act under the auspices of high-level
leadership and include representatives of all major holders of municipal capital assets and entities
responsible for implementing asset management activities and policies. The chairman of the task
force should be the most senior person in the local government who is ultimately responsible for
all asset management. At the current initial stage, creating any new bureau, SOE, or agency for
asset management is not advisable. The task force's purpose would be (i) to identify the nature of
current asset management practices in the city based on the initial findings of this report, then (ii)
to set up priorities in the town for addressing crucial issues, and finally (iii) to implement an action
plan as well as the national guidelines (see R1). Over the medium to long term, the functions
performed by the task force should be institutionalized according to recommendations and
consensus developed within the task force itself.

R8. Diagnose the status of asset management systems and portfolios on a rolling basis.
Timing: short and medium term. Cities have limited resources, so they need an objective
diagnostic of which elements of asset management need improvement the most. The special
assessment survey that was tested in in the three cities produces scorecards measuring asset
management system performance that would be a good instrument for use by any city. In
particular, it identifies elements of asset management that are in a bad shape (“on red”) and thus
may need attention sooner than other elements, which are at a more advanced stage.

R9. Develop and start implementing a practical action plan tailored to a specific city or town
and local sense of priorities. Timing: short to medium term.) Based on the scorecard, identify
which elements of asset management should be improved first and then develop a realistic action
plan for implementation, including baseline information and readiness of the inventory system. It
                                                  34
is advisable that this action plan is worked on and presented to the city leadership by the inter-
disciplinary task force (see R6) After the action plan is validated by city’s leadership, the Task
Force would also be a vehicle facilitate plan’s implementation. The action plan should be aligned
with the relevant national guidelines as and when those are issued. See Annex 1 for detailed city
recommendations based on the scorecards and in-depth assessment.

R10. Improve information sharing within local government, including through the
preparation of reports on asset management. Timing: short, medium, and long term. It is
essential to initiate asset information sharing, coordination, and integration across different asset
users and custodians. Achieving this should be among the top tasks of the task force. Additionally,
while cooperation and sharing of information can be facilitated by investments in information and
communications technology (ICT), the corporate culture within government should gradually
change as well. For example, it would not take much effort to introduce, as a short-term task, a
requirement to prepare and publish periodic (annually or every few years) specialized reports on
“the state of the estate” 56 for buildings, land, and infrastructure systems. 57 The content of the
reports would evolve and improve over time and could eventually adhere to national guidelines.

R11. Initiate improvements in the financial aspects of asset management as a top priority
and continue them on a rolling basis. Timing: short and medium term. The lack of proper
planning and budgeting of asset-related expenses constitutes a systemic risk for the fiscal stability
of cities and their ability to deliver services to citizens. Therefore, addressing these issues has to
be among the top priorities for local governments. This is at least a three-part task:
● Planning and budgeting proper O&M expenses for buildings and infrastructure. For
  overcoming the current practices of substantial underinvestment in existing fixed assets and
  absence of even basic elements of life-cycle costing, there should be (i) proper policy, (ii)
  adequate technical norms, and (iii) matching budgetary resources. The first two conditions can
  be addressed if political will exists, preferably facilitated by proper incentives. However, the
  third condition goes well beyond the realm of asset management itself and belongs to municipal
  finance reform.
● Introducing new, explicit asset management policies. Many issues cannot be addressed by
  technical improvements alone and require, first of all, explicit policy reform. Such a policy for
  example, could establish that taking proper care of operations, maintenance, repair (including
  capital repair), and replacement of existing public buildings and infrastructure for main public
  services should take priority over investment in territorial expansion or building new facilities
  beyond the scope of main services.
● Modernize the process of capital investment planning by introducing multi-year capital
  investment plans (CIP).58 Expanding the time horizon for financial planning from the current
  one-year paradigm to longer-tem thinking, planning, and budgeting would be an important
  element of a practical transition to a long-term financial mentality. One may expect that Chinese
  cities would face two main challenges to introducing CIP: first, finding how to consolidate a
  fragmented annual decision-making process for selecting projects for capital investment and

56
   The term used in the United Kingdom reports.
57
   As the score cards indicated, none of the pilot cities publish such reports. Moreover, in most cases and for most
types of assets, such reports are not prepared even for decision makers.
58
   The methodology recommended by the World Bank is published as Guidebook on Capital Investment Planning
for Local Governments (2011), which has been also reprinted in Chinese in 2012.

                                                          35
  transforming it into something based on more transparent criteria; and, second, combining this
  new, better organized process of project selection with a similarly consolidated process of
  assembling finance for these projects. Experience of Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, suggests that the
  first task can be addressed more easiliy than the second task (see box 4.3). Bigger cities in China
  with a higher current share of their own-source revenues, such as Laibin, could be more able to
  transition to multi-year planning than small county towns like Linshui and Chengcheng.

 Box 4.3 Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Introducing the First Modern Capital Investment
 Plan (CIP)

 In 2014, Ulaanbaatar started developing its first modernized, multi-year capital investment plan. A
 special CIP Committee selected the following criteria, also approved by city management, for
 evaluating and ranking potential projects:

 Table B4.3.1 Criteria for Evaluating and Ranking Potential Projects
  No                           Criterion                               Maximum evaluation in
                                                                             points
  1      Project was started in a previous year or included in                 20
         a previous year’s CIP
  2      Project provides an important health or safety benefit                   10
  3      Project provides an important school or kindergarten                     5
         benefit to a neighborhood
  4      Project is a necessary repair or replacement of                          15
         existing capital equipment or facility
  5      Project advances objective #_________from                                10
         Mayor’s 3-year Operation Program
  6      Project cost will be offset by operating cost savings                    10
         or increased revenues
  7      Number of benefiting neighborhoods                                       10
  8      How important the project is for the submitting                          20
         entity (district, agency, etc.)
         TOTAL points                                                             100

 It is important to note that capital repair and replacement receives a 15- point advantage over new
 investment. Prioritizing projects according to this approach progressed successfully, but there was
 no coordination with identification of sources of finance, indicating that fragmentation inside the
 city government continued. Moreover, due to an unexpected rift between the city government and
 the central government at the last moment before approval of the city budget, the overall process of
 finalizing the new CIP was not completed in 2014.

 (Aide-Memoire 2014)

R12. Specifically for Linshui, Chengcheng, and Laibin: Start addressing the weaknesses
identified in the scorecards and sharing positive experiences on a rolling basis. Timing: short
term. The leadership and technical staff of Linshui, Chengcheng, and Laibin can take advantage
of the fact that the scorecards are already prepared, so they can act upon them. For example, the
leadership can:
                                                   36
● Establish requirements for main government agencies and SOEs to report regularly on fixed
   assets, with content valuable for decision makers. If such data and information doesn’t fully
   exist, asset managers should be made responsible for accumulating useful and computerized
   data. The cities also need to avoid the trap of collecting data without knowing for what it will
   be used. The task force, by collaborating with the city leadership, could be very instrumental
   in suggesting which inventory and financial data is the most important at the first stage.
 ● Re-orient officers with asset management responsibilities toward expanding their knowledge
    and analysis into financial aspects and risk management, so that the leadership and decision
    makers start having a picture of what is happening, citywide. Critical issues must be addressed
    in a credible and verifiable way, including estimates of O&M needed to maintain assets in
    operating shape and the gap between this and what is currently spent for this purpose; critical
    components and minimum requirements for maintenance of adequate service delivery and to
    minimize risk for citizens; and the age of assets and forecasts of potential upkeep costs for the
    next 10 years.
 ● Seek agreement from government to launch pilot testing to introduce a process of full-cycle
    asset management matched with multi-year capital investment planning, citywide (or at least
    including several sectors).
 ● Compare and contrast their scorecard with the other cities (and the help of technical experts)
    and ask their counterparts how exactly they handle issues on which their city scored better,
    moving towards more peer-to-peer learning. For example: Linshui and Laibin might ask
    Chengcheng to see its report to decision makers on buildings and decide whether they want
    to adopt its content for themselves. Linshui and Chengcheng might be interested to see what
    and how Laibin reports to the public about land. Linshui and Chengcheng might ask Laibin
    how it monitors and records O&M costs for each building. Chengcheng and Laibin may want
    to know how Linshui almost always projects its long-term investment needs for the storm
    drainage system, solid waste management, and streets and roads.

R13. Start introducing and using key performance indicators for municipal asset
management. Timing: short and medium term. For monitoring and measuring progress over
time, introducing key performance indicators (KPIs) would be invaluable. This would be
consistent with a worldwide trend in asset management. It is important to be realistic and start with
simple and basic indicators initially. Two types of indicators seem relevant. The first would be the
scorecard indicators, calculated once a year, to monitor progress since the previous round. Changes
in scorecard indicators would show whether improvements were made in those practices that the
task force identified as the top priority. However, the scorecard indicators deliberately offer only
rough measures of achieving good practice benchmarks (see Methodology section 1.3). The
second type would be a more precise set of indicators that may be needed to measure operational
improvements for some selected practices.59




59
  For example, the assessment survey underlying the scorecard has rough ranges for the indicator on completion of
inventorying, such as “no inventory exists (less than 5 percent of buildings inventoried,” and “on early stages
(between 5 percent and 50 percent of buildings inventoried”), etc. Meanwhile the task force may need to assess the
process with a more precise indicator, such as “the number of buildings inventoried by the end of the year” and
“percentage of total building number inventoried by the end of the year,” so that year-on-year progress with
inventorying can be measured more accurately.

                                                        37
R14. Introduce other measures to improve financial performance of municipal fixed assets.
Timing: medium to long term. Measures that promise tangible savings and other improvements
can be incorporated into action plans developed by local task forces and include the following:
● Screening government-use and public-use buildings systematically for opportunities to
  generate additional revenues and reduce operating expenses through better use of space, energy
  efficiency, and operating efficiency. An effective incentive to motivate asset management and
  building management staff to come up with creative ideas could be monetary awards (as some
  percentage of the realized savings or revenues), similar to a program in Montgomery County,
  Maryland, United States (see box 4.2).
● Linking spatial development planning with cost assessment for such plans. In particular,
  introduce mandatory revenue and cost assessment for territorial development and
  redevelopment plans, similar to that used in Poland, described in box 4.4.60 This would be a
  very important step toward spatial efficiency, which, in turn, is critical for the long-term
  sustainability of any city or town.
     Box 4.4 Poland: Linking Spatial Urban Planning with Public Financial Planning
     The Financial Impact Study (FIS) in Poland coordinates views of urban planners with the realities of
     municipal finance and interests of the private sector. This must be done before a land development plan
     (LDP) can be approved. A simple calculation in the FIS produces estimated expected land-related
     revenues from the area covered by the LDP and public expenses related to its implementation. The
     following items can be found in the FIS:

        Table B4.4.1 Types of Revenue and Expenditures in the Financial Impact Study

          Revenues                           Expenditures
          Property tax                       Construction of streets / roads
          Perpetual usufruct fee             Sewage mains
          Planning gain                      Water mains
          Betterment fee                     Purchases of the private lands to build the above
                                             infrastructure
     Based on the results of the FIS, urban planners can reduce the length and characteristics of streets, if the
     expenditure side seems too high compared to revenues, for example.
     A modification of this model could be applied in China by revising the structure of revenues and
     including expected revenues from land concession sales. This could be developed as a spreadsheet for
     considering various costs and revenue scenarios depending on land uses and their parameters, such as
     width of streets, percentage of land reserved for public uses, floor-to-area ratio (FAR), land coverage,
     etc. It could also be used by urban planners, financial planners, and decision makers, for linking spatial
     planning with municipal financial planning. In particular, the model would enable decision makers to
     have some ideas on how spatial plans translate into expected public costs and revenues.
     (Kaganova & Buczek 2010)

● Streamlining government property holdings by privatizing surplus properties and reducing the
  list of SOEs to those that perform truly public functions.


60
  Usufruct as referred to in Box 4.4 refers to the legal right of using and enjoying the fruits or profits of something
belonging to another.

                                                          38
● Rethinking a strategy of land management and spatial growth. This would have a critical
  impact on city and town sustainability in the long term. Such a strategy might include
  components to improve management of land concessions and leases; increasingly sophisticated
  spatial planning to introduce more humanly attractive scale, increase density of land uses, and
  increase livability of the city or town; and enhanced approaches to location of territorial growth
  and to scale of redevelopment on existing urban territories to increase spatial sustainability and
  diversity of the urban fabric. For example, consider what will happen to the housing in older
  parts of cities or towns that people have improved. Will it be demolished and replaced at high
  social and financial costs by new large-scale high-rise development? Will it be incorporated in
  a more complex, diverse, and inclusive urban environment that integrates different periods of
  time and history? After numerous cycles of trial and error in many countries, planners,
  researchers, and politicians have arrived at mutual agreement that policies of inclusion work
  better.




                                                39
References

Aide-Memoire. 2014. "Technical Assistance Mission: Land Administration and Markets, Capital
Investment Planning and Quality of Urban Services in Ulaanbaatar." World Bank, May 10–16,
2014.

Audit Commission (United Kingdom). 2000. Hot Property: Getting the Best from Local
Authority Assets. Oxen, UK: Audit Commission Publications.
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100806212101/http://www.audit-
commission.gov.uk/housing/nationalstudies/Pages/hotproperty_copy.aspx

Biagi, Mark. 2014. Information Management Strategies for Structural Integrity, A Bently White
Paper. https://www.bentley.com/~/asset/14/426.ashx

Browder, Greg J. with Shiqing Xie, Yoonhee Kim, Lixin Gu, Mingyuan Fan, and David
Ehrhardt. 2007. Stepping Up: Improving the Performance of China's Urban Water Utilities.
Washington, DC: World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6833

Butler, A. W., Fauver, L., & Mortal, S. 2009. Corruption, political connections, and municipal
finance.Review of Financial Studies.

China Ministry of Finance (MoF). 2014. Strengthening Government Financial Reporting Reform
Towards Accrual-Based Reporting System.
http://www.mof.gov.cn/zhengwuxinxi/caizhengxinwen/201412/t20141231_1174662.html

China Business News. 2015. Huge Difference in Data on Land Transaction Revenues: The
National Finance Bureau and The National Land Bureau.
http://stock.jrj.com.cn/2015/04/22160519132503.shtml

The Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA) Property. 2015. Building
Confidence in Changing Times. http://www.cipfa.org/services/property

City of Portland, Oregon. 2009. Citywide Assets Report December 2009.
https://www.portlandoregon.gov/bps/article/324907

City of Portland, Oregon. 2011. Citywide Assets Report December 2010, Revised October 2011.
https://www.portlandoregon.gov/bps/article/352969

City of Portland, Oregon. 2014. 2014 Citywide Assets Report: Status and Best Practices.
https://www.portlandoregon.gov/bps/article/532125

David Bentley. 2014. Performance Comparison and Benchmarking in Local Government Property
and Construction: An Essential Guide. Federation of Property Societies, United Kingdoms.

Deloitte. 2012. Improving Public Sector Property Management. Office Politics.
http://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Public-Sector/dttl-ps-office-
politics-08082013.pdf

                                               40
Federation of Canadian Municipalities. 2012. Canadian Infrastructure Report Card– Volume 1:
2012 Municipal Roads and Water Systems. Ottawa, Ontario: Federation of Canadian
Municipalities.

Federation of Canadian Municipalities and National Research Council. 2006. "Decision Making
and Investment Planning Best Practice DMIP 7 – Managing Infrastructure Assets." Ottawa,
Ontario: Federation of Canadian Municipalities.

Fernholz, F., & Fernholz, R. M. 2007. A Toolkit for Municipal Asset Management. Research
triangle park, North Carolina: RTI International, Duke University.

Fortune. 2015. China’s Local Government Get a New Bailout. Reported by Scott Cendrowski.
http://fortune.com/2015/03/10/chinas-local-governments-get-a-new-bailout/

Institute of Asset Management (IAM). 2014. Asset Management – An Anatomy. Issue 2.

Institute for Water Resources (IWR) Report 2013-R-08, "Best Practices in Asset Management”,
US Army Corps of Engineers, Alexandria, VA.

Introducing Management of Capital Assets in Secondary Cities in China. (2012). Laibin Inception
Report: Initial Diagnostic and Recommendations.

Jamer, Murray. 2015. Infrastructure Asset Management: Can the Canadian Municipal Experience
Help Inform Better Practices in Southeast Asia? Asian Development Bank. The Governance Brief.
Issue 21.

Jones, K. and White, A. 2008. RICS Public Sector Asset Management Guidelines. A Guide to
Best Practice. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.

Kaganova, Olga. 2008. "Integrating Public Property in the Realm of Fiscal Transparency and Anti-
Corruption Efforts." In Finding the Money: Public Accountability and Service Efficiency through
Fiscal Transparency, edited by Gábor Péteri, 209-232. Budapest: Local Government and Public
Service Reform Initiative, /Open Society Institute. http://cps.ceu.hu/publications/joint-
publications/finding-the-money

Kaganova, Olga. 2011. Guidebook on Capital Investment Planning for Local Governments.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Kaganova, Olga. 2013. Guidebook on Capital Investing Planning for Local Governments.
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://go.worldbank.org/N6TOLP5PT0. Reprinted in Chinese.

Kaganova, Olga, and Grzegorz Buczek,. 2010. Public Land and Property Asset Management in
Warsaw: Strategic Opportunities. Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2010/03/12586573/poland-public-land-property-
asset-management-warsaw-strategic-opportunities#

                                              41
Kaganova, Olga, and James McKellar. 2006. Managing Government Property Assets:
International Experiences. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press
.
Kaganova, Olga and Mihaly Kopanyi. 2014. "Managing Local Assets." In Municipal Finances:
A Handbook for Local Governments, edited by C. Farvacque-Vitkovic and Mihaly Kopanyi,
275-324. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Kaganova, Olga and Gary Windolph. 2012. Introducing Management of Capital Assets in
Secondary Cities in China: Laibin Inception Report, Initial Diagnostic and Recommendations.
Background note prepared for the World Bank.

Laris, Michael. 2011. "New Program Encourages." In The Washington Post, June 4, 2011.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/politics/new-program-encourages/2011/05/25/AGLT
n3IH_story.html

Lu, Yinqiu, and Sun, Tao. 2013. Local government financing platforms in China: A fortune or
misfortune? International Monetary Fund.

McGraw Hill Construction. 2013. Water Infrastructure Asset Management: Adopting Best
Practices to Enable Better Investments. Bedford, Massachusetts: McGraw_Hill Construction.

McIvor, Gordon K. Forthcoming. Canada Lands Company: How Canada Handles Asset
Optimization of its’s Surplus Federal Properties. Washington, DC: World Bank.

McKellar, James. 2006. "Alternative Delivery Models: The Special Purpose Corporation in
Canada." In Managing Government Property Assets: International Experiences, edited by Olga
Kaganova and James McKellar, 335-366. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.

McKinsey, 2013. Infrastructure Productivity: How to Save $1 Trillion a Year.

National Executive Forum on Public Property. 2013. "Program Activities."
http://www.publicpropertyforum.ca/program-activities.htm

National Opinion Research Center (NORC). 2013. “Municipal Asset Management: Estimating
Operation and Maintenance Costs of Municipal Infrastructure”, Technical Guidelines.
https://www.academia.edu/12106967/Good_Asset_Management_A_Pillar_of_Sustainable_Urba
nization

Peterson, George. 2008. Unlocking Land Values to Finance Urban Infrastructure. Washington,
DC: World Bank.

Peterson, George E. and Kaganova, Olga. 2010. Integrating Land Financing into Subnational
Fiscal Management. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Peterson, George E. and Thawakar V. 2013. Capturing the Value of Public Land for Urban
Infrastructure: Centrally Controlled Landholdings. Washington, DC: World Bank.


                                              42
Phelps, A. 2011. Municipal property asset management–a comparative study of UK and Russia.
International Journal of Strategic Property Management, 15(4), 416-437.

Salvetti, Maria. 2014. "Water Sector Regulation in France: A Complex Multi-Model and Multi-
Level Regulatory Framework." Florence, Italy: Florence School of Regulation, European
University Institute.

Schulte, K. W., & Ecke, C. 2006. Public real estate management in Germany: an empirical
study. Managing Government Property Assets: International Experiences.” Kaganova, Olga,
231-254.

State Council of the People's Republic of China. 2014. "Tentative Regulations for the
Registration of Immovable Property. Promulgated by the State Council on November 24, 2014
and Effective as of March 1, 2015." State Council Decree [2014] No. 656, State Council website.

Suzuki, Hiroaki, Arish Dastur, Sebastian Moffatt, Nanae Yabuki, and Hinako Maruyama. 2010.
Eco2 Cities: Ecological Cities as Economic Cities. Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://www.worldbank.org/eco2

Towers, Fred. 2013. National Executive Forum on Public Property Benchmarking Presentation at
the Annual General Meeting of Federal-Provincial-Territorial Deputy Heads of Public Works,
Canada, August 2013.

U.K. Department for Communities and Local Government. 2008. Building on Strong Foundations.
A Framework for Local Authority Asset Management. London.

VFA, 2011. The Seven Steps to Strategic Facilities Capital Planning and Management. A VFA
White Paper. Boston, Massachusetts: VFA.

Vincent, Australia. 2009. Town of Vincent: Asset Management Strategy 2010–2020.
http://www.vincent.wa.gov.au/Your_Council/Public_Documents.

Whitestone Research. 2010. The Whitestone Facility Maintenance and Repair Cost Reference
2010 – 2011, 15th Annual Edition, Santa Barbara, California: Whitestone Research.

World Bank. and The People's Republic of China Development Research Center of the State
Council. 2014. "China’s Urbanization and Land: A Framework for Reform." In Urban China:
Toward Efficient, Inclusive, and Sustainable Urbanization, 263-336. Washington, DC: World
Bank.

World Bank. and The People's Republic of China Development Research Center of the State
Council. 2014. Urban China: Toward Efficient, Inclusive, and Sustainable Urbanization, 263-
336. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hsing, You-tien. 2010. The great urban transformation: politics of land and property in China.
Oxford University Press.

                                              43
Appendix: Scorecards for Three Cities Together
Part 1: Buildings (or Parts of Buildings if Separate Properties)                            Linshui       Chengcheng            Laibin
                                                                                                                                           Maximum
Question                                                                                    Score (for quantitative indicators the score
                              Characteristic of the Good Practices                                                                           Score
  No.                                                                                         approximates estimated actual levels)
                                                                                                                                            Possible

Basic Asset Management
   Q2      Inventory of buildings and parts of buildings, level of completion                1.00              0.33               1.00         1
   Q3      Level of inventory computerization                                                1.00              1.00               1.00        1
   Q4      Breadth of inventory information                                                  0.44              0.31               0.56         1
           Existence of specialized asset management classification of buildings and
   Q5                                                                                        1.00              0.33               0.00         1
           parts of buildings
           Existence of regulations requiring market valuation of buildings and parts
   Q6                                                                                        1.00              1.00               1.00         1
           of buildings before transactions with them
           Use of market valuation of buildings and parts of buildings in practice, for
  Q7A                                                                                        0.50              0.75               0.00         1
           decision making
           Use of market value (or market rent) of buildings and parts of buildings in
  Q7B                                                                                        1.00              1.00               0.00         1
           practice, in transactions
           Transparency of documents and procedures related to buildings and parts
   Q8                                                                                        0.50              0.35               0.70         1
           of buildings
   Q9      Transparency of transactions with buildings and parts of buildings                0.92              0.08               0.96         1
   Q10     Periodic reporting to decision makers on building assets                          0.00              1.00               0.00         1
   Q11     Periodic reporting to the public on building assets                               0.00              0.00               0.00         1
           Use of auctions for allocating municipal buildings / parts of buildings to the
   Q12                                                                                       1.00              1.00               0.00         1
           private sector
           Regulation on using revenues from the transfer of buildings / parts of
   Q13                                                                                       0.00              0.00               1.00         1
           buildings for capital investment or debt repayment
           Practice of using revenues from the transfer of buildings / parts of
   Q14                                                                                       0.00              0.00               0.00         1
           buildings for capital investment or debt repayment
Basic Asset Management, Subtotal Score (Q2 - Q14)                                            8.35              7.16              6.22         14
Advanced Asset Management
           Established responsibility for a common city-wide framework for and
   Q15                                                                                       1.00              1.00               1.00         1
           approaches to management of buildings (parts of buildings)
           Existence of strategic asset management plan (SAMP) or a similar
   Q16                                                                                       0.00              0.00               0.00         1
           specialized strategic document covering buildings
           Training and professional development opportunities for staff working on
   Q17                                                                                       0.50              0.50               0.00         1
           asset management of buildings (parts of buildings)
           Use of proactive maintenance / preventive repair plans and schedules for
   Q18                                                                                       0.00              0.33               0.33         1
           buildings (parts of buildings)
           Use of condition records about buildings (parts of buildings) for repair and
   Q19                                                                                       0.00              0.00               0.33         1
           replacement planning
   Q20     Updating the condition records                                                    0.33              0.00               0.67         1
           Monitoring and recording annual operations and maintenance (O&M) costs
   Q21                                                                                       0.00              0.00               1.00         1
           for each building (part of buildings)
           Use of norms and standards for service provision and service levels for
   Q22                                                                                       1.00              1.00               1.00         1
           planning building needs
   Q23     Projecting long-term investment needs for main building groups                    0.50              0.00               0.00         1
           Existence of government-wide multi-year capital investment plan (as a part
   Q24                                                                                       0.00              0.00               0.00         1
           of the budgeting system) that covers buildings or parts of buildings
           Considering future life-cycle costs while planning technical solutions for
   Q25                                                                                       0.00              0.00               0.50         1
           capital investment in particular buildings
           Assessing impact of future operations and maintenance (O&M) costs
   Q26                                                                                       0.00              0.00               0.50         1
           resulting from planned capital investment on the future operating budget
           Existence of special protected funds or accounts for accumulating funding
   Q27                                                                                       0.33              0.33               0.00         1
           for buildings' capital repair and replacement
Advanced Asset Management, Subtotal Score (Q15 - Q27)                                        3.66              3.16              5.33         13
                                                                         Total Score         12.01             10.32             11.55        27
                                                        Questions Without Responses                                                2




                                                                                44
Part 2: Land                                                                            Linshui       Chengcheng           Laibin

Question                                                                               Score (for quantitative indicators, the score     Maximum
                             Characteristic of the Good Practices
  No.                                                                                     approximates estimated actual levels)        Score Possible

   Q2      Inventory of land, level of completion                                         1.00             1.00             0.50             1
   Q3      Level of inventory computerization                                             1.00             1.00             0.50             1

   Q4      Existence of specialized asset management classification of land               1.00             0.67             0.00             1
           Existence of regulations requiring market valuation of land before
   Q5                                                                                     1.00             1.00             1.00             1
           transactions with it

  Q6A      Use of market valuation of land in practice, for decision making               0.50             0.67             0.92             1

  Q6B      Use of market value (or market rent) of land in practice, in transactions      1.00             1.00             0.00             1

   Q7      Transparency of documents and procedures related to land                       0.77             0.60             0.50             1

   Q8      Transparency of transactions with land                                         0.83             0.92             0.92             1
  Q9       Periodic reporting to decision makers on land                                  0.00             1.00             1.00             1
  Q10      Periodic reporting to the public on land                                       0.00             0.00             1.00             1
  Q11      Use of auctions for allocating land to the private sector                      1.00             1.00             1.00             1
           Regulation on using revenues from the transfer of land for capital
  Q12                                                                                     0.00             1.00             1.00             1
           investment or debt repayment
           Practice of using revenues from the transfer of land for capital
  Q13                                                                                     0.00             1.00             0.00             1
           investment or debt repayment
           Responsibility for establishing a common city-wide framework for and
  Q14                                                                                     1.00             1.00             1.00             1
           approaches to management of land
           Existence of strategic asset management plan (SAMP) or a similar
  Q15                                                                                     0.00             0.00             0.00             1
           specialized strategic document covering land
           Training and professional development opportunities for staff working
  Q16                                                                                     0.50             0.50             1.00             1
           on asset management of land
                                                                        Total Score       9.60             12.35            10.33           16
                                                   Questions Without Responses                                                2




                                                                              45
Part 3: Infrastructure                                                              Linshui          Chengcheng          Laibin

                                                                                                                                           Maximum
Question                                                                            Score (for quantitative indicators, the score
                            Characteristic of the Good Practices                                                                             Score
  No.                                                                                  approximates estimated actual levels)
                                                                                                                                            Possible

Basic Asset Management
           Number of infrastructure systems under local government ownership and
   Q2                                                                                5.00               6.00               7.00                -
           control (non-scoring characteristic)
   Q3      Inventory of infrastructure, level of completion                          0.74               0.56               0.33               1
    S1     WATER SYSTEMS                                                                      0.67             0.67                 0.33               1
    S2     WASTEWATER SYSTEMS                                                                 0.67             0.67                 0.67               1
    S3     STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS                                                             0.67             0.33                 0.33               1
    S4     SOLID WASTE COLLECTION & DISPOSAL FACILITIES                                       0.67             0.67                 0.33               1
    S5     PARKS & PUBLIC SPACES                                                              0.67             0.33                 0.00               1
    S6     CEMETARIES                                                                                                               0.00
    S7     STREETS AND ROADS                                                                  1.00             0.67                 0.67               1
    S8     POWER GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
    S9     OTHER (specify)
   Q4      Level of inventory computerization                                        0.30               0.50               0.43               1
    S1     WATER SYSTEMS                                                                                       0.50                 0.50               1
    S2     WASTEWATER SYSTEMS                                                                 0.50             0.50                 0.50               1
    S3     STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS                                                             0.00             0.50                 0.50               1
    S4     SOLID WASTE COLLECTION & DISPOSAL FACILITIES                                       0.00             0.50                 0.50               1
    S5     PARKS & PUBLIC SPACES                                                              0.00             0.50                 0.00               1
    S6     CEMETARIES                                                                                                               0.00
    S7     STREETS AND ROADS                                                                  1.00             0.50                 1.00               1
    S8     POWER GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
    S9     OTHER (specify)
   Q5      Periodic reporting to decision makers on infrastructure                   0.00               0.00              0.00                1
   Q6      Periodic reporting to the public on infrastructure                        0.00               0.00              0.00                1
Basic Asset Management, Subtotal Score (Q3- Q6)                                      1.04               1.06              0.76                4
Advanced Asset Management
         Established responsibility for a common city-wide framework for and
   Q7                                                                                0.33               1.00               0.00               1
         approaches to management of infrastructure
         Existence of Strategic Asset Management Plan (SAMP) or a similar
   Q8                                                                                0.00               0.00               0.00               1
         specialized strategic document covering infrastructure
         Training and professional development opportunities for staff working on
   Q9                                                                                0.50               0.50               0.50               1
         asset management of infrastructure
         Use of proactive maintenance / preventive repair plans and schedules for
  Q10                                                                                0.53               0.50               0.67               1
         infrastructure
   S1    WATER SYSTEMS                                                                                         0.33                 1.00               1
   S2    WASTEWATER SYSTEMS                                                                   0.67             0.33                 1.00               1
   S3    STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS                                                               0.33             0.67                 0.33               1
   S4    SOLID WASTE COLLECTION & DISPOSAL FACILITIES                                         0.00             0.67                 1.00               1
   S5    PARKS & PUBLIC SPACES                                                                1.00             0.33                 1.00               1
   S6    CEMETARIES                                                                                                                 0.00
   S7    STREETS AND ROADS                                                                    0.67             0.67                 0.33               1
   S8    POWER GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
   S9    OTHER (specify)
         Use of condition records about infrastructure for repair and replacement
  Q11                                                                                0.80               0.56               0.48               1
         planning
   S1    WATER SYSTEMS                                                                                         0.67                 1.00               1
   S2    WASTEWATER SYSTEMS                                                                   0.67             0.33                 1.00               1
   S3    STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS                                                               0.67             0.67                 0.33               1
   S4    SOLID WASTE COLLECTION & DISPOSAL FACILITIES                                         1.00             0.67                 0.67               1
   S5    PARKS & PUBLIC SPACES                                                                0.67             0.33                 0.00               1
   S6    CEMETARIES                                                                                                                 0.00
   S7    STREETS AND ROADS                                                                    1.00             0.67                 0.33               1
   S8    POWER GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
   S9    OTHER (specify)




                                                                           46
  Q12     Updating the condition records                                               0.61           0.89           0.38           1
   S1     WATER SYSTEMS                                                                                       1.00           0.67        1
   S2     WASTEWATER SYSTEMS                                                                   0.67           0.33           0.67        1
   S3     STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS                                                               0.67           1.00           0.33        1
   S4     SOLID WASTE COLLECTION & DISPOSAL FACILITIES                                         1.00           1.00           0.33        1
   S5     PARKS & PUBLIC SPACES                                                                0.33           0.67           0.33        1
   S6     CEMETARIES                                                                                                         0.00
   S7     STREETS AND ROADS                                                                    0.33           1.00           0.33        1
   S8     POWER GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
   S9     OTHER (specify)
          Monitoring and recording annual operations and maintenance (O&M) costs
  Q13                                                                                  0.80           0.50           0.33           1
          for infrastructure
   S1     WATER SYSTEMS                                                                                       0.67           0.00        1
   S2     WASTEWATER SYSTEMS                                                                   0.67           0.33           1.00        1
   S3     STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS                                                               0.67           0.33           0.33        1
   S4     SOLID WASTE COLLECTION & DISPOSAL FACILITIES                                         1.00           0.67           0.33        1
   S5     PARKS & PUBLIC SPACES                                                                0.67           0.33           0.00        1
   S6     CEMETARIES                                                                                                         0.00
   S7     STREETS AND ROADS                                                                    1.00           0.67           0.67        1
   S8     POWER GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
   S9     OTHER (specify)
          Use of norms and standards for service provision and service levels for
  Q14                                                                                  1.00           1.00           1.00           1
          planning infrastructure needs
  Q15     Projecting long-term investment needs for infrastructure                     0.70           0.00           0.07           1
   S1     WATER SYSTEMS                                                                                       0.00           0.00        1
   S2     WASTEWATER SYSTEMS                                                                   0.50           0.00           0.00        1
   S3     STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS                                                               1.00           0.00           0.00        1
   S4     SOLID WASTE COLLECTION & DISPOSAL FACILITIES                                         1.00           0.00           0.00        1
   S5     PARKS & PUBLIC SPACES                                                                0.00           0.00           0.50        1
   S6     CEMETARIES                                                                                                         0.00
   S7     STREETS AND ROADS                                                                    1.00           0.00           0.00        1
   S8     POWER GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
   S9     OTHER (specify)
          Existence of government-wide multi-year capital investment plan (as a part
  Q16                                                                                  0.00           0.00           0.00           1
          of the budgeting system) that covers infrastructure
          Considering future life-cycle costs while planning technical solutions for
  Q17                                                                                  0.50           0.50           0.50           1
          capital investment in infrastructure
          Assessing impact of future operations and maintenance (O&M) costs
  Q18                                                                                  0.00           0.50           0.50           1
          resulting from planned capital investment on the future operating budget
          Existence of special protected funds or accounts for accumulating funding
  Q19                                                                                  0.67           0.00           0.00           1
          for infrastructure capital repair and replacement
Advanced Asset Management, Subtotal Score (Q7 - Q19)                                   6.44           5.95           4.43           13
                                                                        Total Score    7.47           7.00           5.19           17
                                                      Questions Without Responses                                    2.29
TOTAL SCORE FOR PART 1 - PART 3                                                        29.09          29.67          27.07          60
Total number of questions without responses                                                                          6.29




                                                                            47
