                                               WPS7929


Policy Research Working Paper                 7929




                          Caste System
                                 Karla Hoff




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7929


  Abstract
 In standard economics, individuals are rational actors and                         Indian classrooms reduces the cognitive performance of
 economic forces undermine institutions that impose large                           low-caste boys by 23 percent. (3) Because of lower-caste
 inefficiencies. The persistence of the caste system is evidence                    men’s control of working-class occupations, the propor-
 of the need for psychologically more realistic models of                           tion of lower-caste children enrolled in English-language
 decision-making in economics. The caste system divides                             schools in Mumbai after India opened itself up to the world
 South Asian society into hereditary groups whose lowest                            market grew only one-fourth as quickly for boys as for girls,
 ranks are represented as innately polluted. After the his-                         restricting boys’ occupational mobility. Given the benefit of
 torical encounter between colonial powers and South Asia,                          access to caste-based networks, most Indians practice caste
 caste became capable of expressing and systematizing what                          endogamy. The caste system is a dramatic example of an
 had been diverse forms of social identity, community, and                          institution to which it may pay each individual to conform
 organization. This paper reviews work that estimates the eco-                      because others conform. The caste system also illustrates the
 nomic costs of the caste system in particular environments:                        two-way influence between people and institutions empha-
 (1) In North India, discrimination between higher-caste                            sized in psychology: people construct institutions, and
 landowners and lower-caste tenants in markets for ground-                          institutions shape understandings. Abolition by law of an
 water for irrigation reduces the tenants’ agricultural yields                      institution may change neither understandings nor behavior.
 by 45 percent. (2) Making caste identity public in North



  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author
  may be contacted at khoff@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                            CASTE SYSTEM

                                                 Karla Hoff*




KEYWORDS: culture, caste, discrimination, endogamy, stereotype threat

JEL CODES: O12, O17, Z13


___________
*This manuscript was written as an entry in the Sage Encyclopedia of Political Behavior. I thank Junaid Kamal
Ahmad, Priyanka Pandey, and Martin Rama for helpful comments.
                                       CASTE SYSTEM

The caste system divides society in the Indian subcontinent into mutually exclusive,

hereditary groups called castes, ranked by ritual status. Traditionally, South Asians

believed that a man’s social capacities were known from the caste into which he was born,

and his caste prescribed the occupations that he could enter. The most distinctive features

of caste ideology are the emphasis on the innately polluted state of the lowest ranked

castes, formerly known as untouchables, and the strict exclusiveness of the so-called clean

castes in relation to marriage. There is virtually no mobility of individuals across caste

groups. Nothing quite like the caste system has evolved in other parts of the world.

       When India became independent in 1947, a political goal was to create a “modern”

casteless India. The Constitution of India legally abolished caste and created for the

formerly untouchable castes a system of quotas (“reservations”) in university admissions,

government jobs, and political posts. Since 2007, the poorest state of India (Bihar) has

targeted initiatives to the worst-off of the formerly untouchable castes. The reservation

system has helped keep the concept of caste prominent in politics. The gap in average

socioeconomic status between high and low castes remains large. This paper emphasizes

some of the economic costs of the caste system in India.

       The word caste corresponds to two distinct concepts: jati (community) and varna

(archetype). The jati is the community within which one was traditionally required to be

married and that forms social identity. Dwellings in villages are usually clustered by jati.

In contrast to the vast number of jatis, varna is a scheme with only four divisions, and they

are symbolic types: first, priests; second, warriors; third, merchants and agriculturalists;



                                                  2 
 


and fourth, laborers and servants. The formerly untouchable jatis occupy a place outside

the varna scheme (they are “outcastes”), whereas all other jatis are within it. The usual

name for the formerly untouchable castes is Dalits, which means oppressed in Sanskrit.

The official name is Scheduled Castes. This name comes from the schedule made by the

British colonial government in 1932.



Discrimination


In standard economics, individuals are rational actors and economic forces undermine

institutions that impose large inefficiencies. Standard economics predicts that

discrimination in competitive markets will not persist, since discriminators have higher

costs than non-discriminators. Behavioral economics, with the first studies appearing in

the 1970s (most of them written by psychologists), has different models of the individual:

he or she is a “quasi-rational actor” influenced by seemingly irrelevant features of context

(emphasized in Strand I of behavioral economics) and an “enculturated actor” whose

cognition and preferences are influenced by social constructions (emphasized in Strand II

of behavioral economics). The distinction between the two strands is made in Hoff and

Stiglitz. Behavioral sciences helps explain the persistence of the caste system. Social

constructions that are shared within a culture shape how people perceive and understand

the world and themselves.

    In the rural sector of India, the “pollution barrier” between former untouchable castes

and all others remains strong. A study of 565 villages in 11 Indian states found that

despite legal bans, untouchability continued to be practiced in almost 80 percent of the

villages. The following percentages indicate the proportion of villages in which each kind

                                                 3 
 
 


of discrimination was observed: restrictions barring Dalits from selling milk (47%);

restrictions barring Dalits from selling any goods in local markets (35%); separate utensils

in restaurants and hotels for Dalits and non-Dalits (32%); and denial to Dalits of access to

water for irrigating their fields (33%).

    For the last example of discrimination, Siwan Anderson estimated the cost in North

India, a region in which caste discrimination is particularly acute. Her study compares two

types of villages: in the first type, the majority of the land is owned by higher castes; in

the second type, the majority of the land is owned by lower castes. Since the origins of the

land distribution across caste groups go back hundreds of years, the distribution can be

viewed as a ‘natural experiment,’ and its causal impact can be identified. This natural

experiment finds extensive discrimination against Dalits by higher-caste owners in markets

for groundwater for irrigation. In villages where lower castes own most of the land, they

own the majority of the private groundwater extraction mechanisms and rent them to the

lower-caste tenants. But in villages where higher castes own most of the land, it is they

who own the majority of the private groundwater extraction mechanisms, and they rarely

trade with lower-caste water buyers: a severe breakdown of groundwater markets occurs.

Comparing the two types of villages, holding all else equal, lower-caste water buyers have

agricultural yields 45 percent higher if they reside in a village where the majority of water

sellers are of lower caste.




Stereotype Threat

In standard (non-behavioral) economics, the individual is modeled as autonomous in the

sense that social influences do not shape preferences or cognition. In contrast, psychology,

                                                  4 
 
 


sociology, and anthropology recognize that one’s sense of self, preferences, and cognition

are in large part constituted through the concepts, practices, and social interactions that

society makes available. Individuals have many social identities (that is, social groups

relevant to their sense of self): for example, a person may be a parent, spouse, landowner,

Hindu, member of a particular caste, and member of many other groups. Seemingly

irrelevant cues to a particular identity can affect how the individual behaves and his ability

to perform. An experiment by Karla Hoff and Priyanka Pandey assessed the effect of

making caste identity salient on boys’ intellectual performance. In the experiment,

students in a six-person session generally did not know each other. They were taught how

to solve mazes and were rewarded financially and in private for the number of mazes that

they solved (which was never publicly revealed). The control condition of the experiment,

in which each student’s caste was not revealed, demonstrated that boys of former

untouchable castes solve mazes just as well as high-caste boys. However, publicly

revealing the boys’ caste identities reduced the performance of the low-caste boys.

Holding all else equal, low-caste boys solved 23 percent fewer mazes than high-caste boys

if they were in a mixed-caste setting where caste identities were revealed. This is an

example of stereotype threat: cueing a social identity that is stereotyped as mentally

deficient actually impairs on average the performance of members of the group.

Stereotype threat applies widely. In the United States, it applies to African-Americans and

women. The experimental finding on maze-solving performance has been replicated in

China for rural household status (rural hukou living in Beijing) and in the Slovak Republic

for Romas (gypsies).




                                                  5 
 
 


       There is a theory in which a stereotype that represents a particular group as

cognitively inferior can persist even when it is a pure fiction. There are three steps to the

argument: (1) The stereotype causes stigmatized individuals, compared to non-stigmatized

individuals, to perceive their achievements as lower than they otherwise would perceive it.

(2) With lower perceived achievement, they have lower self-confidence. (2) With lower

self-confidence, they underperform relative to the non-stigmatized individuals. The result

is what Hoff and Joseph Stiglitz call “equilibrium fictions”: stereotypes that rank groups

by intelligence may create productivity gaps between groups that sustain, and seemingly

validate, the stereotypes. The theory formalizes an idea suggested by the philosopher Ian

Hacking about “making up people”: the social construction of categories of people can

produce behaviors that would not occur in the absence of the social constructions.

       An experiment in the United States demonstrated dramatic effects on social

interactions of gender salience in the classroom. The experiment manipulated the salience

of gender in kindergartens over a two-week period. In the low-salience condition, children

continued to experience a preschool environment in which the teacher did not make gender

explicit. In the high-salience condition, the children experienced a preschool environment

in which the teacher labeled individuals by gender (for example, the teacher said “Good

morning, boys and girls,” instead of “Good morning, children”) and used gender-based

organization (for example, assigning boys and girls to separate bulletin boards). This mild

treatment made the children significantly less likely to play in mixed-gender groups.

Unlike the caste system, the treatment did not prohibit any kind of social interactions

between the two groups, yet the salience of the categories increased the likelihood that

boys and girls would not interact in free play.


                                                  6 
 
 




How Did the Caste System Emerge?

       Ideas of caste can be traced back to Hindu texts dated from about the second century BC,

but it was not until the 18th and 19th centuries that caste-like society began to take shape in South

Asia as a rigid system of division. An answer to the question posed in the heading of this section

has been offered by the historians Susan Bayly and Nicholas Dirks. They argue that the caste

system is the product of the historical encounter between Indian and colonial rule. Caste became

capable of expressing, organizing, and systematizing what had been diverse forms of social

identity, community, and organization across South Asia.

       Ruling groups in the 18th century found that they could increase their legitimacy and

consolidate their power by projecting themselves as heirs of the heroic tradition of the warrior

kings, and by naming and ranking classes of their subjects in a caste-like way. Sustained

interaction between Muslim and Hindu dominion-builders increased the significance of jati titles.

       In the 19th century, landowners in India faced volatile markets and greater revenue

demands from the British East India Company. The landowners responded by turning ever

larger groups of tenants and laborers into innately “unclean” menials defined in ways that had

earlier applied only to individuals in ritually unclean occupations, such as waste removal and

leatherwork. Being “unclean” meant that caste status was defined as an inherited quality of

servitude: open-ended labor and tenancy relationships were turned into caste-based service

bonds. This sometimes occurred for casual labor in factories, as well. The 19th century

represented a shift in the language and reality of social life.




                                                   7 
 
 




Caste Reproduces Itself Because It Is a Resource to Individuals and Groups

Why does caste persist? The caste system lowers market efficiency and individual mobility and

causes suffering, but no one acting alone has the power to abolish it. Given that it is in place in

South Asia, individuals have opportunities to use caste as a resource. If everyone else is in a

network, an individual normally wants to be in a network, too. Historically most South Asians

have not embraced castelessness. Many have tried to use the caste system as a source of

concepts, shared community, narratives, and worldviews that could help give them access to

social insurance, jobs, and dominance over individuals in lower-ranked castes.

       Kaivan Munshi and Mark Rosenzweig provide a startling example of the persistence of

networks based on caste. In Bombay (renamed Mumbai), networks of lower-caste men have

controlled particular occupations for generations and do not admit outsiders. Women do not

participate in these networks. When the Indian economy opened up to the world market in 1991,

the returns to English language schooling in Bombay rose steeply for both boys and girls.

English education increased the likelihood of obtaining a white-collar job, whereas education in

the local language channeled students into working class jobs. However, the proportion of

lower-caste boys schooled in English grew relatively slowly in the post-reform 1990s (from

about 20 to 35 percent), whereas the proportion of lower-caste girls sent to English language

schools almost quadrupled (from about 10 to almost 40 percent). The gender difference may

reflect a positive externality associated with men’s participation in the networks and tacit

restrictions on occupational mobility for the sake of preserving the working class networks.




                                                 8 
 
 


       The long-run stability of the caste system requires caste endogamy. In an analysis of

urban, well-off, highly educated Indians, Abhijit Banerjee and colleagues showed that 70 percent

of people married within their caste (jati). The authors argue that caste-based preferences in

marriage are likely to persist because the cost to an individual of marrying within his or her own

caste is typically low: the observed matching is close to being what most individuals would

have wanted on the basis of characteristics other than caste. In a survey, three-fourths of Indians

stated that they were opposed to marriage of individuals from different jatis.

       An individual is never fully aware of his culture, since it shapes how he processes

information. Cultural concepts and categories are social constructions that affect everyone in the

community. The influence of culture on cognition increases the difficulty of ending the caste

system. The caste system is a dramatic example of an institution to which it may pay each

individual to conform because others conform. The system also illustrates the two-way

influence between people and institutions emphasized by psychologists such as Hazel Rose

Markus: people construct institutions, and institutions shape understandings (culture). Abolition

by law of an institution may change neither understandings nor behavior.




                                                 9 
 
 


                                       References

Akerlof, G. (1976). The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful Tales.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90 (4): 599-617.
Anderson, S. (2011). Caste as an Impediment to Trade. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 3, 239-263. doi: =10.1257/app.3.1.239

Banerjee, A., Duflo, E, Ghatak, M., & LaFortune, J. (2013). Marry for what? Caste and
mate selection in modern India, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(3): 33-
782. doi:10.1257/mic.5.2.33

Bayly, S. (1999). Caste, Society and Politics in India from the Eighteenth, Cambridge
University Press.

Deshpande, A. (2011). The Grammar of Caste, Oxford University Press.

Dirks, N.B. (2001). Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern India, Princeton
University Press.
Hilliard, L.J. & Liben, L.S. (2010). Salience in Preschool Classrooms: Effects on Children's
Gender Attitudes and Intergroup Bias. Child Development, 81(6): 1787-1798.
Hoff, K., Kshetramade, M., & Fehr, E. (2011). Caste and Punishment—The Legacy of Caste
Culture in Norm Enforcement. Economic Journal, 121, F449-F475.doi:10.1111/j.1468-
0297.2011.02476
 
Hoff, K. & Pandey, P. (2014). Making Up People: The Effect of Identity on Performance in a
Modernizing Society. Journal of Development Economics, 106:118-131.
doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2013.08.009

Hoff, K. & Stiglitz, J.E. (2010). Equilibrium Fictions: A Cognitive Approach to Societal
Rigidity, American Economic Review, 100: 141-146. doi: 10.1257/aer.100.2.141

Hoff, K. & Stiglitz, J.E. (2016). Striving for Balance in Economics: Towards a Theory of the
Social Determination of Behavior. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,126B: 25-
57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2016.01.005 

Kumar, H. & Somanathan, R. (2016). Caste Connections and Government Transfers: The
Mahadalits of Bihar. Delhi School of Economics. Manuscript.

Markus, H.R. & Kitayama, S. (2010). Cultures and Selves: A Cycle of Mutual Constitution.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5(4): 420-430. DOI: 10.1177/1745691610375557
Munshi, K. & Rosenzweig, M. (2006). Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World:
Caste, Gender, and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy. American Economic
Review, 96, 1225-1252. doi: 10.1257/aer.96.4.1225



                                               10 
 
 


Shah, G, Mander, H., Thorat, S, Deshpande, S. & Baviskar, A. (2006). Untouchability in
Rural India. New Delhi: Sage Publications.




                                              11 
 
