                                                      WPS7892


Policy Research Working Paper                        7892




                       Grow, Invest, Insure
         A Game Plan to End Extreme Poverty by 2030

                                 Indermit S. Gill
                                   Ana Revenga
                                Christian Zeballos




Development Economics
Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
  &
International Finance Corporation
November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7892


  Abstract
 As global extreme poverty has fallen—by one measure, from                          they could not benefit from economic opportunities and
 close to 2 billion people in 1990 to about 700 million                             better social services. This two-and-a-half-point strategy has
 today—the world has learned about antipoverty strategies                           been working well over the past quarter century, and the
 that work. These experiences should inform the final push                          end of extreme poverty is in sight. But more people are
 to end extreme poverty. In the 1960s and 1970s, when                               now at risk of slipping back into poverty because of eco-
 close to half of the world was living in extreme poverty, the                      nomic, natural, and health-related hazards. To end extreme
 approach that worked best consisted of two sets of com-                            poverty by 2030, the approach now needs three comple-
 plementary measures: encouraging broad-based growth                                mentary components: economic growth, investments in
 that is labor using, and investing in education, health,                           people, and measures to insure against setbacks to families,
 and family planning. When extreme poverty rates came                               nations, and regions due to disabilities, recessions, disas-
 down—first in East Asia and then in other parts of the                             ters, and disease. In countries that have reduced poverty a
 developing world—it became clear that the two-point                                lot and those that could do a lot better, a winning game
 strategy to make economies grow and enable people to                               plan for putting a quick end to extreme poverty should be
 invest in human capital needed a social assistance sup-                            based on a three-point strategy: grow, invest, and insure.
 plement to help people with disadvantages so severe that




  This paper is a joint product of the Development Policy Department, Development Economics Vice Presidency, the Poverty
  and Equity Global Practice Group, and the International Finance Corporation. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at indermit.gill@duke.edu, arevenga@worldbank.org, and czeballos@ifc.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
              Grow,	Invest,	Insure:	
      A	Game	Plan	to	End	Extreme	Poverty	by	
                      2030	
                                                   	
                                                   	
                                        Indermit	S.	Gill,	
                                         	Ana	Revenga,		
                                               and		
                                       Christian	Zeballos*	
	
                                                   	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Keywords:	Poverty,	Economic	growth,	Human	capital	accumulation,	Social	Insurance	
	
JEL	Codes:	O20,	O40,	H41,	I38	
	
*	Indermit	Gill	(indermit.gill@duke.edu)	is	at	the	Duke	Center	for	International	Development	in	
the	Sanford	School	of	Public	Policy	of	Duke	University,	Ana	Revenga	(arevenga@worldbank.org)	
is	 at	 the	 World	 Bank,	 and	 Christian	 Zeballos	 is	 at	 the	 International	 Finance	 Corporation	
(czeballos@ifc.org).	 At	 the	time	 of	writing,	 Indermit	 Gill	was	Director	 of	 Development	Policy	in	
the	Office	of	the	Chief	Economist	at	the	World	Bank,	Ana	Revenga	was	the	Senior	Director	of	the	
World	 Bank’s	 Poverty	 Global	 Practice,	 and	 Christian	 Zeballos	 was	 attending	 Georgetown	
University’s	 Global	 Human	 Development	 Program.	 The	 authors	 thank	 Jim	 Yong	 Kim	 and	 John	
Donnelly	 for	 their	 encouragement,	 and	 Omar	 Arias,	 Kathleen	 Beegle,	 Shaohua	 Chen,	 Francisco	
Ferreira,	 Chorching	 Goh,	 Ruth	 Hill,	 Martin	 Ravallion,	 Nobuo	 Yoshida	 and	 colleagues	 in	 the	
Development	Economics	Vice‐Presidency	and	the	Poverty	Global	Practice	for	sharing	ideas	and	
information.			
	                                  	
                          Grow,	Invest,	Insure:	
               A	Game	Plan	to	End	Extreme	Poverty	by	2030	
                                                   	
                          Indermit	Gill,	Ana	Revenga,	and	Christian	Zeballos	
                                                   	
                                                   	
	
In	the	Republic	of	Korea,	1965	was	a	year	of	reconciliation.		On	June	22,	after	years	of	
talks,	 Korea	 and	 Japan	 signed	 a	 treaty	 of	 reconciliation.	 	 With	 typical	 Eastern	
understatement,	 it	 was	 called	 the	 “Treaty	 on	 Basic	 Relations”.	 The	 details	 were	 kept	
secret	 by	 the	 Korean	 government	 for	 decades.	 In	 2005,	 it	 became	 known	 that	 the	
agreement	 had	 involved	 complete	 and	 final	 compensation	 to	 Korea	 for	 Japanese	
colonization	 of	 the	 peninsula	 between	 1910	 and	 1945.	 The	 Japanese	 had	 given	 $800	
million	 in	 grants	 and	 loans	 in	 full	 settlement	 of	 the	 claims.	 Korea’s	 per	 capita	 income	
was	only	about	$100	at	the	time,	so	this	was	a	lot	of	money.1	Korea	got	a	lot	more	help	
from	the	United	States:	economic	aid	totaled	$60	billion	over	the	years,	about	the	same	
as	what	the	United	States	has	given	to	Sub‐Saharan	Africa.	
	
In	Indonesia,	1965	was	a	year	of	living	dangerously.	In	an	Independence	Day	speech	on	
August	 17,	 1964,	 President	 Ahmed	 Sukarno	 had	 used	 the	 Italian	 phrase	 vivere	
pericolosamente	to	describe	the	coming	challenges	for	his	newly	independent	nation.		A	
year	 later,	 with	 Indonesia	 engaged	 in	 hostilities	 on	 its	 borders	 with	 Malaysia	 and	
wracked	by	runaway	inflation	at	home,	he	called	for	a	socialist	revolution.		By	the	end	of	
the	year	Sukarno	was	powerless.	In	a	bloody	coup,	General	Suharto	had	taken	over.	Over	
the	 next	three	 decades,	 Suharto’s	 New	 Order	government	 received	billions	in	 financial	
aid	from	the	United	States	and	its	allies	in	the	Cold	War.		
	
A	quarter	century	later,	the	World	Bank	published	the	1990	World	Development	Report	
on	 Poverty.	 	 The	 report	 was	 inspired	 by	 progress	 in	 Korea	 and	 Taiwan,	 China—
henceforth	 Taiwan—	 both	 had	 by	 then	 virtually	 eliminated	 extreme	 poverty.	 Malaysia	
and	Thailand	had	made	impressive	 gains	in	 reducing	poverty	and	 figured	prominently	
too.	The	policies	recommended	in	the	report	were	also	surely	influenced	by	Indonesia,	
which	 had	 as	 many	 people	 as	 these	 four	 economies	 combined.	 	 Under	 Suharto’s	 New	
Order,	Indonesia	had	reduced	the	incidence	of	extreme	poverty	by	half.			
	
The	1990	World	Development	Report	distilled	these	experiences	into	a	simple	strategy	
for	 reducing	 poverty:	 market‐based	 growth	 made	 pro‐poor	 through	 an	 emphasis	 on	
agricultural	 reforms,	 openness	 to	 trade,	 and	 fiscal	 prudence;	 and	 large	 public	
investments	in	education,	health,	and	family	planning	implemented	in	ways	to	make	sure	
that	people	in	villages—especially	girls	and	women—got	their	fair	share.	These	would	
create	the	conditions	in	which	the	poor	both	had	the	opportunity	to	pull	themselves	out	
of	 poverty	 and	 the	 capacities	 to	 avail	 of	 the	 opportunities.	 	 The	 report	 also	
recommended	 modest	public	assistance	programs	as	a	supplement.		It	came	to	be	known	
as	the	two‐and‐a‐half‐point	strategy	for	poverty	reduction.2		

																																																								
1	Korea	had	asked	for	about	$365	million—$200	for	every	survivor,	$1,650	for	every	death,	and	

$2,000	each	for	the	injured.		Instead	of	compensating	the	victims,	the	government	used	much	of	it	
for	economic	development—building	schools	and	clinics,	an	expressway,	a	dam,	and	a	steel	mill.		
2	Actually,	 the	 1990	 report	 was	 not	 the	 first	 World	 Development	 Report	 on	 poverty.	 	 Based	 on	

fewer	statistics	and	less	evidence,	the	1980	World	Development	Report	had	proposed	a	similar	
strategy.	 	 The	 main	 difference	 between	 the	 1980	 and	 1990	 strategies	 was	 that	 the	 former	 had	
almost	no	discussion	of	social	insurance	programs.			

                                                           	
                                                           2
	
Between	1981	and	1996,	the	number	of	East	Asians	living	on	less	than	$1.90	a	day3	had	
fallen	from	1.1	billion	to	704	million.	The	strategy	was	working,	at	least	in	East	Asia.		
	
In	 1999,	 the	 World	 Bank	 began	 working	 on	 a	 new	 World	 Development	 Report	 on	
poverty.	 Prompted	 by	 setbacks	 in	 East	 Asia	 due	 to	 the	 1997‐98	 financial	 crisis	
(especially	 in	 Indonesia,	 where	 millions	 were	 pushed	 back	 into	 poverty)	 and	
dissatisfaction	with	the	pace	of	poverty	reduction	in	the	rest	of	the	world,	where	people	
living	 in	 extreme	 poverty	 had	 stayed	 at	 about	 1	 billion	 between	 1990	 and	 1999,	 the	
report	 revisited	 the	 2.5‐point	 strategy.	 	 WDR	 2000	 Attacking	 Poverty	 called	 for	 more	
attention	 to	 institutions,	 participation,	 and	 income	 redistribution.	 It	 outlined	 a	 new	
approach	based	on	increasing	empowerment,	opportunity,	and	security	for	the	poor.			
	
These	 have	 proved	 to	 be	 tougher	 concepts	 to	 translate	 into	 policy,	 so	 the	 strategy	
advocated	 in	 the	 2000	 WDR	 has	 been	 difficult	 to	 operationalize.	 	 During	 the	 next	 two	
decades,	 with	 the	 possible	 exception	 of	 Indonesia	 and	 the	 Philippines,	 East	 Asian	
countries	have	generally	stayed	with	the	2.5‐point	strategy	pioneered	in	Northeast	Asia	
in	the	1960s	and	1970s.		Even	the	countries	that	had	been	communist—China,	Vietnam,	
Cambodia	and	Lao	PDR—have	used	the	2.5‐point	strategy	to	good	effect.		Just	look	at	the	
numbers	(Figure	1).		In	1990,	of	the	1.9	billion	people	living	in	extreme	poverty,	about	
half,	996	 million,	were	in	East	Asia,	575	million	in	 South	Asia,	and	288	 million	in	 Sub‐
Saharan	 Africa.	 	 Today,	 25	 years	 later,	 the	 global	 sum	 is	 estimated	 to	 be	 about	 700	
million.4	East	Asia	has	83	million	people	living	on	less	than	$1.90	a	day,	South	Asia	231	
million,	and	Sub‐Saharan	Africa	347	million.		Put	another	way,	during	the	last	25	years	
East	Asian	countries	reduced	extreme	poverty	by	more	than	30	million—each	year!			
	
Figure	1:	Where	the	extreme	poor	are,	by	region	–	1990	and	2015	
	
	                 1990	                                        2015	
	 Number	of	extreme	poor:	1.9	billion	 Number	of	extreme	poor:	702	million	
	
                  5%
	
	                                                            6% 12%
	             15%                                                                          EAP
	                                                                                          SAS
	
	                           51%                                         33%                SSA
                                                      49%
	            30%
                                                                                           Rest of World
	
	
	
With	a	quarter	century	of	experience,	it	is	reasonable	to	ask	some	questions:		Does	the	
2.5‐point	plan	work	everywhere?	If	it	does	not,	what	should	be	done	instead?		If	it	does	
work,	 have	 we	 learned	 to	 implement	 it	 efficiently	 in	 places	 where	 the	 incidence	 of	
extreme	poverty	is	as	high	today	as	it	was	in	China	and	Vietnam	in	1990,	say	in	Nigeria	
and	 the	 Democratic	 Republic	 of	 Congo?	 Where	 it	 has	 worked,	 should	 the	 strategy	 be	
changed	as	extreme	poverty	is	reduced	to	low	levels?		

																																																								
3	The	international	poverty	lines	of	$1.25	and	$2.00	were	updated	to	$1.90	and	$3.10	in	2015	to	

reflect	 improvements	 in	 the	 measurement	 of	 purchasing	 power	 parity	 conversion	 factors.	 The	
new	lines	maintain	the	real	purchasing	power	of	the	earlier	lines	in	poor	countries,	and	as	such,	
the	revised	poverty	estimates	do	not	change	drastically	as	a	result	of	this	update.	See	Ferreira	et	
al.	(2015)	for	a	detailed	discussion	on	the	topic.								
4	This	 number	 is	 statistically	 projected	 from	 the	 2012	 global	 poverty	 figures.	 The	 latest	 actual	

estimate	of	global	poverty	is	897	million	people	living	in	extreme	poverty	in	2012.		

                                                           	
                                                           3
	
This	 paper	 provides	 answers	 to	 these	 questions.	 	 The	 2.5‐point	 plan	 has	 worked	
reasonably	 well	 where	 it	 has	 been	 implemented.	 	 Over	 the	 last	 25	 years,	 we	 have	
learned	 how	 to	 implement	 it	 better.	 	 We	 have	 also	 learned	 that	 it	 should	 be	 refined	
where	there	is	progress	in	reducing	poverty	and	where	governments	have	become	more	
capable.	 Countries	 that	 have	 reduced	 extreme	 poverty	 to	 low	 levels	 should	 consider	
expanding	social	insurance	to	make	it	a	full	third	component—to	expand	the	strategy	to	
three	 full	 points.	 But	 social	 insurance,	 the	 third	 component	 of	 the	 strategy,	 has	 to	 be	
changed	 from	 a	 supplement	 to	 a	 full	 component	 in	 ways	 that	 strengthen	 rather	 than	
substitute	 the	 first	 two	 components	 of	 the	 strategy.	 	 This	 is	 not	 easy,	 but	 it	 is	 easier	
today	 than	 it	 was	 25	 years	 ago.	 We	 know	 more	 about	 what	 interventions	 work	 and	
under	what	conditions,	and	we	now	have	better	technologies	to	aid	these	interventions.		
The	 lessons	 learned	 in	 East	 Asia	 and	 East	 Africa,	 in	 South	 Asia	 and	 Latin	 America—in	
countries	 as	 diverse	 as	 Bangladesh,	 Brazil,	 China,	 Ethiopia,	 Ghana,	 India,	 Indonesia,	
Mexico,	Peru,	Pakistan,	Rwanda,	South	Africa,	and	Vietnam—will	help	in	deploying	the	
3‐point	strategy	to	put	a	quick	end	to	extreme	poverty.		
	
These	 are	 cryptic	 answers,	 but	 they	 should	 give	 the	 reader	 an	 idea	 of	 the	 general	
conclusions	of	the	paper.		It	is	the	details,	however,	which	will	be	useful	in	formulating	a	
workable	plan	to	end	extreme	poverty,	by	first	reducing	the	number	of	people	living	on	
less	than	$1.90	dollars	to	less	than	250	million	by	2030.		This	is	an	ambitious	task.	Given	
population	growth,	it	entails	engineering	a	reduction	of	about	110	million	people	living	
in	extreme	poverty	every	year	for	the	next	15	years.		Even	East	Asia	could	only	achieve	
reductions	 of	 53	 million	 a	 year	 between	 1981	 and	 1996,	 the	 15	 years	 of	 quickest	
reduction	in	poverty	on	record.	The	international	community	can	help,	but	this	task	will	
have	to	be	done	country	by	country—especially	in	the	30‐40	countries	that	have	almost	
all	of	the	world’s	extreme	poor.	
	
But	governments	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa	and	South	Asia	should	take	heart.	Korea	(with	a	
population	 of	 47	 million)	 and	 Taiwan	 (with	 23	 million)	 showed	 that	 with	 the	 right	
policies	at	home	and	some	help	from	abroad,	poor	post‐conflict	economies	with	hostile	
neighbors	 where	 nearly	 everybody	 was	 living	 in	 abject	 poverty	 could	 40	 years	 later	
become	 post‐industrial	 economies	 where	 almost	 nobody	 is	 poor.	 For	 the	 Koreans	 and	
Taiwanese	to	end	extreme	poverty	in	less	than	four	decades	must	surely	rank	among	the	
most	 impressive	 accomplishments	 in	 modern	 history.	 	 Ending	 global	 extreme	 poverty	
less	 than	 40	 years	 after	 Korea	 and	 Taiwan	 eliminated	 theirs	 could	 well	 be	 mankind’s	
greatest	achievement.		
	
	
              1965‐1990—East	Asia	takes	the	quicker	route	
	
For	all	these	reasons,	any	exploration	of	the	policies	needed	to	end	extreme	poverty	by	
2030	should	begin	in	Northeast	Asia.			
	
Republic	of	Korea	and	Taiwan	(China)		
	
In	the	1960s,	the	Republic	of	Korea	(henceforth	South	Korea	or	Korea)	was	still	a	nation	
of	poor	people,	ravaged	by	colonizers,	devastated	by	conflict,	and	torn	in	two.		By	1990,	
South	 Korea	 had	 virtually	 eliminated	 extreme	 poverty.	 	 Fifteen	 years	 later,	 having	
weathered	 a	 serious	 economic	 crisis,	 it	 had	 become	 an	 advanced	 economy.	 	 How	 did	
Koreans	 make	 this	 miracle?	 Advocates	 both	 of	 state‐led	 development	 and	 market	
capitalism	 claim	 credit	 for	 its	 successful	 economic	 transformation,	 and	 the	 debate	
continues	to	this	day.			
	

                                                   	
                                                   4
	
Less	debatable	perhaps	is	how	South	Korea	ended	extreme	poverty.		
	
It	 started	 with	 a	 comprehensive	 land	 reform.	 	 Between	 1946	 and	 1955,	 60	 percent	 of	
tillable	 land	 was	 bought	 by	 the	 government	 from	 large	 landlords	 and	 sold	 to	 small	
farmers.	 	 Landownership	 became	 more	 equal—by	 one	 measure	 the	 Gini	 index	 of	
landownership	 fell	 from	 0.63	 before	 the	 reforms	 to	 less	 than	 0.50	 after.	 Productivity	
shot	up.	Rural	families	could	send	their	children	to	school	instead	of	working	for	larger	
landowners.	At	the	same	time,	the	government	made	education	top	priority,	second	only	
to	 defense.	 	 By	 1960,	 literacy	 was	 close	 to	 universal.	 By	 the	 mid‐1980s,	 more	 than	 90	
percent	of	middle	school	students	were	going	on	to	high	school.	At	the	same	time,	more	
than	1,300	health	centers	were	set	up	to	provide	primary	care,	medical	aid,	and	family	
planning	 services.	 	 A	 national	 health	 insurance	 scheme	 was	 introduced	 for	 urban	
workers	in	the	1970s	and	was	then	extended	to	rural	areas	in	the	mid‐1980s.		
	
After	 experimenting	 with	 import	 substitution	 for	 a	 decade,	 in	 the	 early	 1970s	 South	
Korea	 switched	 to	 export‐led	 development.	 The	 payoff	 was	 immediate.	 The	 economy	
grew	 by	 double	 digits	 annually	 and	 unemployment	 fell	 to	 less	 than	 5	 percent.	
Productivity	in	agriculture	continued	to	rise,	aided	by	government	programs	to	stabilize	
rice	 prices	 and	 introduce	 new	 technologies.	 A	 rural	 development	 scheme	 that	 helped	
villagers	 build	 roads	 and	 other	 infrastructure	 was	 started	 in	 1971.	 By	 1990,	 the	
economy	 was	completely	transformed:	between	the	mid‐1960s	and	1990,	 the	share	of	
agriculture	in	employment	fell	from	almost	60	percent	to	less	than	20,	and	in	industry	it	
increased	from	10	to	more	than	25	percent.		
	
South	 Korea	 had	 social	 welfare	 programs,	 but	 they	 were	 designed	 to	 strengthen—not	
supplant—the	family.	So,	for	example,	people	taking	care	of	their	elderly	parents	got	tax	
breaks	and	were	exempt	from	military	service.	A	public	assistance	program	was	started	
in	 1965,	 but	 it	 covered	 only	 about	 5	 percent	 of	 Koreans.	 Those	 classified	 as	 poor	
received	 social	 assistance	 but	 at	 least	 until	 the	 East	 Asian	 Crisis	 in	 the	 late	 1990s	 this	
was	never	more	than	1	percent	of	the	population.		
	
By	 1990,	 extreme	poverty	 rates	 at	a	 dollar‐a‐day	 were	 probably	 below	 3	percent.	 	 We	
cannot	be	certain	because	South	Korea	has	not	had	an	official	poverty	line.	It	has	never	
had	 poverty	 targets.	 	 South	 Korea	 followed	 what	 economists	 have	 called	 the	 ‘indirect	
route’	 to	 poverty	 reduction—the	 use	 of	 resources	 to	 accelerate	 growth	 and	 general	
capacities	of	the	population.		At	least	until	the	Asian	Crisis,	it	relied	little	on	the	direct	
route	to	reducing	poverty—cash	transfers	and	the	public	provision	of	housing,	food,	and	
health	care	targeted	specially	for	poor	people.		
	
After	the	Asian	financial	crisis,	Korea	expanded	social	welfare	both	to	address	the	social	
consequences	 of	 its	 rapid	 transformation	 and	 the	 effects	 of	 the	 crisis.	 	 Some	 changes	
were	 also	 made	 to	 institute	 business‐friendly	 labor	 regulations.	 	 Today	 the	 Korean	
welfare	 state	 has	 five	 social	 insurance	 programs:	 the	 Industrial	 Accident	 Insurance	
introduced	in	1961,	which	covers	about	45	percent	of	all	workers;	the	National	Health	
Insurance	 program	 that	 was	 made	 universal	 in	 1989;	 the	 National	 Pension	 Program,	
which	 became	 near	 universal	 in	 1999	 (three	 separate	 public	 pensions	 schemes	 cover	
civil	servants,	teachers	and	the	military);	the	Employment	Insurance	Program	started	in	
1995—those	who	received	unemployment	benefits	were	33	percent	in	1999;	and	Long‐
term	 Care	 Insurance	 started	 in	 2008.	 	 Korea’s	 social	 assistance	 program	 is	 now	 called	
the	 Minimum	 Living	 Standard	 Guarantee,	 an	 expanded	 version	 of	 the	 previous	
assistance	program.		This	provides	benefits	for	people	with	incomes	below	the	poverty	
line	 but	 prime‐aged	 recipients	 must	 enroll	 in	 training,	 public	 works,	 or	 community	
services.	
	

                                                   	
                                                   5
	
Taiwan’s	 development	 and	 poverty	 reduction	 efforts	 mirrored	 those	 of	 Korea	 both	 in	
their	nature	and	timing.		Korea’s	efforts,	e.g.,	in	land	reforms,	were	in	part	motivated	by	
developments	in	communist	North	Korea.	China	may	have	motivated	Taiwan’s	reforms	
even	more.		Taiwan	began	with	a	phased	but	comprehensive	land	reform	between	1949	
and	 1963,	 which	 involved	 an	 organized	 transfer	 of	 ownership	 to	 the	 tillers.	 	 By	 1965,	
more	 than	 90	 percent	 of	 the	 land	 was	 tilled	 by	 tenants.	 Agricultural	 productivity	
increased	quickly,	putting	a	big	dent	in	extreme	poverty.			
	
While	 the	 population	 more	 than	 doubled	 between	 1950	 and	 2000	 (the	 population	 is	
about	23	million	today),	massive	investments	in	education,	health,	and	family	planning	
resulted	 in	 declining	 fertility,	 rising	 school	 attainment,	 and	 greater	 longevity.	 An	
aggressive	policy	to	attract	foreign	direct	investment	(FDI)	resulted	in	Taiwan	becoming	
a	major	exporter	by	the	1990s.		By	2005,	agriculture	was	just	3	percent	of	GDP	and	the	
island	was	home	to	a	third	of	the	world’s	computer	industry.		Despite	minimal	spending	
on	social	welfare,	extreme	poverty	appeared	to	have	been	eliminated.			
	
Because	statistics	on	poverty	have	only	been	maintained	since	1981,	it	is	impossible	to	
be	sure.		Even	today,	Taiwan’s	social	welfare	spending	is	less	than	4	percent	of	GDP,	less	
than	 half	 the	 ratio	 in	 South	 Korea	 and	 one‐fifth	 the	 average	 in	 the	 OECD.	 Welfare	
recipients	are	fewer	than	2	percent	of	the	population	and	get	less	than	$150	a	month.			
	
Malaysia	and	Thailand	
	
Malaysia	 followed	 South	 Korea	 and	 Taiwan	 with	 a	 lag	 of	 about	 a	 decade.	 	 Malaysia	 is	
unusual	in	East	Asia	in	that	it	has	had	an	official	poverty	line	since	1970,	when	the	New	
Economic	 Policy	 was	 introduced	 as	 a	 response	 to	 social	 unrest.	 Steps	 to	 increase	
agricultural	 productivity	 and	 attract	 manufacturing‐related	 foreign	 direct	 investment	
were	accompanied	by	programs	to	provide	health,	housing,	and	other	services	in	rural	
areas.	 As	 in	 other	countries,	 rural	poverty	rates	 are	 higher	in	 Malaysia:	 three	times	 as	
high	 as	 those	 in	 urban	 areas.	 	 The	 civil	 unrest	 had	 its	 roots	 in	 ethnic	 disparities.	 	 At	
independence,	 almost	 90	 percent	 of	 the	 Malay	 population	 was	 rural,	 compared	 with	
about	70	percent	for	Indians	and	50	percent	for	the	Chinese.	The	policy	objective	was	as	
much	the	reduction	of	ethnic	inequality	as	poverty,	as	much	national	unity	as	economic	
progress.		
	
It	 turns	 out	 that	 Malaysia’s	 record	 in	 reducing	 poverty	 is	 more	 impressive	 than	 in	
eliminating	ethnic	inequalities.	In	peninsular	Malaysia,	rural	poverty	rates	fell	from	58	
percent	in	1970	to	19	percent	in	1990;	urban	poverty	from	21	to	7	percent.	In	1970,	the	
poverty	rates	were	about	65	percent	among	Malays,	40	percent	among	Indians,	and	25	
percent	 for	 the	 Chinese.	 	 In	 1990,	 the	 official	 poverty	 rates	 for	 Malay,	 Indian,	 and	
Chinese	groups	were	21,	8,	and	6	percent,	respectively.				
	
After	1990,	somewhat	more	attention	was	paid	to	the	alleviation	of	“hard	core”	poverty.		
Poverty	 rates	 using	the	 national	line	fell	from	 about	50	 percent	 in	1970	 to	 less	 than	 3	
percent	by	2005,	despite	a	setback	in	1997‐99	due	to	the	financial	crisis.		This	decline	in	
poverty	was	largely	the	result	of	annual	economic	growth	rates	that	averaged	8	percent	
in	the	1970s,	6	percent	in	the	1980s,	and	9	percent	in	the	first	half	of	the	1990s,	and	a	
successful	 effort	 to	 provide	 basic	 services	 such	 as	 education,	 health,	 housing,	 and	
sanitation	in	rural	and	urban	areas,	and	in	lagging	and	leading	states.						
	
While	Malaysia’s	record	of	poverty	reduction	is	impressive,	it	is	not	as	stellar	as	that	of	
Korea	and	Taiwan.		With	more	natural	resources	and	better	initial	conditions,	Malaysia	
took	a	decade	longer	to	end	extreme	poverty.	Malaysia’s	task	was	complicated	by	ethnic	
heterogeneity;	in	Taiwan,	by	contrast,	95	percent	of	the	population	is	Han	Chinese.		But	

                                                   	
                                                   6
	
there	are	other	reasons	as	well:	a	weaker	bureaucracy,	non‐transparency	in	monitoring	
the	 effects	 of	 development	 programs	 on	 poverty,	 and	 an	 overemphasis	 on	 heavy	
industry	 at	 the	 expense	 of	 investments	 in	 agriculture	 and	 rural	 development.	 	 It	 may	
also	 be	 because	 Malaysia	 chose	 to	 redistribute	 assets	 differently,	 eschewing	 land	
reforms	 that	 would	 have	 benefited	 rural	 Malays	 and	 preferring	 programs	 that	 favor	
Malay	ownership	of	new	companies.		
	
Thailand,	 Malaysia’s	 neighbor	 to	 the	 north,	 was	 at	 the	 same	 time	 engaged	 in	 poverty	
reduction	efforts	of	its	own.		Unlike	the	others,	Thailand	had	never	been	colonized	and	
had	no	hesitation	in	adopting	policies	to	integrate	into	the	world	economy.		It	began	by	
becoming	 the	 world’s	 biggest	 exporter	 of	 rice,	 a	 position	 it	 held	 for	 more	 than	 three	
decades	 until	 surpassed	 recently	 by	 India	 and	 Vietnam.	 	 In	 the	 1970s	 and	 1980s,	
Thailand	became	an	important	part	of	the	East	Asian	production	networks	for	garments,	
computers,	 and	 automobiles,	 attracting	 FDI	 and	 generating	 exports.	 Tourism	 has	 also	
become	a	big	part	of	its	economy.		Its	export	to	GDP	ratio	has	climbed	to	75	percent.	But	
despite	 an	 outward‐oriented	 strategy	 based	 on	 exporting	 commodities	 and	 cyclically	
sensitive	 services	 such	 as	 tourism,	 Thailand	 did	 not	 have	 even	 one	 year	 of	 negative	
output	 growth	between	1958	 and	 1996—a	four‐decade	 run	during	 which	GDP	 growth	
averaged	4	percent.	Productivity	growth	was	80	percent	of	the	increase	in	value	added	
in	agriculture	between	1980	and	2002.	Agriculture	still	accounts	for	almost	40	percent	
of	employment.			
	
During	 this	 time,	 Thailand	 taxed	 agriculture—especially	 rice	 and	 rubber—heavily,	
extracting	 more	 than	 40	 percent	 of	 value	 added	 during	 the	 1970s.	 	 But	 spending	 on	
infrastructure	 and	 services	 made	 up	 for	 some	 of	 this.	 	 Malaysia	 had	 taxed	 agriculture	
half	as	much.		
	
Thailand’s	 education	 and	 health	 systems	 have	 not	 been	 as	 efficient	 in	 reaching	 rural	
areas.	 	 Its	 approach	 to	 social	 protection	 has	 been	 minimalist.	 	 But	 its	 family	 planning	
programs—one	 of	 the	 most	 effective	 public‐private	 partnerships	 ever—are	 viewed	 by	
many	as	best	practice.		Fertility	fell	from	6	births	per	woman	in	the	mid‐1960s	to	less	
than	2	by	1996,	a	pattern	that	is	similar	to	China’s.		Between	1981	and	1996,	the	$1.90‐
a‐day	 extreme	 poverty	 rate	 fell	 from	 19.6	 to	 2.3	 percent.	 	 Despite	 being	 late	 in	
addressing	weaknesses	in	rural	education	and	health,	$1.90‐a‐day	poverty	has	been	less	
than	1	percent	since	2010.		Thailand	should	be	famous	for	ending	extreme	poverty.		
	
Instead,	it	is	infamous	for	starting	the	East	Asian	financial	crisis	in	1997.		The	eight	years	
before	the	crisis	were	actually	the	best	for	poverty	reduction.	Using	the	official	poverty	
line,	 the	 number	 of	 persons	 living	 in	 poverty	 fell	 by	 11	 million,	 from	 18	 million	 to	 7	
million.		During	the	crisis,	the	ranks	of	the	poor	increased	to	about	8	million;	that	is,	the	
crisis	 reversed	 less	 than	 10	 percent	 of	 the	 poverty	 reduction	 during	 the	 eight‐year	
economic	 boom	 preceding	 the	 bust.	 Today,	 Thai	 exports	 span	 all	 sectors:	 agriculture	
(especially	 rice),	 industry	 (including	 garments,	 light	 manufacturing,	 and	 food	
processing),	 and	 services	 (especially	 tourism).	 	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 think	 of	 a	 more	 labor‐
intensive	set	of	economic	activities.			
	
In	 effect,	 Thailand	 compensated	 for	 weak	 social	 services	 and	 frugal	 welfare	 programs	
with	perhaps	the	most	pro‐poor	economic	growth	pattern	in	all	of	Asia.	This	meant	that	
consumption	 poverty	 fell	 across	 the	 country.	 	 But	 it	 has	 led	 to	 a	 growing	 education	
backlog.		In	the	mid‐1990s,	for	example,	fewer	than	half	of	Thai	children	aged	12‐18	had	
completed	some	junior	secondary	education	(grades	7‐9).		This	was	closer	to	a	third	in	
the	 poorer	 Northeast.	 	 Even	 today,	 Thailand	 does	 poorly	 in	 education,	 ranking	 behind	
even	Lao	PDR	in	some	measures.			
	

                                                  	
                                                  7
	
By	 contrast,	 Thailand’s	 health	 outcomes—maternal	 and	 child	 mortality,	 for	 example—
are	among	the	best	in	the	developing	world.		Since	the	crisis,	Thailand	has	introduced	a	
national	health	insurance	scheme,	and	it	appears	to	have	been	a	big	success.	5	It	is	called	
the	“30	baht	scheme”—visits	to	the	doctor	are	supposed	to	cost	less	than	a	dollar.	The	
scheme	 costs	 the	 government	 about	 4	 percent	 of	 GDP,	 but	 the	 coverage	 is	 nearly	
universal.		
	
Indonesia	
	
Despite	these	astounding	successes	in	the	neighborhood,	it	is	Indonesia	that	gets	much	
of	 the	 attention.	 This	 is	 understandable.	 	 Its	 population	 is	 as	 much	 as	 those	 in	 Korea,	
Taiwan,	 Malaysia,	 and	 Thailand	 combined.	 At	 $3.10‐a‐day,	 there	 are	 as	 many	 poor	
people	 in	 Indonesia	 as	 in	 the	 rest	 of	 East	 Asia	 outside	 China.	 	 In	 addition,	 its	
performance	in	the	three	decades	before	the	crisis	was	spectacular.		
	
The	 formula	 was	 essentially	 the	 same:	 labor‐using	 growth	 and	 investments	 in	 human	
capital.	 	 Green	 Revolution	 technology	 and	 investments	 in	 rural	 infrastructure	 led	 to	
higher	 and	 higher	 farm	 productivity	 for	 a	 quarter	 century:	 agricultural	 total	 factor	
productivity	growth	on	farms	was	2.5	percent	annually	between	1968	and	1992.	Later,	
high	 commodity	 prices	 helped	 farmers,	 and	 40	 percent	 of	 workers	 in	 rural	 areas	
escaped	 poverty	 while	 staying	 in	 agriculture.	 This	 dynamism	 spilled	 over	 to	 nonfarm	
rural	jobs,	which	opened	another	pathway	out	of	poverty	for	millions.		Using	Indonesia’s	
national	measure,	poverty	fell	from	56	percent	to	11	percent	between	1968	and	1996.		
	
Economic	 growth	 between	 1967	 and	 1987	 averaged	 almost	 5	 percent;	 between	 1988	
and	1997	it	went	up	to	6	percent.		Indonesia’s	literacy	rates	climbed	from	less	than	60	
percent	to	more	than	90.		The	country	also	achieved	virtually	universal	primary	school	
enrollment.	 	 In	 the	 three	 decades	 since	 1968,	 life	 expectancy	 increased	 by	 20	 years.		
Fertility	rates	fell	from	6	to	3	births	per	woman.	
	
But	Indonesia	was	getting	more	attention	for	rampant	corruption	than	for	rapid	poverty	
reduction.	Indonesia	got	even	more	attention	when	the	financial	crisis	triggered	political	
upheaval,	and	poverty	rose	by	a	third.		A	massive	restructuring	of	governance	took	place	
as	 democracy	 took	 hold.	 	 Social	 services	 were	 decentralized,	 but	 it	 was	 not	 done	 well.	
Geographic	 and	 social	 disparities	 in	 the	 quality	 of	 education,	 health,	 and	 sanitation	
widened.	 	 Under	 pressure	 to	 stem	 the	 increases	 in	 poverty	 after	 the	 crisis,	 Indonesia	
expanded	 social	 protection	 programs.	 	 The	 growth	 rate	 fell	 by	 about	 a	 third—from	 6	
percent	before	democracy	to	about	3.8	percent	after.		But	it	is	the	poverty	rates	that	are	
most	 disappointing.	 Extreme	 poverty	 has	 been	 coming	 down	 since	 the	 crisis,	 but	 at	 a	
discouragingly	 slow	 pace.	 It	 took	 Indonesia	 more	 than	 a	 decade	 to	 get	 back	 to	 the	
poverty	rates	before	the	crisis.6	In	2011,	there	were	33	million	Indonesians	living	on	less	
than	$1.90	a	day.	
	

																																																								
5	The	 program	was	introduced	 in	2001.		 No	 individual	 would	be	 required	 to	pay	 more	than	 30	

baht	(about	US$0.84	at	the	time)	per	visit	for	either	outpatient	or	in‐patient	care,	including	drugs.	
Some	 costly	 procedures	 are	 not	 covered—cosmetic	 care,	 obstetric	 delivery	 beyond	 two	
pregnancies,	organ	transplant,	chemotherapy,	and	renal	dialysis.	Each	person	must	register	with	
a	 public	 health	 unit—a	 health	 center	 or	 community	 hospital—and	 use	 it	 as	 a	 primary	 point	 of	
contact	before	getting	a	referral	for	secondary	care	at	a	provincial	hospital.		
6	In	 1996,	 Indonesia	 had	 revised	 the	 method	 for	 calculating	 poverty.	 	 While	 the	 old	 method	

yielded	 a	 headcount	 of	 11.3	 percent	 for	 1996,	 the	 revised	 figure	 was	 17.6	 percent.	 	 By	 1999,	
poverty	had	climbed	to	23.4	percent.		Seven	years	later,	the	poverty	rate	was	17.8	percent.	Any	
way	you	look	at	it,	Indonesia	took	more	than	ten	years	to	get	back	to	pre‐crisis	poverty	rates.	

                                                           	
                                                           8
	
By	1990,	with	the	exception	of	the	Philippines—where	at	30	percent,	extreme	poverty	
rates	 at	 $1.90‐a‐day	 were	 essentially	 unchanged	 in	 the	 fifteen	 years	 before	 the	 East	
Asian	 crisis—the	 larger	 countries	 in	 the	 region	 had	 all	 engineered	 impressive	
reductions	 in	 poverty.	 	 China	 and	 Vietnam	 were	 latecomers	 to	 economic	 reform	 and	
poverty	 reduction,	 but	 they	 were	 making	 quick	 progress.	 Between	 1981	 and	 1990,	
China’s	 extreme	 poverty	 rate	 at	 $1.90	 a	 day	 had	 come	 down	 from	 88	 to	 67	 percent,	
Vietnam’s	from	71	to	61	percent.		At	the	time,	though,	these	stories	had	not	been	told.		
	
In	 any	 case,	 until	 the	 1980s,	 poverty	 reduction	 was	 almost	 exclusively	 an	 East	 Asian	
phenomenon.		In	South	Asia,	only	Sri	Lanka	had	made	a	dent	in	poverty,	halving	extreme	
poverty	from	19.3	to	9	percent.		In	India	and	Pakistan,	the	ranks	of	the	poor	had	swelled	
by	millions;	in	conflict‐ridden	Bangladesh	and	Nepal	the	stories	were	even	more	dismal.		
In	Latin	America,	the	only	poor	country	that	had	made	any	progress	was	tiny	Costa	Rica,	
which	had	reduced	extreme	poverty	at	$1.90‐a‐day	by	half.		Brazil,	where	more	than	15	
percent	of	the	population	lived	on	less	than	this,	was	the	biggest	disappointment.	In	Sub‐
Saharan	Africa,	extreme	poverty	rates	had	gone	up	in	most	countries	between	1981	and	
1990.	 In	 the	 Middle	 East	 and	 North	 Africa,	 led	 by	 the	 Arab	 Republic	 of	 Egypt	 and	
Morocco,	poverty	rates	were	cut	from	8	to	6	percent.	It	would	be	fair	to	say	that	before	
1990,	only	East	Asia	had	made	progress	in	reducing	poverty	at	a	pace	that	is	remotely	
consistent	with	what	is	needed	to	get	to	3	percent	by	2030.		
	
	
                     WDR	1990—The	two‐and‐a‐half‐point	strategy	
	
While	 the	 high‐performing	 East	 Asian	 economies—Korea,	 Taiwan,	 Malaysia,	 Thailand,	
and	 Indonesia—were	 becoming	 expert	 in	 getting	 rid	 of	 poverty,	 development	 experts	
were	debating	how	best	to	do	it.		There	were	two	competing	views:	the	indirect	route	to	
reducing	 poverty,	 and	 a	 more	 direct	 one.7	The	 direct	 approach	 requires	 redistribution	
within	a	country	unless	the	funds	come	from	donors.		The	indirect	or	growth‐oriented	
route	can	also	involve	policies	that	help	the	poor,	but	the	emphasis	is	on	increasing	their	
capacity	 to	 earn	 with	 the	 assets	 they	 already	 have.	 	 The	 distinction	 is	 one	 of	 creating	
income	versus	providing	consumption.	
	
The	 popular	 view	 has	 swung	 back	 and	 forth.	 In	 the	 1950s	 and	 1960s	 the	 indirect	
approach	was	in	fashion.		In	the	1970s,	as	the	ranks	of	the	poor	swelled,	proponents	of	
the	direct	approach	began	to	be	heard.		But	by	the	1980s,	because	of	the	success	with	
the	 indirect	 approach	 in	 East	 Asia	 and	 the	lack	 of	success	in	 the	 rest	of	 the	 world,	the	
indirect	approach	was	in	fashion	once	again.		
	
Perhaps	 the	 clearest	 and	 most	 practicable	 treatment	 of	 poverty	 is	 the	 1990	 World	
Development	 Report	 Poverty.	 WDR	 1990	 provided	 a	 systematic	 account	 of	 the	
experience	 of	 countries	 that	 had	 engineered	 big	 reductions	 in	 poverty	 during	 1965‐
1987	 and,	 based	 on	 their	 experience,	 proposed	 a	 strategy	 for	 reducing	 poverty.	 	 It	
reflected	the	consensus	of	the	times,	and	emphasized	the	indirect	route.			Countries	that	
																																																								
7	Bhagwati	 (1988)	 provides	 a	 summary:	 	 “With	 the	 amelioration	 of	 poverty	 as	 the	 target,	 the	

policy	instruments	designed	to	achieve	that	target	can	be	divided	into	two	main	classes:	(i)	the	
indirect	route,	i.e.,	the	use	of	resources	to	accelerate	growth	and	thereby	impact	on	the	incomes	
and	hence	the	living	standards	of	the	poor;	and	(ii)	the	direct	route,	i.e.,	the	public	provision	of	
minimum‐needs‐oriented	education,	housing,	nutritional	supplements	and	health,	and	transfers	
to	 finance	 private	 expenditures	 on	 these	 and	 other	 components	 of	 the	 living	 standards	 of	 the	
poor.”	 Bhagwati	 makes	 it	 clear	 that	 effective	 antipoverty	 policy	 would	 likely	 involve	 a	 mix	 of	
these	two	approaches.		
	
                                                           	
                                                           9
	
made	 the	 most	 progress	 had	 done	 so	 with	 a	 strategy	 with	 two	 equally	 important	
elements:	
	
       “The	first	element	is	to	promote	the	productive	use	of	the	poor’s	most	abundant	
       asset—labor.	 	 It	 calls	 for	 policies	 to	 harness	 market	 incentives,	 social	 and	
       political	institutions,	infrastructure,	and	technology	to	that	end.		
        The	second	is	to	provide	basic	social	services	to	the	poor.		Primary	health	care,	
        family	planning,	nutrition,	and	primary	education	are	especially	important.	
        The	 two	 elements	 are	 mutually	 reinforcing;	 one	 without	 the	 other	 is	 not	
        sufficient.”		
	
During	1965‐1987	in	countries	like	Brazil	and	Pakistan	growth	had	raised	incomes	but	
governments	had	 failed	 to	provide	social	services.		In	Morocco	and	Sri	Lanka,	primary	
education	and	health	indicators	were	impressive	but	the	ranks	of	the	poor	had	swelled	
instead	 of	 shrinking	 because	 income	 growth	 had	 been	 anemic.	 	 But	 in	 Indonesia	 and	
Malaysia,	 where	 both	 parts	 of	 the	 strategy	 were	 implemented,	 the	 number	 of	 poor	
people	 had	 been	 cut	 in	 half,	 along	 with	 impressive	 improvements	 in	 health	 and	
education	and	other	social	indicators.		
	
The	best	evidence	in	favor	of	the	strategy	came	from	Taiwan	and	Korea.	Between	1965	
and	1987,	Korea’s	infant	mortality	fell	from	62	to	24	per	1,000	births,	the	fertility	rate	
fell	from	4.9	to	1.8,	and	life	expectancy	at	birth	rose	to	more	than	70	years.		Secondary	
school	enrollment	for	girls	rose	from	25	percent	in	1965	to	86	percent	in	1987,	and	for	
boys	from	35	to	88	percent.	Rigorous	implementation	of	this	two‐part	strategy—made	
potent	by	a	swift	reform	that	transferred	more	than	half	of	all	cultivated	land	to	poorer	
households—had	slashed	extreme	poverty	to	under	3	percent	by	1990.	Taiwan’s	story	is	
similar.			
	
The	 1997‐98	 crisis	 would	 convince	 the	 Koreans	 that	 these	 two	 elements	 needed	 a	
complement:	social	insurance.		The	1990	WDR	had	anticipated	this.	
	
        “Even	if	this	basic	two‐part	strategy	is	adopted,	many	of	the	world’s	poor—the	
        sick,	the	old,	those	who	live	in	resource	poor	regions,	and	others—will	continue	
        to	 experience	 severe	 deprivation.	 	 Many	 others	 will	 experience	 temporary	
        setbacks	owing	to	seasonal	variations	in	income,	loss	of	the	family	breadwinner,	
        famine,	 or	 adverse	 macroeconomic	 shocks.	 	 A	 comprehensive	 approach	 to	
        poverty	reduction,	therefore,	calls	for	a	program	of	well‐targeted	transfers	and	
        safety	nets	as	an	essential	complement	to	the	basic	strategy.”		
	
The	2.5‐point	strategy	proposed	by	the	WDR	can	be	seen	as	a	policy	package	to	increase	
the	 incomes	 and	 the	 assets	 of	 the	 poor,	 and	 to	 provide	 basic	 insurance	 to	 the	 poor	
against	bad	luck	or	the	vagaries	of	the	economy.		It	can	also	be	seen	as	a	public‐private	
partnership:	private	initiative	would	increase	the	incomes	of	the	poor,	a	blend	of	public	
and	 private	 actions	 would	 help	 them	 add	 to	 their	 assets,	 and	 government‐sponsored	
safety	nets	would	aid	the	most	destitute	and	unfortunate.		For	the	countries	that	had	put	
this	approach	into	practice	in	the	1970s	and	1980s,	it	proved	to	be	a	winning	game	plan.		
During	 the	 next	 25	 years,	 as	 global	 extreme	 poverty	 rates	 continued	 to	 fall,	 it	 would	
display	its	durability	(Figure	2).			
	
	
	
	

                                                	
                                               10	
	
Box	1:	The	1980	WDR’s	two‐point	strategy	
	
In	1973,	just	as	the	East	Asian	nations	were	starting	to	create	what	would	be	called	an	
economic	miracle	two	decades	later,	the	World	Bank’s	president,	Robert	McNamara,	was	
expressing	concern	about	what	was	happening	all	over	the	developing	world:		
	
“The	 basic	 problem	 of	 poverty	 and	 growth	 in	 the	 developing	 world	 can	 be	 stated	 very	
simply.		….	Despite	a	decade	of	unprecedented	increase	in	the	gross	national	product	of	the	
developing	 countries,	 the	 poorest	 segments	 of	 their	 population	 have	 received	 relatively	
little	 benefit.	 Nearly	 800	 million	 individuals—40	 percent	 out	 of	 a	 total	 of	 two	 billion—
survive	 on	 incomes	 estimated	 (in	 U.S.	 purchasing	 power)	 at	 30	 cents	 per	 day	 in	 conditions	
of	malnutrition,	illiteracy,	and	squalor.	They	are	suffering	poverty	in	the	absolute	sense….	
	
The	 data	 suggest	 that	 the	 decade	 of	 rapid	 growth	 has	 been	 accompanied	 by	 greater	
maldistribution	 of	 income	 in	 many	 developing	 countries,	 and	 that	 the	 problem	 is	 most	
severe	in	the	countryside.	There	has	been	an	increase	in	the	output	of	mining,	industry,	and	
government—and	 in	 the	 incomes	 of	 the	 people	 dependent	 on	 these	 sectors—but	 the	
productivity	and	income	of	the	small	farmer	have	stagnated.	
	
One	 can	 conclude	 that	 policies	 aimed	 primarily	 at	 accelerating	 economic	 growth,	 in	 most	
developing	 countries,	 have	 benefited	 mainly	 the	 upper	 40	 percent	 of	 the	 population	 and	
the	allocation	of	public	services	and	investment	funds	has	tended	to	strengthen	rather	than	
to	offset	this	trend.”	
	
Reflecting	 McNamara’s	 emphasis	 on	 the	 living	 standards	 of	 the	 bottom	 40	 percent	 of	
people	in	developing	countries,	the	1980	WDR	took	a	good	look	at	poverty	and	human	
development	since	the	Second	World	War	with	the	data	it	could	muster.		It	essentially	
recommended	 a	 strategy	 with	 two	 important	 elements:	 policies	 to	 foster	 growth,	
especially	in	rural	areas,	and	complementary	policies	for	human	development.			
	
Compared	with	the	1990	WDR,	it	had	one	major	difference:	the	implied	unimportance	of	
social	 insurance	 programs.	 WDR	 1980	 had	 exactly	 two	 paragraphs	 on	 transfers	 and	
subsidies	(page	45).		It	concluded	that	while	in	industrialized	countries	the	mainstay	of	
antipoverty	policy	is	income	transfers	and	social	insurance	programs,	the	scope	for	such	
programs	in	developing	countries	is	limited.		The	alternative	approach	was	to	subsidize	
goods	and	services	that	are	especially	important	for	poor	people,	such	as	food	and	fuel.		
This	 could	 help	 the	 poor	 raise	 their	 health	 and	 longevity,	 but	 such	 subsidies	 involved	
leakages	 to	 the	 non‐poor	 and	 could	 be	 costly.	 	 In	 essence,	 the	 report	 discouraged	
developing	countries	from	relying	much—if	at	all—on	such	transfers	and	subsidies.			
	
A	subtler	difference	lay	in	the	1980	WDR’s	emphasis	on	fertility	and	population	policies.	
Figure	5.6	on	page	69	of	the	report,	titled	“Policy	and	Poverty”	laid	out	the	relationships	
between	 five	 principal	 aspects	 of	 economic	 development:	 Income,	 Nutrition,	 Fertility,	
Education,	 and	 Health.	 	 The	 WDR	 referred	 to	 the	 debate	 on	 family	 planning,	 and	
concluded	that	socioeconomic	progress	and	family	planning	both	affect	fertility	and	are	
mutually	reinforcing.		Ten	years	later,	WDR	1990	would	make	a	similar	judgment.		But,	
influenced	 by	 the	 experiences	 in	 China	 and	 India,	 it	 recommended	 that	 the	 principal	
objective	 of	 family	 planning	 programs	 should	 be	 improved	 maternal	 health	 and	
mortality,	not	reduced	fertility.		
	
Sources:	McNamara	(1973)	and	World	Development	Report	1980.		
	
                                                   	
                                                   	

                                                   	
                                                  11	
	
Figure	2:	Global	extreme	poverty	since	1980	
	
    	
    	                           Percentage	of	population	living	on	less	than	$1.90	a	day
    	         50
    	
              45
    	
    	         40

    	         35
    	         30
    	         25
    	         20
    	         15
    	
              10
    	
    	           5

    	           0
    	            1980                    1990              2000         2010   2020        2030
    	
                      Source:	Global	Monitoring	Report	2015/16	(World	Bank)	
        Note:	Numbers	until	2012	are	estimated	and	numbers	for	2015	and	2030	are	projections.	
	
	
                           Post	1990	—Poverty	reduction	goes	global	
	
Between	 1965	 and	 1990,	 poverty	 reduction	 was	 almost	 exclusively	 an	 East	 Asian	
phenomenon.		 Since	then,	it	has	 gone	 global.		The	next	quarter	 century	saw	continued	
progress	in	East	Asia	led	this	time	by	China,	but	more	than	a	dozen	countries	in	South	
America,	South	Asia,	and	Africa	also	began	to	rapidly	reduce	the	ranks	of	people	living	in	
extreme	poverty.		The	most	successful	ones,	such	as	Vietnam,	relied	on	the	proven	2.5‐
point	 plan:	 a	 strategy	 that	 emphasized	 economic	 growth	 generally	 initiated	 by	
improvements	in	agriculture,	big	investments	in	education,	health	and	family	planning,	
and	well‐chosen	social	assistance	programs.		
	
Along	 the	 way,	 there	 has	 been	 innovation.	 Most	 noticeably,	 development	 specialists	
have	 discovered	 ways	 to	 design	 large‐scale	 social	 assistance	 programs	 in	 ways	 that	
reinforce	policies	to	foster	labor‐using	growth	and	investments	in	human	capital.		There	
have	 been	 numerous	 experiments,	 and	 some	 of	 them	 have	 been	 successful.	 	 The	
especially	 promising	 experiments	 are	 new	 ways	 to	 provide	 cash	 transfers,	 such	 as	
Progresa8	in	Mexico	and	 Bolsa	Familia	in	Brazil,	extending	unemployment	insurance	to	
rural	 workers	 through	 programs	 such	 as	 the	 National	 Rural	 Employment	 Guarantee	
Scheme	 in	 India,	 and	 social	 assistance	 for	 the	 very	 poor	 such	 as	 China’s	 Dibao	 and	
Ethiopia’s	Productive	Safety	Net	Program.		The	costs	of	these	programs	range	from	0.5	
to	5	percent	of	GDP.		
	
What	 some	 countries	 have	 also	 experienced	 is	 the	 effect	 of	 natural	 disasters—of	
droughts	 and	 disease,	 and	 storms	 and	 tsunamis.	 	 A	 major	 contributor	 to	 Ethiopia’s	
success	in	cutting	the	extreme	poverty	rate	by	more	than	half	may	just	be	good	fortune:	
clement	weather	conditions	during	the	last	decade.		Bangladesh	has	been	trying	to	help	

																																																								
8	Mexico’s	 Progresa	program	was	later	renamed	 Oportunidades	and,	more	recently,	 Prospera.	For	

simplicity,	its	original	name	is	used	throughout	this	paper.		

                                                                   	
                                                                  12	
	
people	 find	 better	 ways	 to	 cope	 with	 cyclones	 and	 climate	 change.	 	 In	 the	 1990s	 and	
2000s,	 the	 AIDS	 epidemic	 led	 to	 more	 than	 33	 million	 untimely	 deaths—about	 22	
million	 in	 Sub‐Saharan	 Africa—along	 with	 untold	 human	 suffering	 and	 big	 economic	
losses.		One	estimate	is	that	growth	fell	by	between	2	and	4	percentage	points	during	the	
peak	 of	 the	 epidemic	 in	 Southern	 Africa.	 	 The	 Avian	 Flu	 and	 Ebola	 viruses	 did	
considerable	damage	too.		In	making	sure	that	calamities	and	pandemics	do	not	reverse	
hard‐won	gains	in	reducing	poverty,	much	more	will	have	to	be	done	between	now	and	
2030.			
	
Between	1990	and	2012,	the	largest	reductions	in	the	numbers	of	people	living	on	less	
than	$1.90	a	day	happened	in	China,	Indonesia,	and	Vietnam	in	East	Asia;	India,	Pakistan,	
and	Bangladesh	in	South	Asia;	Brazil	and	Mexico	in	Latin	America;	and	Ethiopia,	Ghana,	
South	Africa,	and	Tanzania	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa.		These	12	countries	accounted	for	1.1	
billion	 of	 the	 1	 billion	 global	 drop	 in	 $1.90	 dollar‐a‐day	 poverty	 between	 1990	 and	
2012.9		Several	of	these	experiences	are	assessed	below.			
	
China	and	Vietnam	
	
The	 biggest	 story	 in	 economic	 development	 and	 poverty	 reduction	 since	 1990	 is,	 of	
course,	 the	 People’s	 Republic	 of	 China.	 	 The	 reforms	 under	 Deng	 Xiaoping	 completely	
transformed	China	(and,	in	due	course,	the	world)	and	are	now	the	stuff	of	legend.	When	
it	comes	to	big,	quick	and	sustainable	poverty	reduction,	these	reforms	have	no	peer.		In	
1981,	88	percent	of	all	Chinese	lived	on	less	than	$1.90	a	day;	in	2012,	that	ratio	is	less	
than	7	percent.		In	1981,	almost	every	Chinese	person	lived	on	less	than	$3.10	dollars	a	
day;	in	2012,	the	number	is	less	than	20	percent.		The	magnitudes	are	stunning.		In	1981,	
880	million	people	lived	on	less	than	$1.90	a	day.	By	1990	it	was	less	than	760	million,	
and	by	2012	it	was	less	than	100	million.	What	makes	these	numbers	impressive	is	that	
between	 1981	 and	 2012,	 China’s	 population	 grew	 by	 a	 third—from	 a	 billion	 to	 more	
than	1.35	billion.		
	
Between	1990	and	2012,	the	absolute	number	of	extreme	poor	has	been	reduced	by	an	
annual	average	of	30	million	a	year.	What	made	China	so	successful?		The	quick	answer	
is	that	since	1980,	China	has	implemented	the	2.5‐point	strategy	almost	as	well	as	Korea	
and	 Taiwan.	 Economic	 growth	 has	 been	 both	 rapid	 and	 labor‐intensive—initiated	 by	
agricultural	productivity	increases,	disciplined	by	a	growing	openness,	and	facilitated	by	
investments	in	infrastructure;	investments	in	human	capital	have	been	aided	by	efforts	
to	 reduce	 fertility	 and,	 more	 recently,	 by	 targeted	 transfers.	 	 But	 the	 pace	 of	 poverty	
reduction	 has	 waxed	 and	 waned	 over	 time,	 and	 these	 fluctuations	 provide	 valuable	
lessons	for	others.					
	
Everyone	 seems	 to	 agree	 that	 the	 metamorphosis	 started	 in	 1978.	 	 But	 then	 the	
narrative	 diverges.	 One	 version	 emphasizes	 China’s	 sudden	 openness	 to	 trade—the	
special	economic	zones	along	the	coast	that	attracted	foreign	direct	investment	and	the	
domestic	 investments	 in	 infrastructure	 in	 and	 around	 these	 favored	 areas.	 	 The	 other	
version	highlights	the	transformation	of	Chinese	agriculture.		
	
There	 were	 no	 sweeping	 purchases	 and	 redistribution	 of	 land,	 as	 there	 had	 been	 in	
Korea	and	Taiwan	(the	land	had	belonged	to	the	State	since	the	late	1940s).		While	there	
had	 been	 investment	 in	 rural	 infrastructure	 such	 as	 canals,	 agricultural	 productivity	
																																																								
9	The	 ranks	 of	 the	 poor	 swelled	 in	 many	 countries.	 In	 six	 countries—Nigeria,	 Democratic	

Republic	of	Congo,	Madagascar,	Kenya,	Malawi,	and	Angola—the	increase	in	people	living	on	less	
than	1.90	dollars	a	day	between	1990	and	2015	added	up	to	100	million.		
	
                                                            	
                                                           13	
	
growth	was	measly—just	2.5	percent	annually	between	1952	and	1977.		But	starting	in	
1979,	almost	all	farmland	was	allocated	to	individual	farmers.	The	old	tenure	system—
in	which	rural	households	worked	to	fulfill	a	quota	for	the	collective—was	changed	to	
allow	 households	 to	 sell	 produce	 above	 a	 reduced	 quota	 in	 local	 markets.	 The	 reform	
was	accompanied	by	liberalization	of	markets	for	farm	outputs	and	inputs.	
	
The	 results	 were	 phenomenal.	 Agricultural	 productivity	 growth	 tripled	 to	 7.4	 percent	
per	 year	 between	 1978	 and	 1994.	 The	 annual	 disposable	 income	 for	 an	 average	 rural	
resident	increased	three‐fold	from	134	yuan	in	1978	to	398	yuan	in	1985.		China	was	an	
agrarian	economy	at	the	time.			Unsurprisingly,	poverty	fell	dramatically.		In	fact,	much	
of	the	poverty	reduction	in	China	can	be	traced	to	productivity	growth	in	agriculture.		
	
After	the	initial	reforms	in	the	early	1980s,	though,	agriculture	moved	down	as	a	policy	
priority	in	the	mid‐1980s,	as	the	focus	shifted	to	urban	areas.		Still,	township	and	village	
enterprises	 (TVEs)	were	established	close	to	rural	populations,	 and	they	 absorbed	the	
growing	labor	surpluses.	In	1990‐95,	as	the	economy	grew	by	almost	9	percent	per	year,	
the	 incomes	 of	 the	 poor	 rose	 just	 1	 percent	 annually.	 	 Poverty	 reduction	 slowed	
considerably	in	the	decade	after	1985.			
	
China’s	 farm	 policies	 were	 supplemented	 by	 the	 “open	 door	 policy”	 of	 trade	
liberalization	and	foreign	direct	investment.		By	1990,	China’s	average	import	tariff	was	
40	percent,	less	than	half	those	of	Bangladesh	and	India.	In	2001,	China	joined	the	WTO	
and	tariffs	fell	below	10	percent.		In	1970,	imports	and	exports	added	up	to	5	percent	of	
GDP;	today	it	is	ten	times	that	as	a	share	of	GDP	that	is	ten	times	larger	than	it	was	in	
1970.	 	 One	 study	 estimates	 that	 more	 that	 90	 percent	 of	 goods	 and	 services	 are	
intermediated	through	competitive	markets	in	China	today.				
	
China	had	one	advantage	over	many	countries	with	high	poverty	rates	today:	its	human	
capital.	 Even	 in	 1980,	 China’s	 education	 and	 health	 levels	 were	 quite	 good.	 Life	
expectancy	at	birth	was	66	years,	compared	to	Brazil’s	63	and	India’s	56.	Its	literacy	rate	
was	 66	 percent,	 closer	 to	 Brazil’s	 75	 than	 India’s	 41	 percent,	 but	 its	 GDP	 per	 capita	
(adjusted	 for	 purchasing	 power)	 in	 1981	 was	 less	 than	 $550,	 compared	 with	 Brazil’s	
$7,000	and	India’s	$900.	While	the	extreme	poverty	rate	in	China	at	$1.90	a	day	was	88	
percent	compared	with	Brazil’s	24	percent	and	India’s	49	percent,	it	was	not	because	of	
China’s	human	capital.		
	
China’s	human	capital	stock	was	good	enough	for	the	hundreds	of	township	and	village	
enterprises	to	begin	profiting	from	the	liberalization	of	the	 economy.		Unlike	the	large	
state	owned	enterprises,	TVEs	did	not	receive	credit	subsidies,	so	they	used	more	labor	
and	 less	 capital.	 Employment	 in	 these	 enterprises	 grew	 by	 more	 than	 100	 million	
between	1978	and	1996;	their	share	in	China’s	value	added	increased	from	6	percent	of	
GDP	to	26	percent.		
	
In	 the	 1980s,	 the	 extreme	 poverty	 rate	 in	 China	 was	 high	 even	 compared	 with	 poor	
countries—in	1981,	only	Cambodia,	Burkina	Faso,	Mali,	and	Uganda	had	higher	poverty	
incidence.		But	health	and	education	standards	were	much	better.	In	1990,	for	example,	
under‐five	 mortality	 was	 54	 per	 1,000	 births	 compared	 to	 87	 for	 middle‐income	
countries,	 and	 life	 expectancy	 was	 almost	 70	 years,	 compared	 with	 65	 for	 middle‐
income	countries.		Adult	literacy	was	78	percent,	much	higher	than	the	middle‐income	
country	average.	China	has	since	increased	life	expectancy	to	75	years	and	adult	literacy	
to	95	percent,	and	the	average	schooling	level	is	now	9	years.		A	2006	revised	education	




                                                 	
                                                14	
	
law	 made	 compulsory	 education	 free	 of	 charge	 by	 2008.	 	 The	 gross	 secondary	
enrollment	ratio	has	tripled	from	31	percent	to	more	than	90	percent.	10		
	
Employees	of	state	owned	enterprises	always	had	access	to	medical	care.		In	1978,	for	
example,	 more	 than	 80	 percent	 of	 the	 urban	 labor	 force	 was	 covered	 by	 the	 danwei	
system	 for	 state‐owned	 enterprises.	 	 But	 even	 25	 years	 later,	 the	 proportion	 of	 rural	
people	 who	 had	 medical	 insurance	 was	 less	 than	 13	 percent.	 	 In	 2003,	 the	 subsidized	
new	 Cooperative	 Medical	 Service	 was	 established.	 	 Within	 a	 decade,	 97	 percent	 of	 the	
farming	population	was	covered.				
	
China’s	efforts	to	improve	education	and	health	policies	were	made	easier	by	relatively	
high	levels	of	female	literacy	in	the	1970s—literate	mothers	are	a	huge	plus.		But	China	
has	not	relied	just	on	female	education	to	bring	population	growth	down	to	manageable	
levels.	 	 China’s	 family	 planning	 programs—nicknamed	 the	 one‐child	 policy—were	
enforced	 widely	 between	 1971	 and	 1980,	 and	 more	 strictly	 between	 1980	 and	 2010.		
These	programs	have	been	controversial.		What	is	not	debatable	is	the	quick	decline	in	
fertility	between	1970	and	1980,	from	almost	6	to	less	than	3	births	in	both	rural	and	
urban	 areas.	 	 Studies	 have	 also	 found	 that	 the	 effects	 of	 family	 planning	 policies	 were	
greater	 for	 less	 educated	 women.	 Over	 time,	 increases	 in	 female	 education	 and	 wages	
were	 combined	 with	 penalties	 on	 having	 more	 children	 than	 allowed,	 leading	 to	
declining	 fertility	 even	 in	 the	 poorer	 provinces	 and	 among	 both	 the	 majority	 Han	 and	
ethnic	minorities.		By	one	measure,	China	averted	200	million	births	because	of	the	one	
child	 policy,	 though	 this	 number	 is	 disputed.	 	 What	 is	 not	 disputed	 is	 that	 the	 policy	
enjoyed	considerable	support	among	the	people.		
	
China	has	transformed	its	traditional	social	relief	system	into	a	modern	social	assistance	
program.		In	2008,	about	23	million	urban	residents	and	43	million	rural	residents	were	
covered	by	a	minimum	livelihood	guarantee	scheme	known	as	the	 dibao,	paying	15‐20	
percent	of	the	urban	disposable	income.		Since	by	the	late	2000s,	extreme	poverty	rates	
in	 China	 were	 almost	 in	 single	 digits,	 this	 meant	 sizeable	 coverage,	 though	 by	 a	 social	
assistance	 scheme	 that	 might	 be	 frugal	 by	 OECD	 standards,	 especially	 in	 rural	 areas.	
Nevertheless,	 the	 dibao	 has	 helped	 to	 reduce	 extreme	 poverty,	 and	 not	 create	 major	
disincentives	to	work.		
	
Over	the	years,	China	has	also	adopted	multiple	social	insurance	mechanisms,	the	most	
important	 of	 which	 are	 medical	 insurance,	 pensions,	 and	 unemployment	 and	 injury	
insurance	for	urban	workers.		A	contributory	pension	system	covers	about	220	million	
urban	 residents;	 unemployment	 and	 injury	 insurance	 covers	 workers	 in	 larger	 urban	
enterprises.		In	2009,	a	pilot	program	for	rural	pensions	was	initiated.			
	
It	 would	 be	 fair	 to	 say,	 however,	 that	 the	 mainstay	 of	 the	 Chinese	 poverty	 reduction	
strategy	 has	 been	 rapid	 economic	 growth—first	 in	 agriculture	 triggered	 by	 better	
incentives	 and	 the	 liberalization	 of	 product	 markets,	 and	 then	 in	 manufacturing	 made	
possible	by	openness	to	trade	and	stable	macroeconomics.		China	has	always	had	a	high	
savings	 rate,	 and	 steady	 increases	 in	 household	 incomes	 led	 to	 rapid	 increases	 in	 the	
																																																								
10	Life	expectancy	in	China	is	nine	years	longer	than	in	India—a	country	that	in	1980	had	a	higher	

GDP	 per	 capita	 than	 China.	 China	 has	 66	 percent	 more	 nurses	 and	 midwives	 and	 160	 percent	
more	 doctors	 than	 India.	 In	 China,	 the	 literacy	 rate	 for	 women	 aged	 15‐24	 is	 99	 percent	
compared	to	less	than	75	percent	for	India.		The	infant	mortality	rate	per	1,000	live	births	is	12	in	
China,	less	than	a	third	that	of	India.		By	2005,	China	had	reduced	the	extreme	poverty	rate	to	19	
percent,	just	twice	Brazil’s	9.6	percent	and	almost	half	of	the	34	percent	poverty	rate	in	India.		
	
	
                                                            	
                                                           15	
	
savings	available	for	investment.		In	1994,	a	value‐added	tax	was	introduced,	giving	the	
central	 government	 a	 healthy	 revenue	 base.	 	 The	 Chinese	 economy	 has	 grown	 rapidly	
and	steadily.		With	the	exception	of	the	period	of	unrest	in	the	late	1980s,	growth	rates	
averaged	almost	10	percent	in	the	1990s	and	2000s.		
	
But	there	has	been	a	lot	of	variation	around	this	average.	While	economic	growth	rates	
have	been	high	and	largely	steady,	the	pace	of	poverty	reduction	has	waxed	and	waned.	
This	 variation	 points	 to	 the	 importance	 of	 agriculture	 and	 rural	 development	 as	 the	
most	potent	way	to	reduce	poverty.		Poverty	reduction	was	quickest	in	the	first	half	of	
the	 1980s	 and	 the	 mid‐1990s,	 both	 of	 which	 were	 times	 of	 rapid	 agricultural	
productivity	growth	and/or	high	prices	of	farm	products.		Growth	of	agricultural	output	
is	 estimated	 to	 be	 four	 times	 as	 potent	 in	 reducing	 poverty	 in	 China	 as	 the	 growth	 in	
industry	 and	 services.	 Absent	 China’s	 relative	 neglect	 of	 agriculture	 and	 rural	
infrastructure,	and	policies	that	restrict	mobility	such	as	the	 hukou,	the	pace	of	poverty	
reduction	might	have	been	twice	as	fast.		
	
It	would	then	have	been	similar	to	what	actually	happened	in	Vietnam.		Between	1990	
and	 2012,	 the	 number	 of	 Vietnamese	 people	 living	 on	 less	 than	 $1.90	 a	 day	 has	 been	
reduced	 from	 40	 million	 to	 less	 than	 3	 million.	 	 Poverty	 at	 $3.10	 a	 day	 is	 less	 than	 a	
quarter	of	what	it	was	in	1990,	falling	from	55	million	to	12	million.		Despite	its	(brief)	
communist	past,	Vietnam’s	policies	beginning	in	the	late‐1980s	were	uncannily	similar	
to	those	of	Korea	and	Taiwan.		
	
The	move	to	a	market	economy	began	with	the	 Doi	Moi	(renovation)	program	of	1986.		
In	1988,	the	government	introduced	the	Land	Law.		By	1990,	more	than	80	percent	of	
the	 country’s	 farmland	 was	 effectively	 privatized.	 	 The	 reform	 was	 initially	 similar	 to	
China’s	 household	 responsibility	 system,	 involving	 land	 allocations	 and	 production	
quotas	 but	 no	 rights	 to	 transfer	 or	 sell	 their	 allocated	 land.	 	 But	 Vietnam	 soon	
abandoned	 production	 quotas	 and	 allowed	 a	 private	 market	 in	 agricultural	 output.	 	 A	
1993	 Land	 Law	 introduced	 official	 land	 titles	 and	 allowed	 for	 transactions	 through	
which	usage	rights	could	be	legally	transferred,	exchanged,	mortgaged,	and	inherited.		
	
All	this	added	up	to	one	of	the	most	radical	land	reforms:	Vietnam	went	from	communist	
collectives	to	family	 farms	in	less	than	 a	 decade.	The	effect	on	poverty	 was	immediate	
and	 immense.	 	 Between	 1992/93	 and	 2004,	 the	 extreme	 poverty	 rate	 in	 Vietnam	 fell	
from	49	percent	to	27	percent,	and	then	to	3	percent	by	2012.	As	a	point	of	comparison,	
in	 China	 the	 extreme	 poverty	 rate	 fell	 from	 88	 percent	 in	 1981	 to	 67	 percent	 in	 1990	
and	32	percent	in	2002.		
	
Agriculture’s	 share	 in	 GDP	 fell	 from	 about	 30	 to	 20	 percent	 during	 this	 time,	 though	
annual	agricultural	growth	rates	have	 averaged	 nearly	4	percent.		Vietnam’s	trade	has	
burgeoned	to	more	than	150	percent	of	GDP,	diversifying	to	include	manufactures	such	
as	garments	and	electronics,	farm	products	such	as	coffee	and	rice,	and	crude	oil.		
	
Vietnam	has	not	relied	much	on	social	assistance	programs.	Social	assistance	in	Vietnam	
including	 the	 government’s	 flagship	 National	 Targeted	 Program	 for	 Poverty	 Reduction	
(NTPPR)	 covered	 just	 1.2	 percent	 of	 the	 population	 in	 2008.	 Temporary	 antipoverty	
programs	 cover	 more	 people,	 such	 as	 the	 roughly	 4	 million	 pupils	 receiving	 fee	
exemptions,	 4	 million	 households	 receiving	 government	 loans,	 and	 2	 million	 people	
receiving	 help	 with	 business	 development	 and	 training.	 	 Total	 spending	 was	 just	 0.2	
percent	of	GDP,	with	benefits	equivalent	to	less	than	20	percent	of	the	minimum	wage—
less	than	a	third	of	the	poverty	line.			
	


                                                   	
                                                  16	
	
These	are	magnitudes	reminiscent	of	Korea	and	Taiwan	during	the	1980s.		Like	Korea	at	
a	similar	stage,	Vietnam	has	also	struggled	recently	to	maintain	macroeconomic	stability.		
But	looking	back	at	its	record	of	poverty	reduction	between	1990	and	2015,	it	is	clear	
that	Vietnam	is	already	one	of	the	world’s	most	successful	developers.				
	
India	and	Bangladesh	
	
Peace	and	independence	came	later	to	Vietnam	than	to	the	countries	in	Northeast	Asia.		
It	 was	 only	in	the	 1970s	 that	 hostilities	 between	the	 United	 States	 and	 North	 Vietnam	
ceased.		Within	a	decade	of	consolidating	the	country,	Vietnam	had	started	to	engineer	
the	 fastest	 decline	 in	 extreme	 poverty	 ever	 seen	 so	 far.	 	 At	 the	 time	 that	 the	 conflict	
ended	in	 Vietnam,	 South	 Asia	 was	suffering	 its	 last	 major	 war.	 	In	 1971,	 East	 Pakistan	
became	 Bangladesh;	 there	 has	 not	 been	 a	 war	 between	 India	 and	 Pakistan	 since.	 	 A	
decade	or	so	later,	poverty	reduction	on	the	subcontinent	began	in	earnest.			
	
In	India,	this	was	initiated	by	a	pickup	in	economic	growth.		Unlike	China,	where	1978	is	
seen	 as	 the	 year	 in	 which	 reforms	 were	 initiated,	 in	 India	 it	 is	 harder	 to	 pin	 the	
watershed.		What	is	clear	is	that	extreme	poverty	rates	began	to	fall	in	the	mid‐1980s,	
but	the	total	number	of	extreme	poor	began	to	decline	only	around	2000.		The	number	
of	Indians	living	on	less	than	$1.90	a	day	increased	from	about	400	million	in	1981	to	
about	 440	 million	 in	 2002.	 	 Since	 then,	 India	 has	 seen	 a	 big	 reduction	 in	 these	
numbers—to	 about	 275	 million	 in	 2011	 and	 less	 than	 240	 million	 in	 2012.11	Indeed,	
between	 2008	 and	 2011,	 India	 was	 the	 biggest	 contributor	 to	 global	 poverty	
reduction—cutting	the	number	of	extreme	poor	by	almost	120	million.			
	
There	 are	 many	 reasons	 why	 India’s	 poverty	 reduction	 has	 been	 slower	 and	 late	 in	
coming	when	compared	with	China.		Three	top	contenders	are	India’s	relatively	slower	
economic	growth;	its	patchier	performance	in	improving	agricultural	productivity;	and	
critically,	 lower	 levels	 of	 and	 greater	 inequalities	 in	 human	 capital,	 especially	 with	
regard	 to	 the	 education	 of	 girls,	 the	 health	 of	 women,	 and	 the	 access	 to	 services	 for	
disadvantaged	groups.				
	
After	a	struggle	with	fiscal	and	trade	deficits,	low	investment,	and	high	inflation	rates	in	
the	 late	 1980s,	 India	 managed	 to	 institute	 macroeconomic	 stability	 by	 the	 mid‐1990s.		
Economic	 growth	 was	 aided	 by	 regulatory	 reforms	 triggered	 by	 the	 1991	 balance	 of	
payment	crisis.		Between	1995	and	2004,	growth	in	GDP	was	averaging	about	5	percent.		
Between	2005	and	2014,	with	the	exception	of	2009,	it	averaged	more	than	8	percent.		
	
With	 China‐like	 growth	 rates,	 China‐like	 poverty	 reduction	 should	 have	 followed.	 	 But	
India	has	not	done	nearly	as	well	in	making	its	growth	pro‐poor.		One	reason	for	this	is	
the	 relative	 neglect	 of	 agriculture.	 	 India’s	 land	 reforms	 happened	 soon	 after	
independence	in	the	1950s,	but	were	uneven	across	the	states.		Land	redistribution	was	
less	 extensive	 than	 the	 reform	 of	 tenancy	 laws,	 and	 studies	 have	 found	 both	 to	 be	
associated	 with	 increases	 in	 agricultural	 productivity	 and	 poverty	 reduction.	 	 Indeed,	
the	 benefits	 of	 the	 Green	 Revolution	 went	 mainly	 to	 states	 that	 implemented	 the	 new	
tenancy	laws.		
	
In	general	though,	agriculture	was	not	accorded	the	priority	it	should	have	in	a	country	
where,	even	in	recent	years,	more	than	half	of	all	people	depend	on	farming,	and	almost	
																																																								
11	At	 $3.10	 a	 day	 the	 magnitudes	 are	 much	 greater	 though	 the	 trend	 is	 the	 same.	 	 $3.10‐a‐day	

poverty	 rose	 from	 about	 570	 million	 in	 1981	 to	 peak	 at	almost	 780	 million	 people	in	 the	early	
2000s,	and	has	been	coming	down	steadily	since.		
	
                                                            	
                                                           17	
	
one	of	every	four	rural	residents	still	lives	in	extreme	poverty.		The	economic	reforms	of	
1991	 largely	 neglected	 agriculture,	 excluding	 policy	 areas	 such	 as	 rural	 infrastructure	
from	 the	 list	 of	 priorities.	 	 Agriculture’s	 share	 in	 GDP	 has	 been	 falling	 rapidly	 since—
from	 about	 33	 to	 13	percent	between	 1990	and	 2015—but	the	 share	 of	 agriculture	in	
employment	 has	 barely	 budged.	 Until	 2005,	 the	 employment	 in	 agriculture	 grew	 in	
absolute	 terms.	 	 It	 is	 only	 since	 the	 mid‐2000s	 that	 agriculture’s	 share	 of	 total	
employment	fell	below	half,	and	the	numbers	began	to	decline.	Urban	growth	helped	to	
reduce	rural	poverty	in	the	early	years,	but	the	effectiveness	of	this	indirect	channel	has	
weakened	over	time.		
	
One	reason	for	this	may	be	India’s	lagging	health	and	educational	services,	especially	in	
rural	areas.		While	China	had	an	extensive	infrastructure	for	social	service	provision	at	
the	start	of	its	reforms,	in	India	the	access	to	education	and	health	was	unequal.	Despite	
an	improvement	in	the	overall	levels	of	education	and	health,	it	has	remained	that	way.		
Health	 spending	 by	 both	 state	 and	 central	 governments	 has	 remained	 low,	 and	
indicators	 of	 access	 such	 as	 immunization	 rates	 have	 actually	 deteriorated	 in	 some	
states.	 	 States	 that	 have	 increased	 access	 to	 public	 education	 and	 health	 have	 done	
better	in	reducing	poverty:	a	study	estimates	that	increasing	social	sector	spending	by	
one	percentage	point	of	GDP	leads	to	at	0.5	point	reduction	in	poverty.			
	
Fertility	rates	have	been	slower	in	coming	down.		In	1965,	China	and	India	had	identical	
fertility	 rates	 of	 about	 6	 births	 per	 woman.	 	 By	 1990,	 while	 China’s	 fertility	 rate	 was	
down	 to	 2.5,	 India’s	 still	 was	 about	 4.	 	 The	 difference	 can	 be	 attributed	 to	 slower	
improvements	in	the	education	and	wages	of	women.		India’s	family	planning	programs	
have	 had	 their	 share	 of	 controversy,	 but	 they	 have	 been	 credited	 with	 more	 than	 150	
million	averted	births.		
	
India	has	had	a	long	history	of	direct	interventions	to	reduce	poverty,	including	food	and	
fuel	 subsidies,	 subsidies	 for	 agricultural	 inputs	 such	 as	 fertilizers	 and	 electricity,	
subsidized	credit	programs,	and	large‐scale	workfare	schemes.		The	general	consensus	
is	 that	 food,	 fuel	 and	 fertilizer	 subsidies	 have	 been	 fiscally	 burdensome—by	 one	
measure,	costing	more	than	10	percent	of	GDP—and	least	cost‐effective:	while	some	of	
the	 poor	 have	 benefited,	 most	 of	 their	 benefits	 have	 gone	 to	 the	 non‐poor.	 	 Far	 more	
effective	 has	 been	 the	 big	 workfare	 program	 introduced	 in	 2006:	 the	 National	 Rural	
Employment	 Guarantee	 Scheme,	 which	 guarantees	 each	 rural	 household	 100	 days	 of	
unskilled	wage	work	each	year.		The	NREGS	has	been	shown	to	increase	consumption,	
the	intake	of	proteins,	and	the	accumulation	of	assets.		With	improved	implementation,	
schemes	 like	 the	 NREGS	 can	 be	 effective	 in	 alleviating	 rural	 poverty	 in	 ways	 that	
reinforce	 the	 growth	 of	 agriculture	 and	 nonfarm	 employment.	 	 It	 is	 equally	 clear	 that	
general	 subsidies	 for	 food	 and	 farm	 inputs	 cannot.	 	 A	 better	 way	 would	 be	 to	 provide	
targeted	cash	transfers,	but	this	requires	administrative	capacity	that	the	government	is	
still	acquiring.			
	
In	short,	India’s	approach	during	the	last	25	years	cannot	be	described	as	an	application	
of	 the	 2.5‐point	 poverty	 reduction	 strategy.	 	 While	 economic	 growth	 has	 accelerated,	
agricultural	productivity	has	not	kept	pace.		While	education	and	health	indicators	have	
improved,	 inequalities	 in	 access	 have	 widened.	 And	 while	 India	 has	 implemented	
innovative	social	assistance	schemes	to	help	the	poor,	it	has	not	aggressively	reallocated	
resources	 into	 these	 programs	 and	 out	 of	 less	 cost‐effective	 general	 subsidies	 for	 fuel,	
food,	 and	 farm	 inputs.	 	 As	 of	 2012,	 close	 to	 230	 million	 Indians	 still	 live	 on	 less	 than	
$1.90	a	day,	and	more	than	650	million	on	less	than	$3.10	a	day.		To	eliminate	extreme	
poverty	 by	 2030,	 economic	 growth	 has	 to	 become	 more	 pro‐poor,	 and	 social	 services	
have	 to	 be	 made	 to	 work	 for	 poor	 people.	 	 In	 India,	 it	 is	 not	 yet	 time	 for	 large‐scale	
expansion	of	social	insurance.				

                                                   	
                                                  18	
	
In	neighboring	Bangladesh,	the	poverty	reduction	strategy	looks	a	lot	more	like	the	2.5‐
point	plan.		Starting	in	the	1990s,	extreme	poverty	has	come	down.		In	1990,	almost	75	
million	Bangladeshis—more	than	half	of	the	country’s	population—lived	on	less	than	a	
$1.90	 a	 day;	 as	 of	 2012,	 it	 is	 less	 than	 58	 million.	 How	 did	 Bangladesh	 get	 almost	 a	
million	people	out	of	extreme	poverty	every	year	between	1990	and	2012?		The	answer	
lies	 in	 a	 combination	 of	 economic	 growth	 spurred	 by	 trade	 and	 investments	 in	 rural	
infrastructure,	 a	 big	 effort	 to	 improve	 the	 education	 of	 girls	 and	 maternal	 health,	 and	
interventions	to	improve	family	planning	and	access	to	credit,	especially	in	rural	areas.		
Compared	with	India,	Bangladesh	has	relied	less	on	big	social	assistance	programs.			
	
In	the	1990s,	GDP	 growth	averaged	 about	 5	percent	annually.	 	During	the	last	 decade,	
aggregate	growth	rates	have	averaged	more	than	6	percent.		Real	output	per	person	has	
increased	by	almost	4	percent	annually	between	1990	and	2015.		Agriculture’s	share	of	
the	labor	force	has	fallen	slowly	from	about	52	to	45	percent.		Its	share	of	GDP	has	fallen	
faster,	as	output	in	industry	and	services	has	grown	twice	as	fast	as	in	agriculture.		But	
the	rate	of	growth	of	agricultural	output	accelerated	around	1990.		Between	1965	and	
1990,	agricultural	output	grew	by	only	about	1.6	percent	annually.		Between	1991	and	
2011,	 it	 grew	 more	 than	 3.8	 annually.	 	 While	 farming	 output	 per	 person	 has	 not	
increased	 rapidly,	 output	 per	 unit	 of	 land	 has	 grown	 rapidly,	 aided	 by	 greater	 use	 of	
fertilizers,	 better	 varieties	 of	 rice,	 and	 improved	 irrigation.	 	 For	 example,	 rice	 yields	
increased	 from	 about	 2.6	 to	 4.2	 tons	 per	 hectare.	 	 Since	 more	 than	 80	 percent	 of	
Bangladesh’s	 extreme	 poor	 depend	 on	 agriculture,	 the	 effects	 of	 higher	 yields	 on	
poverty	were	immediate.			
	
The	 government	 made	 rural	 roads	 a	 priority;	 more	 than	 2,500	 kilometers	 have	 been	
improved.	In	addition,	630,000	rural	homes	were	connected	to	the	national	grid	while	
more	 than	 750,000	 households	 in	 remote	 rural	 areas	 have	 installed	 solar	 systems.	
Studies	 show	 that	 improved	 connectivity	 raises	 female	 employment	 by	 50	 percent,	
increases	the	share	of	farmers’	nonagricultural	assets	sizably,	and	doubles	the	poverty	
reduction	rate.	For	a	population	that	is	still	66	percent	rural,	high	economic	returns	to	
improved	rural	connectivity	should	be	unsurprising.				
	
Growing	trade	and	industry	have	been	absorbing	the	labor	being	released	as	agriculture	
slowly	modernizes.		Exports	of	goods	and	services	have	risen	from	about	10	percent	of	
GDP	in	1990	to	about	33	percent	today.		Labor‐intensive	manufactures	such	as	garments	
have	 been	 the	 mainstay	 of	 Bangladesh’s	 exports.	 They	 have	 also	 been	 a	 source	 of	
employment	for	increasingly	educated	women.				
	
Bangladesh	has	also	made	remarkable	progress	in	girls’	education.		Today,	98	percent	of	
girls	are	enrolled	in	primary	school,	and	the	enrollment	of	girls	in	secondary	schools	has	
risen	from	1.1	million	in	1991	to	over	6	million	today.	Assisted	deliveries	have	helped	
reduce	 maternal	 mortality	 rates	 by	 40	 percent	 in	 just	 the	 last	 decade.	 90	 percent	 of	
Bangladeshi	children	receive	vitamin	A	supplements	and	over	80	percent	are	vaccinated,	
and	infant	and	child	mortality	have	fallen	by	more	than	two‐thirds	since	 1990.	During	
this	period,	fertility	rates	have	fallen	from	more	than	4	births	per	woman	to	about	2.2,	
close	 to	 replacement	 levels.	 	 Annual	 population	 growth	 has	 fallen	 from	 more	 than	 2.5	
percent	in	1990	to	less	than	1	percent	today.		The	evidence	from	a	well‐evaluated	family	
planning	 intervention	 in	 Bangladesh	 indicates	 that	 while	 such	 programs	 can	 help	 in	
increasing	 awareness	 of	 methods	 available	 to	 women,	 they	 have	 to	 be	 complemented	
with	policies	to	increase	the	education	of	girls	and	the	labor	market	prospects	of	women.		
Bangladesh	appears	to	have	done	both,	and	has	the	results	to	prove	it.			
	
Bangladesh’s	 geography	 makes	 it	 vulnerable	 to	 natural	 disasters	 and	 climate	 change.		
Bangladesh	suffered	80	serious	droughts,	floods,	storms,	or	earthquakes	in	1993‐2002	

                                                 	
                                                19	
	
and	55	in	2003‐2012,	and	accounted	for	more	than	half	of	all	deaths	from	storms	during	
the	1990s	and	2000s.	In	2009,	for	example,	more	than	50	percent	of	households	recalled	
being	hit	by	climate	or	health	related	shocks,	but	fewer	than	2	percent	reported	social	
safety	 nets	 as	 one	 of	 the	 top	 four	 ways	 to	 deal	 with	 them.	 	 Saving	 and	 borrowing	 was	
much	more	important.		Microfinance	institutions	had	more	than	34	million	members	in	
2010.	 Evaluations	 have	 shown	 that	 long‐term	 membership	 in	 these	 programs	 helps	
smooth	 consumption	 in	 light	 of	 shocks.	 	 Consumption	 is	 twice	 as	 stable	 for	 Grameen	
Bank	 borrowers	 as	 for	 others.	 	 In	 an	 economy	 as	 vulnerable	 to	 shocks	 as	 Bangladesh,	
organized	microfinance	through	public‐private	partnerships	such	as	the	Grameen	Bank	
should	be	seen	as	an	important	part	of	a	comprehensive	poverty	reduction	strategy.			
	
The	government	spends	about	1.5	percent	of	GDP	on	social	protection,	though	this	ratio	
can	be	as	high	as	2.6	percent	in	some	years.		There	are	many	social	assistance	programs,	
but	less	than	a	third	of	people	under	the	national	poverty	line	receive	benefits.		Access	to	
microfinance	appears	to	be	more	effective	in	helping	households	cope	with	shocks.		
	
Ethiopia	and	Ghana	
	
Ethiopia	has	also	been	subject	to	the	vagaries	of	the	weather.		Many	of	us	grew	up	with	
images	 of	 Ethiopian	 famine	 and	 starvation.	 	 During	 the	 last	 decade,	 Ethiopia	 has	 had	
better	 weather.	 	 It	 has	 also	 instituted	 better	 policies.	 	 With	 economic	 growth	 rates	
topping	10	percent,	poverty	reduction	has	accelerated	since	2000.	The	extreme	poverty	
headcount	ratio	at	$1.90	a	day	was	47	percent	in	2002.		By	2012,	it	was	29	percent.		This	
achievement	puts	Ethiopia	as	one	of	the	top	performers	in	reducing	poverty.		
	
What	accounts	for	Ethiopia’s	stellar	performance	and	what	are	the	big	tasks	ahead?	The	
short	 answer	 is	 rapid	 economic	 growth	 especially	 through	 higher	 productivity	 in	
agriculture;	 quicker	 progress	 in	 education	 and	 health,	 especially	 that	 of	 women;	 and	
minimal	but	well‐designed	income	support	for	the	very	poor—the	Productive	Safety	Net	
Program,	the	largest	such	scheme	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa.			
	
Growth	 has	 increased	 and	become	 more	 stable	 during	 the	last	decade.	 	Between	1990	
and	 2004,	 growth	 averaged	 about	 5	 percent	 and	 there	 were	 four	 years	 of	 negative	
growth.	 	 Since	 2004,	 growth	 has	 averaged	 more	 than	 10	 percent	 and	 has	 been	
remarkably	steady.		Ethiopia	has	also	done	better	than	other	countries	in	Sub‐Saharan	
Africa	 in	 converting	 growth	 into	 poverty	 reduction.	 	 Its	 success	 comes	 from	 a	
combination	 of	 good	 agricultural	 policies,	 investments	 in	 rural	 infrastructure,	 and	 a	
decade‐long	 run	 of	 clement	 weather.	 	 Agricultural	 prices	 have	 been	 high,	 which	 have	
brought	adversity	for	the	most	poor,	but	with	an	overall	positive	influence	on	poverty.		
Ethiopia	 has	 made	 large	 investments	 in	 roads,	 and	 this	 has	 helped	 improve	 access	 to	
markets.			
	
Improved	 health	 (especially	 antenatal	 services	 for	 women)	 and	 education	 services	
during	 the	 last	 fifteen	 years	 have	 resulted	 in	 life	 expectancy	 increasing	 from	 52	 to	 63	
years,	and	stunting	has	fallen	from	56	to	44	percent.		In	2000,	Ethiopia’s	contraceptive	
prevalence	 rate	 for	 modern	 methods	 was	 only	 6.3	 percent,	 which	 was	 the	 lowest	 in	
Eastern	and	Southern	Africa.	By	2011,	the	rate	was	27	percent,	and	the	fertility	rate	had	
fallen	 from	 5.5	 to	 4.8.	 	 But	 despite	 a	 massive	 reduction	 from	 70	 to	 50	 percent	 of	 the	
share	of	people	without	any	education,	educational	attainment	remains	low.		And	while	
fertility	rates	are	falling,	they	are	still	greater	than	4.			
	
In	2005,	the	government	introduced	the	Productive	Safety	Net	Program	(PSNP),	aimed	
at	 helping	 poor	 households	 in	 food	 insecure	 areas.	 	 The	 government	 spends	 about	 1	
percent	 of	 GDP	 on	 the	 PSNP,	 which	 combines	 a	 public	 works	 scheme	 with	 an	

                                                  	
                                                 20	
	
unconditional	cash	transfer.		Food	insecure	households	with	able‐bodied	adults	are	paid	
to	work	on	public	works	projects,	while	those	without	able‐bodied	adults	are	given	cash	
transfers.	 	 The	 program	 has	 been	 shown	 to	 increase	 agricultural	 input	 use,	 thus	
increasing	output	and	helping	to	reduce	poverty.	Households	that	had	access	both	to	the	
PSNP	and	agricultural	support	packages	were,	according	to	Gilligan	et	al.	(2009):	“more	
likely	to	be	food	secure,	to	borrow	for	productive	purposes,	use	improved	agricultural	
technologies,	and	operate	their	own	nonfarm	business	activities.		For	these	households,	
there	is	no	evidence	of	disincentive	effects	in	terms	of	labor	supply	or	private	transfers.”	
Research	also	shows	that	the	PSNP	directly	reduces	poverty.			
	
The	 pattern	 of	 poverty	 reduction	 has	 varied	 over	 the	 years.	 	 Between	 1996	 and	 2000,	
the	 impact	 of	 growth	 on	 measured	 poverty	 was	 small.	 	 Between	 2000	 and	 2005,	 both	
urban	 and	 rural	 poverty	 fell	 impressively.	 	 Between	 2005	 and	 2011,	 rural	 poverty	
continued	to	fall	(by	20	percent)	but	urban	poverty	appeared	to	stall,	and	the	severity	of	
poverty	 actually	 increased.	 	 Ethiopia	 will	 have	 to	 remedy	 some	 deficiencies	 in	 its	
poverty	 reduction	 strategy	 but	 it	 is	 clear	 that	 even	 if	 it	 continues	 to	 implement	 the	
economic	policies	that	it	has	during	the	last	decade,	it	will	be	a	major	contributor	to	the	
global	poverty	reduction	during	the	next	decade.			
	
As	Ethiopia	engaged	in	significant	efforts	to	reduce	poverty,	another	success	story	was	
emerging	in	West	Africa.	During	the	past	25	years,	Ghana	made	substantial	progress	in	
poverty	 alleviation.	 Between	 1990	 and	 2012,	 the	 share	 of	 the	 population	 living	 under	
$1.90	a	day	decreased	from	61	to	13	percent.	This	represented	a	decrease	in	the	number	
of	 people	 experiencing	 extreme	 poverty	 from	 8.9	 to	 3.3	 million.	 At	 $3.10	 a	 day,	 the	
number	 of	 poor	 also	 declined,	 from	 12.5	 million	 to	 7.9	 million	 during	 the	 same	 time	
period.	 Ghana’s	 strong	 economic	 performance	 allowed	 the	 country	 to	 reach	 middle‐
income	 status	 in	 2010.	 These	 achievements	 took	 place	 despite	 a	 period	 of	 rapid	
population	growth,	which	saw	the	country’s	population	increase	by	73	percent	–	to	25.4	
million	–	during	the	same	period.	
	
Consistently	high	economic	growth	rates,	especially	in	agriculture,	played	an	important	
role	 in	 reducing	 poverty.	 Annual	 GDP	 growth	 hovered	 around	 4	 percent	 during	 the	
1990s	 and	 steadily	 rose	 until	 reaching	 average	 rates	 of	 almost	 8	 percent	 from	 2006	
onward.	 The	 performance	 of	 the	 agriculture	 sector	 was	 particularly	 noteworthy:	 with	
average	 annual	 growth	 of	5	 percent	 during	the	 past	 25	 years,	Ghana	is	among	the	 top	
five	 countries	 in	 the	 world	 with	 the	 fastest	 agricultural	 growth	 over	 this	 period.	 The	
resurgence	 of	 cocoa	 production	 was	 perhaps	 the	 most	 significant	 development	 in	 this	
sector.	 An	 early	 world	 leader	 in	 cocoa,	 Ghana	 experienced	 a	 protracted	 decline	 in	
production	throughout	the	1960s	and	1970s.	Nevertheless,	beginning	in	the	1980s,	the	
government	 made	 an	 effort	 to	 reverse	 this	 trend.	 By	 the	 early	 2000s,	 production	 had	
broken	all	records	and	Ghana	became	the	third	leading	producer	of	cocoa	in	the	world.	
The	 improvement	 in	 the	 welfare	 of	 cocoa	 farmers	 was	 also	 unmistakable:	 using	 the	
national	 poverty	 line,	 the	 poverty	 rate	 among	 these	 farmers	 decreased	 from	 60	 to	 24	
percent	between	1991	and	2005.		
	
How	did	Ghana	revitalize	its	dwindling	cocoa	sector?	First,	it	achieved	macroeconomic	
stability	 and	 removed	 economic	 distortions,	 such	 as	 the	 overvaluation	 of	 its	 currency.	
Second,	 the	 government	 introduced	 reforms	 that	 brought	 a	 greater	 role	 for	 private	
markets	 along	 the	 cocoa	 value	 chain.	 Specifically,	 reforms	 eliminated	 the	 monopsony	
power	of	Ghana’s	cocoa	marketing	board	(COCOBOD),	which	had	previously	acted	as	the	
sole	 buyer	 in	 the	 market,	 and	 allowed	 new	 purchasers	 to	 compete	 and	 offer	 better	
prices	to	farmers.	Reforms	also	created	a	private	market	for	the	distribution	of	inputs.	
Finally,	 targeted	 public	 programs	 were	 conducted	 by	 COCOBOD	 with	 the	 purpose	 of	
boosting	 farmers’	 productivity.	 Key	 programs	 include	 a	 rehabilitation	 project	 that	

                                                 	
                                                21	
	
replaced	infected	trees	with	new	high‐yield	varieties	and	a	free	mass	spraying	program	
to	protect	against	cocoa	diseases.		
	
Another	important	pillar	of	Ghana’s	poverty	reduction	strategy	was	improved	education.	
This	 enabled	 the	 poor	 to	 avail	 of	 the	 new	 opportunities	 that	 emerged	 in	 the	 nonfarm	
economy	 as	 Ghana’s	 agricultural	 sector	 continued	 to	 modernize.	 To	 this	 end,	 the	
government	gradually	increased	education	expenditure	from	2.8	percent	of	GNI	in	1991	
to	 6.9	 percent	 in	 2004	 and	 maintained	 an	 average	 of	 5.8	 percent	 from	 2005	 onward.	
With	more	financial	resources	available	to	improve	education,	the	government	focused	
on	 building	 school	 infrastructure,	 providing	 free	 school	 uniforms	 and	 textbooks,	 and	
instituting	a	school	feeding	program	to	provide	meals	at	public	primary	schools.	In	2005,	
Ghana	 also	 instituted	 a	 capitation	 grant	 scheme,	 eliminating	 school	 fees	 for	 basic	
education	across	the	country.		
	
Education	 outcomes	 improved	 a	 lot	 as	 a	 result	 of	 these	 investments.	 The	 primary	 net	
enrollment	rate	nearly	doubled	from	45.2	percent	in	the	early	1990s	to	89.3	percent	in	
2013.	 The	 share	 of	 young	 people	 who	 are	 able	 to	 read	 and	 write	 in	 English	 increased	
from	17	percent	in	the	early	1990s	to	81	percent	in	2012.	This	meant	that,	over	time,	the	
labor	force	became	more	educated:	between	1991	and	2012,	the	proportion	of	workers	
with	schooling	rose	from	59	to	76	percent.	The	provision	of	education	was	also	aided	by	
urbanization;	 as	 a	 result,	 the	 greatest	 improvements	 in	 educational	 outcomes	 can	 be	
found	in	the	main	cities	of	Accra	and	Ashanti.	It	is	hard	to	overstate	the	importance	of	
improved	employment	opportunities	for	poverty	reduction	–	a	study	by	Azevedo	et	al.	
(2013)	 estimates	 that	 growth	 in	 labor	 incomes	 accounted	 for	 almost	 50	 percent	 of	 all	
poverty	reduction	in	Ghana	between	1998	and	2005.			
	
In	recent	years,	Ghana	has	also	introduced	noteworthy	social	assistance	and	insurance	
programs	 that	 seek	 to	 support	 the	 poor	 and	 vulnerable,	 while	 strengthening	 human	
capital	accumulation.	In	2003,	Ghana	introduced	the	National	Health	Insurance	Scheme	
(NHIS)	law,	mandating	universal	enrollment	in	public	insurance.		By	2012,	36	percent	of	
Ghanaians	 were	 actively	 enrolled	 in	 these	 schemes.	 The	 NHIS	 is	 financed	 through	
subsidies,	 and	 a	 combination	 of	 taxes	 and	 premiums.	 Nevertheless,	 vulnerable	
populations,	 such	 as	 children,	 the	 elderly	 and	 the	 indigent,	 are	 exempt	 from	 these	
payments.	 The	 program	 is	 credited	 with	 increasing	 the	 utilization	 of	 health	 services,	
especially	among	women.		
	
A	second	program,	known	as	the	Livelihood	Empowerment	against	Poverty	(LEAP)	cash	
transfer,	was	introduced	in	2008.	This	provides	unconditional	cash	grants	to	households	
with	 elderly	 and	 disabled	 individuals,	 and	 a	 conditional	 transfer	 to	 households	 with	
orphan	 or	 vulnerable	 children	 subject	 to	 meeting	 school	 attendance	 and	 health	 visit	
targets.	From	a	small	pilot	with	1,654	beneficiaries,	this	program	has	expanded	to	cover	
74,000	 households	 by	 2013.	 Impact	 evaluations	 suggest	 that	 LEAP	 has	 had	 a	 positive	
impact	on	school	enrollment	and	attendance	figures.		
	
To	 date,	 social	 assistance	 programs	 have	 remained	 small‐scale	 and	 under‐utilized,	
reaching	a	limited	number	of	beneficiaries	and	accounting	for	1.4	percent	of	GDP.	Going	
forward,	as	poverty	continues	to	decline	and	become	more	concentrated	among	specific	
populations,	 targeted	 social	 assistance	 programs	 should	 play	 a	 greater	 role	 in	 the	
government’s	 poverty	 reduction	 strategy.	 While	 the	 northern	 regions	 in	 Ghana	 have	
experienced	 improvements	 in	 poverty	 and	 human	 capital,	 they	 continue	 to	 lag	 behind	
the	rest	of	the	country,	highlighting	the	need	for	geographically‐targeted	interventions	
and	 more	 equitable	 investments	 in	 health	 and	 education.	 Finally,	 Ghana	 will	 need	 to	
address	 renewed	 concerns	 about	 macroeconomic	 stability	 and	 inflation	 in	 order	 to	
preserve	the	gains	it	has	made.			

                                                	
                                               22	
	
Brazil	and	Mexico	
	
Between	1990	and	2012,	the	number	of	people	living	in	extreme	poverty	in	Brazil	fell	
from	almost	31	million	to	less	than	5	million.		At	$3.10	a	day,	poverty	has	been	reduced	
from	54	million	to	18	million.		That	millions	are	still	living	in	abject	poverty	in	a	country	
that	 reached	 upper	 middle‐income	 levels	 almost	 50	 years	 ago	 is	 testament	 to	 an	
ineffective	 development	 strategy.	 But	 the	 progress	 during	 the	 last	 two	 decades	 has	
lessons	for	countries	in	Asia	and	Africa.		It	shows	that	for	countries	that	have	reduced	
poverty	 to	 low	 levels,	 a	 combination	 of	 macroeconomic	 stability	 with	 more	 effective	
social	 policies	 can	 help	 end	 extreme	 poverty.	 	 But	 it	 also	 shows	 that	 without	 higher	
growth	 rates,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 sustain	 this	 progress.	 What	 exactly	 has	 Brazil	 done	 well,	
and	what	will	it	have	to	do	better?		
	
First,	between	1994	and	1997,	Brazil	stabilized	its	economy.		Inflation	had	stayed	above	
100	 percent	 annually	 since	 1982	 going	 up	 to	 2,500	 percent	 in	 1993.	 	 It	 was	 brought	
down	 to	 less	 than	 10	 percent	 by	 1998.	 Between	 1993	 and	 2004,	 using	 the	 national	
poverty	 line,	 the	 share	 of	 people	 living	 in	 poverty	 dropped	 by	 a	 third,	 from	 33	 to	 22	
percent.	 Brazil’s	 experience	 with	 inflation	 is	 a	 reminder	 for	 others	 that	 poor	
macroeconomic	management	is	one	of	the	most	anti‐poor	things	a	government	can	do.		
	
Second,	 Brazil	 invested	 in	 agriculture.	 	 Brazil’s	 support	 for	 agricultural	 research	 has	
helped	both	large	and	small	farms.		Despite	the	publicity	that	mega‐farms	have	received,	
more	than	80	percent	of	rural	Brazilians	continue	to	till	small	farms.		Their	productivity	
has	 grown	 due	 to	 better	 seeds	 and	 farming	 techniques	 made	 available	 by	 EMBRAPA,	
Brazil’s	agricultural	research	agency.		But	it	is	also	clear	that	small	farmers	need	more	
assistance	 than	 they	 have	 received	 and	 this	 has	 led	 to	 rural	 poverty	 remaining	 high,	
prompting	an	exodus	to	cities.		Extreme	poverty	is	evenly	distributed	between	rural	and	
urban	 areas	 in	 Brazil,	 unlike	 Asia	 and	 Africa	 where	 it	 is	 largely	 a	 rural	 phenomenon.		
While	in	China	it	was	agriculture	that	led	poverty	reduction,	in	Brazil	this	role	is	played	
by	 services.	 	 Periods	 during	 which	 the	 service	 sector	 grows	 faster	 are	 associated	 with	
faster	poverty	reduction.	
		
Third,	 Brazil	 has	 improved	 education	 and	 health	 services	 during	 the	 last	 two	 decades.		
Spending	on	education	as	a	share	of	GDP	doubled	between	1994	and	1995,	and	has	been	
maintained	at	about	5	percent	ever	since.		Healthcare	spending	has	averaged	close	to	9	
percent	of	GDP,	and	coverage	has	been	improving	since	the	reforms	in	the	early	1990s.		
Combined	with	social	assistance	programs	that	urged	poor	families	to	take	advantage	of	
these	 services,	 these	 investments	 have	 resulted	 in	 much	 better	 outcomes.	 	 Secondary	
school	enrollment	has	increased	from	50	percent	to	more	than	80	percent	in	less	than	
two	 decades.	 Life	 expectancy	 at	 birth	 is	 now	 74	 years,	 up	 five	 years	 since	 1990.		
Maternal	and	infant	mortality	rates	fell	by	about	4	percent	every	year	between	2000	and	
2009.	 	 These	 are	 impressive	 achievements,	 which	 have	 helped	 Brazil	 catch	 up	 with	
neighbors	like	Chile	and	Argentina.			
	
The	Brazilian	government	spends	about	1	percent	of	GDP	on	non‐contributory	pension	
schemes	 for	 the	 rural	 and	 urban	 elderly.	 	 But	 Brazil	 is	 better	 known	 for	 its	 social	
assistance	program,	 Bolsa	Familia,	a	 conditional	 cash	transfer	(CCT)	program	in	which	
parents	get	a	fixed	monthly	stipend	of	about	$30	in	exchange	for	enrolling	their	children	
in	school	and	for	health	checkups.		It	covers	50	million	low‐income	Brazilians,	a	quarter	
of	 the	 total	 population,	 and	 costs	 about	 0.5	 percent	 of	 GDP.	 In	 its	 decade	 of	
implementation,	 Bolsa	Familia	has	helped	to	reduce	the	extreme	poverty	incidence	from	
12.7	 to	 4.9	 percent—its	 contribution	 is	 estimated	 at	 about	 a	 quarter	 of	 the	 total	
reduction.		
	

                                                   	
                                                  23	
	
Today,	with	a	tax	to	GDP	ratio	of	36	percent,	rampant	corruption,	and	collapsing	public	
investment	in	infrastructure,	Brazil	is	again	flirting	with	economic	disaster	and	risks	a	
rise	in	poverty.	
	
Brazil	 is	 not	 the	 only	 upper‐middle	 income	 country	 that	 still	 has	 people	 living	 in	
extreme	poverty.	Its	northern	Latin	American	neighbor,	Mexico,	is	facing	challenges	of	
its	 own.	 There	 has	 been	 unmistakable	 progress	 in	 poverty	 reduction	 over	 the	 past	
decades.	Between	1981	and	2011,	the	share	of	people	living	under	$1.90	a	day	fell	from	
23	 to	 3	 percent.	 This	 has	 meant	 a	 reduction	 in	 the	 number	 of	 people	 experiencing	
extreme	poverty	from	16.8	million	in	1981	to	3.5	million	in	2011.	But	the	progress	has	
not	 been	 consistent.	 This	 trend	 masks	 instances	 when	 poverty	 reduction	 efforts	 have	
languished,	 including	 reversals	 during	 the	 mid‐1990s	 and,	 most	 recently,	 in	 the	 2011‐
2015	period.	As	such,	Mexico’s	story	is	illustrative	not	only	of	effective	actions	against	
poverty,	 but	 also	 of	 problems	 that	 can	 occur	 when	 the	 2.5	 strategy	 is	 not	 fully	
implemented.		
	
Mexico’s	 inconsistent	 performance	 in	 poverty	 alleviation	 reflects,	 in	 part,	 fragilities	 in	
economic	growth.	Until	the	late	1990s,	Mexico	suffered	various	forms	of	macroeconomic	
instability	 and	 mismanagement.	 The	 1980s	 were	 marked	 by	 a	 severe	 debt	 crisis—a	
result	of	large	fiscal	deficits,	excessive	debt	accumulation	(of	about	$100	billion),	and	a	
rapid	 decline	 in	 the	 price	 of	 Mexico’s	 oil	 exports.	 As	 creditors	 demanded	 repayment,	
Mexico	 undertook	 a	 fiscal	 adjustment,	 resulting	 in	 curtailed	 imports	 and	 investment.	
Between	1982	and	1988,	economic	growth	was	virtually	zero.	The	poverty	rate	had	also	
risen	from	23	percent	in	1981	to	27	percent	in	1984.	In	1989,	an	agreement	known	as	
the	 Brady	 Deal	 was	 finally	 reached	 with	 Mexico’s	 creditors,	 slashing	 Mexico’s	 debt	 by	
$12	 billion	 in	 discounted	 value	 terms.	 	 Debt	 relief	 brought	 many	 benefits:	 investment	
resurged,	growth	re‐bounded	to	4	percent,	and	the	extreme	poverty	rate	decreased	to	9	
percent	by	1993.	
	
But	 these	 results	 were	 short‐lived.	 	 Mexico	 was	 headed	 into	 a	 new	 crisis	 in	 1994.	
Mexico’s	reforms	in	financial	markets	liberalization	combined	with	a	fixed	exchange	rate	
regime	led	to	a	rapid	accumulation	of	foreign	capital	inflows.	While	capital	accumulated,	
institutions	that	provide	oversight	 did	not	keep	up.	Between	 1989	and	1992,	portfolio	
investments	 grew	 from	 zero	 to	 $18	 billion.	 Foreign	 direct	 investment	 grew	 from	 $2	
billion	 to	 $4	 billion	 per	 year	 after	 reforms.	 Nevertheless,	 investor	 confidence	 began	 to	
erode	 following	 bouts	 of	 political	 instability,	 declining	 foreign	 exchange	 reserves,	 and	
considerations	by	the	government	to	abandon	the	peg.	The	investor	panic	that	followed	
was	severe:	in	two	days,	$5	billion	was	withdrawn.	The	result	was	a	deep	recession	and	
an	increase	in	the	extreme	poverty	rate	from	9	percent	in	1993	to	14	percent	in	1996.	
Mexico	soon	regained	stability,	 but	it	was	only	in	2002	that	 poverty	 decreased	to	pre‐
crisis	levels.		
	
After	 the	 2000s,	 growth	 became	 consistently	 positive,	 albeit	 slow.	 Between	 2002	 and	
2015,	 Mexico’s	GDP	 grew	at	an	average	rate	of	 2.4	percent.	During	this	time,	the	rural	
poor	have	been	able	to	diversify	their	incomes	by	taking	part	in	the	nonfarm	economy,	
though	 productivity	 remained	 slow	 among	 smallholders.	 In	 urban	 areas,	 slow	
productivity	 growth	 constrained	 the	 availability	 of	 employment	 opportunities	 in	
productive,	 labor‐intensive	 sectors,	 such	 as	 manufacturing.	 Instead,	 the	 poor	 relied	
increasingly	 on	 the	 informal	 and	 self‐employed	 sectors	 of	 the	 economy.	 While	 the	
introduction	 of	 NAFTA	 led	 to	 an	 initial	 export	 surge,	 low	 productivity	 has	 constrained	
export	 growth.	 Several	 factors	 hampered	 Mexico’s	 productivity,	 including	 inadequate	
investments	in	infrastructure,	lack	of	competition,	inefficiencies	in	the	labor	market	and	
a	 costly	 business	 environment.	 Despite	 these	 challenges,	 poverty	 reduction	 continued,	
aided	 by	 rapidly	 expanding	 social	 services,	 transfers,	 and	 remittances.	 While	 the	

                                                 	
                                                24	
	
extreme	poverty	rate	decreased	to	3.8	percent	by	2008,	progress	might	have	been	faster	
with	greater	growth.		
	
With	the	establishment	of	the	Law	of	Social	Development	in	2003,	Mexico	increased	the	
attention	 to	 social	 policies	 and	 service	 delivery.	 As	 part	 of	 the	 law,	 the	 government	
strengthened	 the	 decentralization	 of	 resources	 and	 responsibilities	 to	 municipalities,	
and	 committed	 to	 not	 reduce	 social	 spending	 in	 real	 terms	 in	 any	 year.	 As	 such,	
education	 spending	 more	 than	 doubled	 from	 2.4	 percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 1991	 to	 5	 percent	
from	 2009	 onward.	 Health	 expenditures	 also	 increased,	 albeit	 more	 slowly,	 from	 2.1	
percent	 in	 1995	 to	 3.3	 percent	 in	 2014.	 Following	 decentralization,	 access	 to	 social	
services	 increased,	 especially	 in	 poor	 rural	 areas.	 The	 infant	 mortality	 rate	 (per	 1,000	
live	births)	fell	from	35.4	in	1991	to	11.3	in	2015.	Life	expectancy	increased	from	71.2	to	
76.9	years.	Completion	rates	in	primary	school	grew	from	86.4	percent	in	1991	to	102.8	
percent	in	2013,	while	in	secondary	school,	completion	rose	from	57.3	to	80.1	percent.	
	
These	 efforts	 were	 complemented	 with	 social	 assistance	 programs	 that	 specifically	
targeted	the	poor.	The	most	renowned	of	these	is	 Progresa,	a	conditional	cash	transfer	
(CCT)	 program	 for	 poor	 families	 who	 receive	 support	 as	 long	 as	 they	 maintain	
investments	in	health	and	education.	Intended	to	replace	inefficient	and	badly	targeted	
subsidies,	 this	CCT	 was	 designed	 with	 clear	 targeting	 criteria	 and	a	 big	 data	collection	
effort.	Initially	a	small	program	with	300,000	rural	beneficiaries,	Progresa	grew	to	cover	
as	 many	 as	 5.8	 million	 families	 (over	 20	 percent	 of	 the	 population)	 in	 both	 rural	 and	
urban	settings	by	2011,	distributing	over	$4.5	billion	in	transfers.	In	2014,	the	program	
was	 renamed	 Prospera	 as	 it	 introduced	 new	 components	 which	 link	 beneficiaries	 to	
vocational	 training	 opportunities	 and	 financial	 services.	 Progresa	 has	 been	 subject	 to	
rigorous	 impact	 evaluations,	 which	 found	 positive	 impacts	 on	 long‐term	 consumption,	
food	intake,	school	enrollment,	and	health	visits.	Since	its	launch,	Mexico	has	continued	
to	 develop	 a	 culture	 of	 evaluation	 in	 social	 programs	 by	 establishing	 a	 National	
Evaluation	 Council	 and	 budget	 laws	 to	 integrate	 the	 results	 of	 evaluations	 into	
budgeting	decisions.	
	
It	is	clear	that	social	assistance	programs	have	helped	Mexico	achieve	gains	in	poverty	
reduction	during	a	time	of	slow	economic	growth.	It	is	also	clear	that	poverty	is	hard	to	
end	when	all	components	of	the	2.5‐point	strategy	are	not	implemented	together	or	in	
ways	 that	 complement	 each	 other.	 The	 sustainability	 of	 social	 investments	 and	
insurance	 rely	 on	 the	 resources	 generated	 through	 growth.	 In	 recent	 years,	 Mexico’s	
growth	 has	 remained	 fragile	 and,	 not	 surprisingly,	 the	 number	 of	 people	 living	 under	
$1.90	 rose	 from	 3.5	 million	 to	 6.4	 million	 between	 2011	 and	 2015.12	Efforts	 to	 boost	
productivity	 and	 employment	 in	 labor‐intensive	 sectors	 will	 be	 crucial	 for	 ending	
poverty	in	Mexico.				
	
A	quarter	century	of	global	poverty	reduction	
	
Looking	back	at	what	has	happened	during	the	last	two	decades,	the	2.5‐point	strategy	
appears	to	have	withstood	the	test	of	time.			
	
In	1990,	at	about	50	to	60	percent,	extreme	poverty	rates	were	essentially	the	same	in	
East	 Asia,	 South	 Asia,	 and	 Sub‐Saharan	 Africa	 (Figure	 3).	 Mainly	 because	 of	 China,	
extreme	poverty	in	East	Asia	was	halved	between	1990	and	2002,	and	more	than	halved	
again	by	2012.		Today,	just	about	one	of	every	ten	East	Asians	lives	in	extreme	poverty,	
down	 from	 almost	 six	 of	 every	 ten	 in	 1990.	 In	 South	 Asia,	 mainly	 because	 of	 India,	
extreme	poverty	rates	have	fallen	but	not	so	much—from	just	over	half	in	1990	to	about	
																																																								
12	The	poverty	estimate	of	2015	for	Mexico	is	projected	following	the	methodology	of	PovcalNet.		


                                                            	
                                                           25	
	
 a	fifth.		In	Latin	America,	since	2000,	the	same	strategy—complemented	by	expansions	
 in	social	insurance—has	led	to	extreme	poverty	being	cut	in	half.		In	Sub‐Saharan	Africa,	
 extreme	 poverty	 rates	 have	 stayed	 much	 the	 same	 and	 the	 ranks	 of	 the	 extreme	 poor	
 have	doubled	because	the	population	has	doubled.		In	2011,	24	of	the	25	countries	with	
 the	highest	extreme	poverty	rates	were	in	Africa	(the	exception	was	Bangladesh).			
 	
 Many	 East	 Asian	 countries	 implemented	 the	 2.5‐point	 strategy	 to	 varying	 degrees	 but	
 with	considerable	success.		Most	notably	China,	with	economic	growth	rates	of	close	to	
 10	 percent,	 land	 reforms	 that	 improved	 the	 incentives	 for	 and	 the	 productivity	 of	
 farmers,	and	sizeable	investments	in	education	and	health,	has	reduced	poverty	below	
 $1.90	 a	 day	 from	 88	 percent	 in	 1981	 to	 6.5	 percent	 in	 2012.	 Openness	 to	 trade	 and	
 investments	in	infrastructure	have	led	to	the	growth	of	labor‐intensive	manufacturing.	
 Vietnam’s	more	comprehensive	land	reforms	made	its	policies	even	more	like	those	of	
 Korea,	and	cut	extreme	poverty	from	49	percent	in	1993	to	less	than	4	percent	in	2012.		
 	
 Figure	3:		Extreme	poverty	rates	since	1980,	by	region	
 	
                           Percent	of	the	population	living	on	less	than	$1.90	a	day

90
      80.6
80
70
          60.6                 58.1                    56.8 57.1
60
                                   50.7             50.8
50                                                               42.7
                                      40.8
40
              29.2
30
                                           18.8                           19.7
20                                                                            15.5 13.2

10                   7.2                                                              5.6             6.2
                                                                                            3.1 1.9         2.1
0
             EAP                     SAS                   SSA                  LAC              ECA

                                             1981   1990      2002      2012

 	
 In	South	Asia,	led	by	a	growing	trade	in	services,	India’s	GDP	growth	rates	of	between	6	
 and	7	percent	have	helped	it	reduce	the	extreme	poverty	rate	from	47	percent	in	1994	
 to	 less	 than	 20	 percent	 in	 2012.	 	 This	 is	 less	 impressive	 than	 East	 Asia,	 in	 large	 part	
 because	of	the	relative	neglect	of	agriculture	and	rural	infrastructure.		It	is	also	because	
 of	primary	health	care	shortfalls,	and	secondary	enrollment	ratios	that	barely	reach	50	
 percent.			
 	
 Even	 in	 Africa,	 countries	 that	 have	 emphasized	 broad‐based	 growth	 (with	 special	
 attention	 to	 agriculture)	 and	 investments	 in	 human	 capital	 (especially	 health	 and	
 education)	 have	 halved	 extreme	 poverty	 during	 these	 two	 decades.	 	 In	 Ethiopia,	 with	
 annual	growth	rates	of	more	than	10	percent	since	2005,	headcount	poverty	rates	were	
 almost	 halved	 between	 1990	 and	 2010	 (from	 more	 than	 60	 percent	 to	 less	 than	 40	
 percent).		Primary	school	enrollment	ratios	have	increased	from	less	than	25	percent	to	
 more	 than	 80	 percent,	 and	 rural	 access	 to	 safe	 water	 is	 getting	 close	 to	 50	 percent.		
 Ghana	has	done	well	too.		Annual	GDP	growth	has	hovered	around	8	percent	since	2006.	
 Under‐five	mortality	rates	decreased	from	54	to	19	deaths	per	1,000	live	births	between	
 1998	and	2014.	Children	today	are	expected	to	live	two	more	years	than	children	who	

                                                         	
                                                        26	
 	
were	 born	 ten	 years	 ago.	 Extreme	 poverty	 rates	 have	 fallen	 from	 61	 percent	 to	 13	
percent	between	1990	and	2012.			
	
The	 number	 of	 people	 living	 under	 $1.90	 a	 day	 fell	 from	 almost	 2	 billion	 in	 1990	 to	
about	 700	 million	 in	 2015—a	 fall	 in	 the	 global	 headcount	 ratio	 from	 more	 than	 40	
percent	 to	 less	 than	 10	 percent.	13		 Besides	 their	 numbers,	 the	 geographic	 distribution	
has	changed.		Back	then,	more	than	80	percent	of	the	world’s	extreme	poor	were	in	East	
and	 South	 Asia.	 Today,	 82	 percent	 live	 in	 South	 Asia	 and	 Sub‐Saharan	 Africa.	 	 This	 is	
familiar	stuff	(Figure	4).			
	
Figure	4:	Distribution	of	the	world’s	extreme	poor	($1.90	poverty	line)	
	
	
	                                1981                                                       1990	
	         Total	Number	of	Poor:	1.9	billion                                 Total	Number	of	Poor:	1.9	billion
	
	                                                               EAP                                             EAP
                                                                                      15%
	                              10%
                                                                ECA                                             ECA
	                                                                                                               LAC
                                                                LAC
	                     27%                                                                            51%
	                                                58%            MNA             30%                             MNA
	                           4%                                  SAS                                             SAS
                                                                                        3%
	                    1%
                                                                SSA                                             SSA
	                           1%                                                        1% 0%
	
	
	
	                              2005                                                         2015
	       Total	Number	of	Poor:	1.4	billion                                   Total	Number	of	Poor:	700	million
	
	                                                                     EAP                                       EAP
                                                                                                      1%
	                                                                                             12%
                        28%                    27%                    ECA                           4% 1%       ECA
	
	                                                                     LAC                                       LAC
                                                                                49%
	                                                          2%         MNA                                       MNA
                                                   4%
	                                                                                                   33%
                                                           1%         SAS                                       SAS
	                                39%
	                                                                     SSA                                       SSA
	
	
                  Source:	Global	Monitoring	Report	2015/16	and	PovcalNet	in	August	2016.	
                              Note:	All	numbers	for	MNA	region	are	projections.		
	
	
Less	 appreciated	 perhaps	 is	 that,	 much	 as	 it	 was	 in	 1973	 when	 President	 McNamara	
announced	 the	 World	 Bank’s	 goal	 of	 reducing	 absolute	 poverty,	 70	 percent	 of	 the	
world’s	extreme	poor	still	live	in	rural	areas.		This	is	despite	the	fact	that	half	the	world	
is	 now	 urban,	 up	 from	 a	 third	 back	 in	 the	 1970s.	 In	 2020,	 half	 the	 people	 in	 the	

																																																								
13	The	2015	 figures	 for	 global	 extreme	 poverty	 are	 statistical	 projections.	 The	 most	 recent	
estimate	of	the	global	extreme	poverty	rate	is	12.7	percent	for	2012.				

                                                                       	
                                                                      27	
	
developing	 world	 will	 be	 urban.	 	 But	 it	 is	 likely	 that	 about	 two‐thirds	 of	 the	 extreme	
poor	 will	 still	 be	 living	 in	 villages.	 For	 the	 rapid	 elimination	 of	 poverty,	 a	 quicker	
urbanization	will	be	necessary.	But	it	will	not	be	sufficient.	Even	in	2030,	40	percent	of	
the	developing	world’s	population	will	likely	be	rural.	Global	extreme	poverty	cannot	be	
cut	to	3	percent	unless	rural	poverty	rates	are	reduced	to	single	digits.		
	
This	is	likely	to	happen	in	many	developing	countries,	but	not	in	those	mired	in	conflict	
or	 fragility.	 	 By	 2020,	 more	 than	 half	 of	 the	 world’s	 extreme	 poor	 will	 be	 in	 conflict‐
affected	countries	or	relatively	fragile	states.		With	the	exception	of	Afghanistan,	all	such	
countries	will	be	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa.		
	
	
    2015‐2040—A	three‐point	strategy	to	end	extreme	poverty	
	
The	record	of	poverty	reduction	in	the	1990s	and	2000s	validates	the	broad	elements	of	
the	 strategy	 proposed	 in	 the	 1990	 WDR.	 	 But	 with	 the	 reduction	 of	 global	 extreme	
poverty	from	more	than	half	of	the	world’s	population	to	less	than	a	fifth,	and	with	the	
profile	 of	 the	 global	 extreme	 poor	 changing	 rapidly,	 the	 strategy—if	 it	 is	 to	 reduce	
extreme	poverty	to	less	than	3	percent	by	2030—has	to	be	refined.		Our	contention	is	
that	 the	 third	 component—social	 insurance—should	 not	 be	 just	 a	 supplement	 to	 the	
first	 two	 components,	 but	 a	 full	 complement.	 	 But	 for	 this	 to	 make	 the	 strategy	 more	
potent	 rather	 than	 less,	 social	 insurance	 has	 to	 be	 designed	 and	 implemented	 in	 ways	
that	 make	 the	 three	 components	 of	 the	 strategy	 mutually	 reinforcing.	 	 Experiments	 in	
public	 policy	 and	 advances	 in	 information	 technology	 during	 the	 last	 25	 years	 have	
provided	the	knowhow	needed	to	do	this	well.			

There	are	three	reasons	for	adopting	a	3‐point	strategy.			

1. The	need	for	social	assistance	in	every	country.		With	poverty	reduction,	those	left	in	
   poverty	 are	 increasingly	 those	 that	 are	 hardest	 to	 reach—people	 living	 in	 remote	
   areas,	ethnic	minorities,	or	other	disadvantaged	groups	who	face	multiple	obstacles.	
   Even	 in	 dynamic	 East	 Asian	 economies	 and	 wealthier	 Latin	 America,	 there	 remain	
   obstinate	 pockets	 of	 poverty	 seemingly	 resistant	 to	 the	 policy	 cocktail	 of	 labor‐
   intensive	 growth	 and	 investments	 in	 human	 capital.	 For	 them,	 additional	
   instruments	are	needed.		This	was	the	supplement	recommended	in	the	1990	World	
   Development	Report,	but	we	now	know	how	to	design	social	assistance	in	ways	that	
   helps	economies	grow	and	aids	investments	in	human	capital.		Think	of	conditional	
   cash	transfers.				

2. The	 utility	 of	 social	 insurance	 in	 successful	 developers.	 	 The	 3‐point	 strategy	 may	 be	
   most	needed	in	countries	that	have	reduced	extreme	poverty	to	low	levels.		Here	the	
   challenge	 becomes	 one	 of	 how	 to	 protect	 these	 gains.	 	 Take	 Indonesia.	 By	 2011	 it	
   had	reduced	poverty	to	33	million	people,	about	half	the	number	in	1999.		But	over	
   twice	 as	 many	 people	 (some	 73	 million)	 were	 vulnerable	 to	 falling	 back	 into	
   poverty—they	were	living	on	more	than	$1.90	a	day,	but	less	than	$3.10	a	day.	And	
   many	 do	 indeed	 slip	 down	 into	 poverty	 due	 to	 poor	 weather,	 ill	 health,	 or	
   unemployment;	surveys	show	that	one	of	every	other	poor	person	in	Indonesia	was	
   not	poor	the	year	before.	Social	insurance	becomes	a	necessary	third	component	to	
   policies	that	enable	labor‐intensive	growth	and	investments	in	human	capital,	but	it	
   has	 to	 be	 designed	 to	 complement	 (or	 at	 least	 not	 eviscerate)	 the	 first	 two.	 If	
   designed	in	ways	that	discourage	the	use	of	labor—for	example,	if	social	insurance	is	
   financed	by	taxes	on	labor	use—it	 will	weaken	the	first	component	 of	the	strategy	
   by	 making	 economic	 growth	 less	 labor‐intensive	 even	 when	 labor	 is	 abundant.		


                                                  	
                                                 28	
	
    Think	 Italy	 and	 Spain	 since	 the	 crisis.	 	 If	 social	 insurance	 takes	 up	 so	 much	 of	 the	
    government	 budget	 that	 not	 much	 is	 left	 for	 education	 and	 infrastructure,	 then	 it	
    will	not	help	in	ending	poverty.		Think	Brazil	since	2002.			

3. The	 imperative	 of	 protection	 against	 pandemics	 and	 disasters.	 A	 3‐point	 strategy	 is	
    also	 desirable	 in	 developing	 countries	 that	 are	 most	 vulnerable	 to	 pandemics	 and	
    large‐scale	 natural	 disasters.	 These	 also	 tend	 to	 be	 the	 poorest	 countries,	 with	 the	
    lowest	 capacity	 to	 respond	 to	 such	 massive	 shocks.	 These	 events	 cause	 enormous	
    human	 and	 economic	 loss,	 reversing	 progress	 in	 poverty	 reduction.	 A	 number	 of	
    trends	 suggest	 these	 risks	 will	 feature	 prominently	 in	 the	 future.	 Rising	
    temperatures	and	climate	change	set	the	stage	for	greater	frequency	and	severity	of	
    extreme	 weather	 events.	 Greater	 openness	 among	 countries	 can	 also	 facilitate	 the	
    spread	of	disease	through	travel	and	trade.	These	risks	call	for	policy	makers	to	take	
    actions	 that	 increase	 their	 countries’	 preparedness	 to	 shocks	 and	 enable	 a	 swift	
    response	in	event	of	a	crisis.	Global	risks	require	global	cooperation.				
         	
What	 does	 the	 three‐point	 strategy	 look	 like?	 	 First,	 as	 in	 the	 WDR	 1990	 strategy,	 it	
requires	 that	 economies	 grow	 in	 ways	 that	 raise	 the	 labor	 incomes	 of	 the	 poor.	 This	
means	increasing	labor	productivity	in	agriculture,	which	employs	a	large	fraction	of	the	
poor.	 It	 means	 investing	 in	 the	 right	 infrastructure	 to	 support	 labor‐intensive	 growth.	
And	it	means	opening	up	to	 trade	to	make	sure	countries	build	on	their	 strengths	 and	
use	their	resources	efficiently.		But	none	of	this	can	happen	if	there	is	no	foundation	of	
macroeconomic	stability	to	build	on.	

Second,	 the	 3‐point	 strategy	 requires	 that	 countries	 invest	 in	 the	 human	 capital	 of	 the	
poor	 by	 providing	 access	 to	 key	 human	 development	 inputs	 such	 as	 education,	 health,	
and	 population	 programs,	 safe	 water	 and	 sanitation.	 This	 is	 particularly	 important	 for	
children,	as	their	opportunities	early	in	life	greatly	determine	their	future	lives	as	adults.	
Moreover,	 improving	 opportunities	 for	 the	 poor	 is	 not	 just	 about	 the	 coverage	 of	
services,	 but	 also	 about	 quality	 of	 services.	 It	 is	 not	 enough	 to	 get	 kids	 to	 school:	
teachers	need	to	show	up;	textbooks	need	to	arrive;	and	kids	need	to	be	taught	in	a	way	
where	they	learn.		Health	clinics	need	to	be	staffed	with	trained	personnel,	and	able	to	
provide	adequate	services	if	people	are	going	to	use	them.		All	this	requires	a	foundation	
of	effective,	accountable	and	transparent	service	delivery	mechanisms	and	institutions	–	
in	other	words,	effective	governance.		

Third,	 the	 3‐point	 strategy	 requires	 programs	 that	 insure	 and	 protect	 people	 from	 the	
worst	 of	 destitution	 and	 from	 falling	 (deeper)	 into	 poverty	 when	 hit	 by	 shocks.	 These	
programs	 can	 help	 families	 avoid	 irreversible	 losses	 and	 prevent	 them	 from	 having	 to	
make	decisions,	such	as	pulling	a	child	out	of	school,	with	costly	long‐run	consequences.	
But	they	have	to	be	designed	in	ways	that	complement	the	first	two	points.	They	need	to	
be	 consistent	 with	 labor‐intensive	 growth	 and	 they	 need	 to	 support	investment	 in	the	
human	 capital	 of	 the	 poor.	 	 After	 twenty	 years	 of	 learning	 from	 the	 use	 of	 social	
protection	 programs	 in	 developing	 countries,	 we	 now	 know	 how	 to	 so	 this.	 There	 are	
three	different	sets	of	programs	that	are	needed:			

   Non‐contributory	 social	 assistance	 programs	 (or	 social	 safety	 nets)	 targeted	 to	 the	
    chronic	or	extreme	poor	to	protect	them	from	destitution	and	promote	investments	
    in	their	children’s	human	capital.	
   Social	insurance	programs	aimed	at	protecting	a	broader	segment	of	the	population	
    from	falling	back	into	poverty	as	a	consequence	of	shocks.	These	may	be	individual	
    shocks,	such	as	illness	or	unemployment	or	the	risk	of	poverty	in	old	age,	or	more	
    systemic	shocks,	such	as	droughts	or	economic	crises.			



                                                   	
                                                  29	
	
   Global	 insurance	 mechanisms	 that	 can	 help	 countries	 cope	 with	 the	 impact	 of	
    massive	 natural	 disasters	 that	 affect	 more	 than	 one	 country	 (such	 as	 the	 2004	
    Indian	 Ocean	 Tsunami)	 or	 pandemics	 (such	 as	 SARs	 or	 more	 recently	 the	 Ebola	
    epidemic).			

In	 order	 to	 make	 effective	 use	 of	 these	 programs,	 governments	 need	 to	 develop	
information	 systems	 that	 permit	 the	 timely	 collection	 and	 analysis	 of	 relevant	 data.	
Information	 systems	 enable	 governments	 to	 obtain	 a	 thorough	 and	 dynamic	
understanding	 of	 poverty,	 making	 it	 possible	 to	 identify	 populations	 experiencing	
chronic	forms	of	poverty,	as	well	as	those	that	are	vulnerable	to	risk.	This	is	essential	for	
the	 effective	 implementation	 of	 social	 assistance	 and	 social	 insurance	 programs.	
Information	 systems	 also	 enable	 governments	 to	 monitor	for	 potential	pandemics	 and	
natural	 disasters,	 identify	 areas	 that	 are	 at	 high	 risk,	 and	 take	 preventative	 action	 in	
response	 to	 these	global	 shocks.	As	a	 summary,	Box	 2	lists	 the	 components,	 priorities,	
and	prerequisites	of	the	3‐point	strategy.	

Box	2:	Components,	priorities,	and	prerequisites	of	the	three‐point	strategy	
	
1.	Grow—Policies	to	foster	labor‐intensive	growth	
			Objective:	Promote	productive	use	of	labor	
			Priorities:	Agriculture,	Trade,	Infrastructure	
			Prerequisite:	Macroeconomic	Stability	
		
2.	Invest—Policies	to	catalyze	investments	in	human	capital		
		Objective:	Deliver	basic	social	services	
		Priorities:	Education,	Health	&	Population,	Water	&	Sanitation	
		Prerequisite:	Good	(enough)	Governance	
	
3.	Insure—Policies	to	reduce	vulnerability	to	risk	
		Objective:	Help	the	destitute	and	protect	the	vulnerable	
		Priorities:	Social	Assistance,	Social	Insurance,	Climate	Action	&	Pandemic	Response	
		Prerequisite:	Information	Systems	
	
Grow—Policies	to	foster	labor‐intensive	growth		
	
The	 most	 important	 driver	 of	 poverty	 reduction	 is	 growth	 in	 labor	 incomes.	 This	 was	
clear	from	the	experience	of	the	East	Asian	tigers	in	the	1970s	and	1980s,	and	it	is	clear	
from	the	experience	of	most	developing	countries	during	the	1990s	and	2000s.		A	study	
of	successful	poverty	reduction	episodes	in	developing	countries	during	the	2000s,	for	
example,	 finds	 that	 labor	 income	 growth—due	 to	 the	 combined	 effect	 of	 growth	 of	
employment	 and	 earnings—accounted	 for	 more	 than	 50	 percent	 of	 the	 poverty	
reduction	 in	 the	 majority	 of	 the	 countries	 studied	 (Figure	 5).	 	 In	 some	 cases,	 such	 as	
Peru,	 it	accounted	for	more	than	 80	 percent	of	 all	 poverty	reduction	 during	the	 2003‐
2013	decade.	If	poverty	is	to	be	reduced	at	the	rate	needed	to	reach	the	3	percent	target	
by	2030,	governments	need	to	institute	policies	that,	first	and	foremost,	lead	to	higher	
labor	incomes	for	poor	people.		
	
Raising	the	labor	incomes	of	the	poor	requires	the	same	true	and	tested	approach	that	
was	 used	 in	 China,	 India,	 Vietnam,	 Thailand,	 and	 other	 countries	 that	 have	 reduced	
poverty:	 foster	 agricultural	 growth	 through	 the	 combination	 of	 good	 policies	 and	
investments,	 encourage	 economic	 discipline	 through	 openness	 to	 trade,	 and	 build	 the	
infrastructure	needed	to	increase	productivity	and	facilitate	access	to	markets.		
	


                                                  	
                                                 30	
	
Agriculture.	 Despite	 growing	 urbanization	 in	 developing	 countries,	 poverty	 continues	
to	 be	 a	 largely	 rural	 phenomenon.	 Three‐quarters	 of	 the	 poor	 in	 developing	 countries	
are	 located	 in	 rural	 areas.14	Among	 the	 3	 billion	 rural	 inhabitants	 in	 developing	
countries,	86	percent	rely	on	agriculture	for	their	livelihoods.	Consequently,	this	sector	
has	 a	 critical	 role	 to	 play	 in	 poverty	 alleviation	 efforts.	 The	 2008	 World	 Development	
Report	 found	 that	 GDP	 growth	 in	 agriculture	 is	 at	 least	 twice	 as	 effective	 in	 reducing	
poverty	as	non‐agricultural	growth.		

Agricultural	 productivity	 increases	 are	 not	 only	 a	 source	 of	 economic	 growth	 but	 also	
catalyze	the	development	of	related	industries—accounting,	in	some	cases,	for	about	a	
third	of	the	GDP—and	the	broader	nonfarm	economy.	The	linkages	between	agriculture	
and	 industry	 illustrate	 the	 importance	 of	 agricultural	 growth	 as	 a	 labor‐intensive	
process.	 Productivity	 growth	 in	 agriculture	 keeps	 food	 prices	 from	 rising,	 resulting	 in	
low	 wages	 that	 contribute	 to	 the	 competitiveness	 of	 non‐agricultural	 sectors.	
Agricultural	 growth	 is	 also	 known	 to	 generate	 multiplier	 effects	 on	 the	 rest	 of	 the	
economy.		It	is	not	surprising	that	the	most	successful	development	stories	begin	with	
agriculture.	

Figure	5:	Rising	labor	income	is	the	main	driver	of	poverty	reduction	
	
                                                 140                          Decomposition of Changes in Moderate Poverty, by Income Level, in Selected Developing
                                                                                                               Countries, 2000s
                                                 120
    Contribution to change in poverty, percent




                                                 100

                                                  80

                                                  60

                                                  40

                                                  20

                                                  0

                                                 -20

                                                 -40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Argentina, 2000–10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Brazil, 2001–09
                                                                                                   Nepal, 1996–2003



                                                                                                                                          Mongolia, 2007–11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Chile, 2000–09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Peru, 2004–10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thailand, 2000–09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Honduras, 1999–2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Panama, 2001–09
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vietnam, 2004–10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Colombia, 2002–10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Costa Rica, 2000–08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Paraguay, 1999–2010
                                                        Bangladesh, 2000–10

                                                                                Ghana, 1998–2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ecuador, 2003–10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Moldova, 2001–10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Romania, 2001–09
                                                                                                                                                                                     Sri Lanka, 2002–09
                                                                                                                                                              Philippines, 2006–09
                                                                                                                      Cambodia, 2007–10




                                                                                                                      US$1.25 a day                                                                                                                                                                                               US$4 a day                                                                                                            US$5 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         day
                                                       Share of working-age family members                                                                                                                              Employment+earnings                                                      Nonlabor income                                                                  Consumption-to-income ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              	
Source:	Figure	1.1	(page	3)	in	Inchauste	and	J.	Saavedra‐Chanduvi,	(2014);	using	Data	from	SEDLAC,	
various	years;	FAO	n.d.;	and	national	household	surveys	
	
At	the	same	time,	the	state	of	agricultural	modernization	varies	greatly	across	countries.	
Accordingly,	in	order	to	leverage	the	agricultural	sector	for	labor‐intensive	growth	and	
poverty	reduction,	it	is	important	to	tailor	policies	to	align	them	with	a	country’s	context.	
The	2008	WDR	provides	a	useful	typology:		


																																																								
14	The	2008	World	Development	Report	 Agriculture	for	Development	calculates	poverty	based	on	

an	international	poverty	line	of	$1.08	in	1993	purchasing	power	parity	dollars.		

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      31	
	
        In	 agriculture‐based	 countries,	 agriculture	 is	 a	 significant	 contributor	 to	 an	
         economy,	accounting	for	29	percent	of	GDP	and	65	percent	of	the	labor	force,	on	
         average.	 In	 these	 countries,	 a	 majority	 of	 the	 poor	 (about	 70	 percent)	 are	
         concentrated	 in	 rural	 areas.	 This	 group	 of	 countries	 accounts	 for	 417	 million	
         rural	individuals	located	predominantly	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa.		
      In	 transforming	 countries,	 the	 significance	 of	 agriculture	 in	 an	 economy	 is	
         diminished,	 representing	 13	 percent	 of	 a	 country’s	 GDP	 and	 57	 percent	 of	 the	
         labor	 force,	 on	 average.	 Nevertheless,	 poverty	 continues	 to	 be	 highly	 rural,	
         accounting	 for	 82	 percent	 of	 the	 poor.	 The	 rural	 population	 in	 these	 countries	
         amounts	to	2.2	billion	individuals,	who	are	mostly	located	in	South	East	Asia	and	
         the	Middle	East	and	North	Africa.			
      In	 urbanized	 countries,	 agriculture	 plays	 an	 even	 smaller	 role	 in	 the	 economy,	
         contributing,	on	average,	to	6	percent	of	GDP	and	18	percent	of	the	labor	force.	
         In	these	countries,	poverty	is	mostly	urban;	however,	a	considerable	fraction	of	
         the	poor	(about	45	percent)	remain	in	rural	areas.	The	rural	population	amounts	
         to	 255	 million	 individuals,	 located	 mainly	 in	 Latin	 America	 and	 the	 Caribbean	
         and	Europe	and	Central	Asia.	
         	
For	 agricultural‐based	 countries,	 agriculture	 must	 act	 as	 the	 principal	 engine	 of	
economic	growth.	Consequently,	the	policy	objective	for	these	countries	is	to	boost	the	
agricultural	 productivity	 of	 their	 smallholder	 farmers.	 Experiences	 across	 countries	
reveal	a	range	of	lessons	for	doing	this.		First,	it	is	important	to	expand	access	to	assets,	
which	act	as	the	main	determinant	of	participation	in	agriculture	for	rural	inhabitants.	
This	includes	strengthening	the	functioning	of	land	markets,	ramping	up	investments	in	
irrigation,	 and	 enhancing	 the	 delivery	 of	 health	 and	 education	 for	 rural	 areas.	 Korea,	
Taiwan,	and	Ethiopia	took	such	steps	to	great	effect.		Second,	improve	the	functioning	of	
markets.	This	includes	reducing	transaction	costs	to	facilitate	farmers’	access	to	markets,	
improving	the	efficiency	of	input	delivery	mechanisms,	bringing	credit	markets	to	rural	
areas,	and	supporting	producer	organizations	to	achieve	greater	market	power.	Ghana’s	
success	 with	 cocoa	 illustrates	 how	 valuable	 market‐oriented	 reforms	 can	 be.	 Third,	
agriculture	 has	 to	 be	 moved	 to	 the	 top	 of	 the	 policy	 agenda.	 Burdensome	 taxation	 of	
agriculture	 (as	 in	 Thailand)	 limits	 its	 potential,	 while	 greater	 R&D	 investments	 (as	 in	
Brazil)	are	required	to	develop	new	technologies	that	boost	productivity.			
	
In	transforming	countries,	the	objective	is	to	facilitate	the	re‐allocation	of	surplus	labor	
from	agriculture	into	other	activities	to	reduce	rural	poverty.	There	are	many	pathways	
that	are	available	to	the	rural	poor	to	escape	poverty,	including	employment	in	the	rural	
nonfarm	 economy,	 movement	 toward	 higher	 value	 agricultural	 activities,	 and	 rural‐
urban	migration.	Several	actions	can	be	undertaken	to	unlock	these	pathways.	Fostering	
a	vibrant	nonfarm	economy	is	at	the	center	stage	of	any	strategy.	Experiences	highlight	
the	important	role	of	connecting	rural	areas	to	urban	economies	by	reducing	transaction	
costs,	 through	 investments	 in	 infrastructure	 or	 the	 provision	 of	 market	 information	
services.	China	has	been	successful	in	this	regard	through	the	establishment	of	township	
and	village	enterprises,	which	brought	industry	closer	to	rural	populations.	At	the	same	
time,	 maintaining	 agricultural	 productivity	 is	 important	 for	 the	 emergence	 of	 related	
industries,	including	food	processing	and	transport.	Finally,	additional	interventions	can	
support	people	as	they	exit	agriculture.	Labor	policies	that	restrict	movement	from	the	
farm	 to	 towns	 and	 cities	 (such	 as	 China’s	 hukou)	 should	 be	 avoided.	 Instead,	
investments	on	education	and	vocational	training	could	be	emphasized	to	equip	farmers	
with	the	skills	to	access	nonfarm	employment	opportunities.	Safety	nets,	such	as	modest	
pensions,	can	also	play	a	role	by	encouraging	the	transfer	of	land	ownership.		
	



                                                	
                                               32	
	
For	 urbanized	 countries	 where	 agriculture	 has	 been	 largely	 modernized	 and	 poverty	
has	become	mostly	urban,	agriculture	continues	to	play	a	valuable	role	in	reducing	the	
entrenched	 poverty	 that	 remains	 in	 rural	 pockets.	 The	 policy	 goal	 for	 urbanized	
countries	is	to	connect	the	rural	poor	to	the	opportunities	that	have	been	unlocked	by	
the	modernization	in	food	markets.	On	the	one	hand,	rural	farmers	have	the	opportunity	
to	 become	 suppliers	 to	 supermarkets;	 this	 involves	 helping	 producer	 organizations	
meet	 the	 scale	 and	 the	 standards	 required	 by	 modern	 food	 markets,	 and	 helping	
smallholders	participate	in	such	organizations.	On	the	other	hand,	the	rural	poor	can	opt	
for	wage	employment	opportunities	at	large‐scale	agribusinesses	that	cater	to	domestic	
or	export	markets.	Chile	has	benefited	from	just	such	an	approach,	taking	advantage	of	
an	export	boom	in	agro‐processing	to	create	jobs	and	decrease	poverty.		
	
Trade.	 Agricultural	 productivity	 ignites	 a	 process	 of	 economic	 growth	 and	 industrial	
development	 that	 offers	 countries	 new	 opportunities	 for	 augmenting	 income	 growth	
through	trade.	The	most	successful	development	examples	since	1965,	especially	in	East	
Asia,	 relied	 heavily	 on	 trade	 through	 labor‐intensive,	 export‐oriented	 manufacturing.	
This	 would	 not	 have	 been	 possible	 without	 a	 prior	 revolution	 in	 agricultural	
productivity	that	kept	food	prices	in	check	and	wages	competitive.	It	is	no	surprise	that	
rapidly‐growing	 economies	 in	 East	 Asia,	 including	 Korea,	 Taiwan,	 and	 China,	
implemented	 policies	 to	 boost	 agricultural	 productivity	 through	 various	 forms	 of	 land	
reform,	 which	 preceded	 their	 industrial	 revolutions.	 These	 conditions	 helped	 set	 the	
stage	 for	effective	 trade	 strategies	that	proved	 to	 be	 a	 fundamental	 ingredient	of	 their	
successes	with	economic	development	and	poverty	reduction.		
	
There	 are	 several	 mechanisms	 through	 which	 trade	 contributes	 to	 economic	
development.	Exports	are	a	crucial	source	of	foreign	exchange	and,	hence,	are	necessary	
for	the	purchase	of	valuable	imports,	such	as	new	technologies	and	inputs,	which	boost	
a	 country’s	 overall	 productivity.	 Openness	 to	 trade	 also	 increases	 domestic	 firm	
productivity	through	the	competition	that	stems	from	bringing	in	more	imports,	as	well	
as	the	competition	that	exporters	face	in	foreign	markets.	The	opportunity	to	reach	large	
export	 markets,	 in	 turn,	 leads	 to	 economies	 of	 scale,	 specialization	 in	 production,	 and	
innovation.	These	effects	set	the	stage	for	firm‐level	efficiencies,	growth,	and	ultimately,	
employment	generation.		
	
The	 experiences	 over	 the	 last	 50	 years	 provide	 us	 with	 several	 valuable	 lessons	 on	
successful	 trade	 strategies.	 First,	 it	 is	 clear	 that	 the	 impressive	 performance	 of	 East	
Asian	 economies	 rested	 on	 the	 development	 of	 effective	 export	 platforms.	 These	
platforms	 often	took	 the	form	 of	 enclaves	 within	 an	 economy,	 creating	 an	appropriate	
enabling	 environment	 for	 foreign	 multinational	 companies	 and	 exporters.	 Reducing	
production	 costs	 is	 an	 imperative	 for	 competitive	 exports	 and	 enclaves	 offer	 a	
convenient	way	of	doing	so,	as	it	is	typically	easier	to	improve	infrastructure,	increase	
security,	 and	 reduce	 red	 tape	 within	 a	 narrowly	 defined	 area.	 China	 was	 active	 in	
pursuing	 this	 approach	 to	 trade,	 creating	 special	 economic	 zones	 along	 the	 coast,	
leading	to	a	surge	in	exports	and	creating	millions	of	new	jobs	in	the	process.	
	
Second,	 East	 Asia	 was	 also	 successful	 in	 exploiting	 the	 synergies	 between	 access	 to	
world	markets	and	foreign	direct	investment.	Within	East	Asia,	an	increasing	number	of	
regional	 trade	 agreements	 were	 negotiated	 (as	 many	 as	 24	 between	 the	 1997‐2007	
decade	alone),	removing	restrictions	to	the	flow	of	foreign	investment.	This	proved	to	be	
critical	 for	 the	 formation	 of	 regional	 production	 networks,	 in	 which	 the	 bulk	 of	 trade	
became	increasingly	made	up	of	components	to	be	assembled	in	a	neighboring	country,	
with	 foreign	 affiliates	 playing	 a	 substantial	 role	 in	 driving	 this	 process.	 Regional	
production	networks	broadened	the	opportunities	for	trade	that	were	available	to	East	
Asian	countries.	This	was	used	to	great	effect	in	Thailand,	for	example,	where	openness	

                                                 	
                                                33	
	
to	 FDI	 enabled	 the	 country	 to	 take	 part	 in	 production	 networks,	 spanning	 industries	
such	 as	 garments	 and	 even	 automobiles.	 	 Today,	 more	 than	 half	 of	 East	 Asia’s	 trade	
takes	place	within	the	region.		
	
Third,	 experience	 shows	 that	 successful	 trade	 strategies	 are	 also	 supported	 by	
complementary	trade	policies.	Maintaining	a	stable	exchange	rate	is	beneficial	for	trade	
as	it	eliminates	currency	risk,	while	avoiding	exchange	rate	overvaluations	is	crucial	for	
keeping	exports	competitive.	Furthermore,	reducing	tariffs	on	imports	is	also	beneficial	
to	 exporters,	 as	 this	 keeps	 the	 cost	 of	 inputs	 in	 check.	 Imports	 may	 also	 embody	
technological	features	that	result	in	productivity	gains.	East	Asia	was	not	entirely	open	
to	imports	at	the	outset	of	its	export‐oriented	strategy.	For	example,	during	the	1980s,	
tariffs	approached	30	percent	in	Korea	and	50	percent	in	Thailand.	Nevertheless,	these	
protectionist	 measures	 were	 largely	 reversed	 in	 the	 1990s	 to	 the	 benefit	 of	 exporters.	
	
Finally,	export	promotion	in	East	Asia	 was	facilitated	through	 a	broader	framework	of	
institutional	 support.	 Most	 governments	 that	 engaged	 in	 export‐promotion	 activities	
relied	 on	 a	 system	 of	 export	 targets	 and	 incentives	 as	 a	 means	 of	 expanding	 trade.	
Rewards	–	often	in	the	form	of	preferential	access	to	credit	and	government	subsidies	–	
were	 distributed	 through	 a	 system	 of	 contests	 to	 best‐performing	 exporters.	 These	
subsidies	were	often	market‐tested	and	government	support	was	granted	to	the	extent	
that	 a	 firm	 continued	 to	 perform	 well	 in	 export	 markets.	 Other	 institutions,	 such	 as	
government	 boards,	 were	 established	 to	 facilitate	 market	 development	 in	 foreign	
countries	in	an	effort	to	give	greater	visibility	to	a	country’s	exports	and	boost	trade.	It	is	
worth	 noting	 that	 some	 of	 these	 actions	 may	 not	 be	 viable	 in	 the	 current	 global	 trade	
context	as	governed	by	the	WTO.	Nonetheless,	the	lesson	remains	that	complementary	
institutions,	 such	 as	 inclusive	 financial	 intermediaries,	 are	 an	 important	 component	 of	
an	effective	trade	strategy.		
	
Infrastructure.	 Investments	in	infrastructure	are	critical	for	facilitating	growth	in	both	
agriculture	 and	 trade.	 For	 smallholder	 farmers	 that	 are	 located	 in	 rural	 areas,	
infrastructure	is	vital	to	reduce	the	distance	to	markets.	The	magnitude	of	the	challenge	
remains	 significant	 to	 this	 day,	 as	 almost	 900	 million	 rural	 inhabitants	 in	 the	 world	
continue	 to	 lack	 access	 to	 all‐weather	 roads	 within	 two	 kilometers.	 Similarly,	 poor	
infrastructure	acts	as	a	constraint	on	trade	through	transaction	costs.	It	is	estimated	that	
poor	infrastructure	accounts	for	anywhere	between	40	and	60	percent	of	transportation	
costs.	Consequently,	improving	infrastructure	is	an	imperative	for	countries	that	seek	to	
initiate	and	sustain	a	process	of	labor‐intensive	growth.	By	some	estimates,	a	10	percent	
increase	in	infrastructure	spending	is	conducive	to	one	percent	of	GDP	growth.		
	
What	can	be	done	to	effectively	improve	the	quality	of	infrastructure	across	developing	
countries?	Greater	investment	is,	of	course,	part	of	the	solution.	This	entails	improving	
access	 not	 only	 to	 roads,	 but	 also	 to	 electricity,	 water,	 and	 information	 and	
communication	 technologies	 (ICT).	 For	 the	 remainder	 of	 this	 decade,	 developing	
countries	will	need	to	spend	about	7	percent	of	GDP	in	infrastructure,	according	to	some	
estimates,	 to	 meet	 their	 needs.	 For	 Sub‐Saharan	 Africa,	 the	 required	 investment	
amounts	 to	 15	 percent	 of	 GDP	 –	 a	 figure	 that	 exceeds	 the	 annual	 infrastructure	
investment	 of	 East	 Asian	 economies	 during	 their	 period	 of	 high	 growth.	 With	 limited	
public	resources,	there	are	opportunities	to	leverage	private	sector	investment	to	make	
up	for	the	gaps	in	financing	through	public‐private	partnerships.	Targeting	rural	areas	
for	 infrastructure	 investments	 is	 a	 particularly	 sound	 policy	 for	 achieving	 gains	 in	
agricultural	productivity,	as	we	saw	in	the	cases	of	Korea,	Bangladesh,	and	Ethiopia.	In	
addition,	 it	 will	 be	 important	 to	 improve	 the	 governance	 of	 infrastructure	 in	 order	 to	
yield	 the	 greatest	 returns	 to	 these	 investments.	 This	 means	 more	 efficient	 regulations	
surrounding	 border	 management,	 streamlined	 logistics,	 and	 reduced	 red	 tape.	 The	

                                                 	
                                                34	
	
governance	 aspects	 of	 infrastructure	 are	 significant:	 import	 delays,	 for	 instance,	 are	
equivalent	to	a	tariff	of	11.2	percent	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa.		
	
Macroeconomic	stability.		 Macro	stability—reflected	in	low	inflation	and	stable	public	
finances—is	a	prerequisite	for	promoting	the	productive	use	of	labor	through	economic	
growth.	 For	 agricultural	 productivity	 growth,	 it	 is	 essential	 to	 implement	 sound	
macroeconomic	policies	that	provide	the	right	incentives	for	farmers	to	invest	in	their	
farms	 and	 engage	 in	 commercial	 activities.	 Moreover,	 in	 order	 to	 leverage	 trade	 in	
agriculture	as	well	as	industry,	the	macroeconomic	environment	must	also	be	favorable	
for	 exporters.	 An	 effective	 policy	 package	 would	 likely	 include,	 but	 not	 be	 limited	 to:	
independent	 monetary	 policy,	 low	 inflation	 targets,	 prudent	 fiscal	 policy	 that	 does	 not	
discriminate	 against	 agriculture,	 exchange	 rate	 policy	 that	 favors	 stability	 and	 avoids	
overvaluations,	 and	 financial	 development	 to	 raise	 savings	 and	 facilitate	 the	 flow	 of	
capital.		
	
Invest—Policies	to	catalyze	investments	in	human	capital	
	
For	individuals	and	families	to	escape	poverty,	they	must	not	only	possess	physical	and	
human	 assets,	 but	 also	 be	 able	 to	 use	 them	 in	 ways	 that	 yield	 high	 returns.	 Labor	 is	
always	the	most	important	asset	of	the	poor.	The	first	component	of	the	3‐point	strategy	
highlights	 the	 importance	 of	 creating	 income‐generating	 opportunities	 for	 the	 poor	
through	 growth.	 But	 to	 avail	 themselves	 of	 the	 opportunities	 created	 by	 growth,	 the	
poor	 also	 need	 human	 capital	 in	 the	 form	 of	 decent	 education	 and	 good	 health	 that	
allows	 them	 to	 participate	 in	 productive	 employment.	 The	 poor	 are	 frequently	 in	 the	
weakest	position	to	develop	their	human	capital,	precisely	because	of	their	poverty.		
	
Consider	the	case	of	education.	The	poor	may	lack	the	means	to	make	investments	in	the	
schooling	 of	 their	 children.	 	 Even	 when	 school	 is	 free,	 the	 opportunity	 cost	 of	 sending	
children	to	school—their	 labor	 at	 home	 or	 in	 family	 farms	 and	 enterprises	earnings—
may	be	too	high	a	price	to	bear.		The	poor	may	also	not	know	the	returns	to	investments	
in	 education.	 	 They	 may	 be	 disadvantaged	 due	 to	 the	 inferior	 quality	 of	 educational	
services	 that	 typically	 affects	 poor	 areas	 and	 villages.	 Health	 matters	 even	 more	 than	
education.		The	ability	of	poor	children	to	go	to	school	and	learn	is	often	compromised	
because	they	are	more	likely	to	be	hungry,	malnourished	or	sick	due	to	lack	of	access	to	
safe	water	and	sanitation.		
	
Eleven	 years	 ago,	 the	 2004	 World	 Development	 Report	 Making	 Services	 Work	 for	 Poor	
People	 noted:	 “Too	 often,	 services	 fail	 poor	 people—in	 access,	 in	 quantity,	 in	 quality.”		
Although	we	have	seen	an	improvement	in	access	to	basic	services	in	many	developing	
countries,	this	statement	is,	unfortunately,	still	valid	today.	Many	of	the	world’s	poor	do	
not	have	access	to	good	schooling,	or	proper	health	care,	electricity,	water	or	sanitation,	
especially	 in	 Sub‐Saharan	 Africa.	 As	 such,	 an	 imperative	 objective	 for	 policy	 makers	
seeking	to	end	extreme	poverty	is	to	improve	the	delivery	of	basic	social	services,	with	
an	emphasis	on	education,	health,	and	water	and	sanitation.		
	
Education.	 There	 has	 been	 progress	 in	 improving	 access	 to	 education	 services	 across	
developing	countries	in	the	last	25	years.	Since	1990,	the	number	of	primary	school	age	
children	 not	 attending	 schools	 has	 halved.	 Nevertheless,	 almost	 59	 million	 primary	
school	children	age	are	still	out	of	school.		Sub‐Saharan	Africa	accounts	for	30	million	of	
them.	 Rapid	 population	 growth	 creates	 further	 strains	 in	 expanding	 the	 reach	 of	
education	 services,	 and	 by	 some	 estimates,	 up	 to	 40	 million	 more	 African	 youth	 may	
drop	out	of	school	in	the	next	decade.		
	


                                                 	
                                                35	
	
Gender	gaps	have	also	persisted	throughout	the	past	decades.	The	global	out‐of‐school	
rate	 for	 primary	 school	 is	 10	 percent	 for	 girls	 and	 8	 percent	 for	 boys.	 In	 Sub‐Saharan	
Africa,	 girls	 make	 up	 55	 percent	 of	 the	 large	 out‐of‐school	 children	 population.	
Uneducated	 girls	 are	 also	 more	 likely	 to	 marry	 at	 an	 earlier	 age,	 give	 birth	 to	 more	
children,	and	have	fewer	opportunities	to	earn	an	income,	thus	having	a	diminished	role	
in	household	decision‐making.	This	has	generational	consequences,	as	their	children	are	
more	likely	to	repeat	the	cycle.		
	
Averages	 can	 mask	 big	 differences	 between	 the	 rich	 and	 the	 poor.	 For	 example,	 in	
Mozambique,	 60	 percent	 of	 children	 in	 the	 top	 60	 percent	 complete	 primary	 school,	
while	only	20	percent	of	the	bottom	20	percent	are	able	to	do	so.						
	
What	 can	 be	 done	 to	 achieve	 greater	 improvements	 in	 educational	 outcomes	 in	
developing	 countries?	 The	 disparities	 described	 above	 suggest	 that	 governments	 have	
to	invest	more	to	close	the	gaps	in	access	to	education.	It	is	not	enough	to	just	improve	
averages:	disadvantaged	children—such	as	girls,	ethnic	minorities,	and	families	in	poor	
or	 remote	 areas—must	 have	 the	 same	 opportunities	 to	 become	 educated	 as	 wealthier	
families.		Malaysia	and	Bangladesh	introduced	policies	to	reduce	disparities	in	education	
by	 investing	 in	 lagging	 states	 and	 girls’	 education,	 respectively.	 Both	 benefited	 greatly	
from	large	gains	in	poverty	reduction.	It	is	also	increasingly	clear	that	investments	are	
most	 effective	 when	 made	 in	 early	 childhood—for	 cognition,	 schooling	 achievement,	
and	 long‐term	 earnings.	 Investing	 in	 education	 between	 birth	 and	 3	 years	 of	 age	
produces	the	highest	rates	of	return	per	dollar	invested,	exceeding	14	percent	in	some	
cases.	
	
To	 make	lasting	improvements	in	education	 outcomes,	it	is	 not	 enough	 to	 address	 the	
problem	 of	 access	 to	 education;	 it	 is	 also	 critical	 to	 focus	 on	 issues	 of	 quality.	 Poor	
countries	systematically	underperform	in	learning	outcomes	in	comparison	to	wealthy	
countries.	 Compounding	 the	 problem,	 learning	 outcomes	 are	 consistently	 weaker	
among	 children	 from	 poor	 households	 in	 relation	 to	 children	 from	 wealthier	
households.	 In	 Indonesia,	for	 example,	PISA	scores	 are	not	only	weak	at	 the	aggregate	
level,	but	are	also	especially	low	among	children	in	the	bottom	quintile	(Figure	6).	The	
same	 observation	 can	 be	 made	 with	 regard	 to	 Latin	 America	 and	 Africa,	 where	 large	
gaps	exist	in	both	reading	and	numeracy	skills	between	children	of	high	and	low	socio‐
economic	status.	
	
Figure	6:		Learning	outcomes	by	quintile	in	Indonesia	




                                                                                                 

Source:	PISA	Database	

                                                  	
                                                 36	
	
Improvements	in	the	quality	of	education	require	a	strong	emphasis	on	accountability.	
That	 is,	 teachers	 and	 principals	 must	 be	 offered	 the	 right	 incentives	 for	 strengthening	
quality,	while	also	receiving	the	necessary	preparation	to	develop	their	skills	as	well	as	
other	inputs	to	perform	their	tasks	effectively.	It	is	similarly	critical	for	schools	to	adopt	
results‐measurement	 systems	 to	 assist	 with	 management	 decisions.	 	 Investing	 more	
resources	 in	 schools	 is	 part	 of	 the	 solution.	 However,	 the	 quality	 of	 spending	 also	
matters,	 and	 in	 this	 regard,	 parental	 voice	 can	 be	 a	 powerful	 ally.	 Recent	 evidence	
suggests	 that	 parental	 voice	 can	 enhance	 accountability,	 leading	 to	 better	 learning	
outcomes.	For	instance,	a	recent	experiment	in	Kenya	gave	Parent‐Teacher	Associations	
resources	 to	 hire	 locally‐contracted	 teachers	 in	 a	 subset	 of	 randomly	 selected	 schools.	
This	 intervention	 led	 to	 a	 clear	 improvement	 in	 learning	 outcomes	 as	 teachers	 faced	
stronger	incentives	to	show	up	and	teach	well,	and	the	parental	involvement	improved	
teacher	 accountability	 and	 school	 governance.	 Most	 countries	 that	 have	 succeeded	 in	
greatly	 improving	 both	 access	 to	 and	 quality	 of	 education	 have	 followed	 these	 simple	
principles.			
	
Health.	 The	delivery	of	basic	health	services	has	also	seen	great	improvements	during	
the	last	quarter	century.	 	Under‐five	mortality	 rates	have	dropped	by	53	 percent	 from	
91	 deaths	 per	 1,000	 live	 births	 in	 1990	 to	 43	 in	 2015.	 The	 pace	 of	 progress	 has	 also	
quickened:	while	the	annual	rate	of	reduction	in	child	mortality	stood	at	1.8	percent	in	
the	 1990s,	 it	 rose	 to	 3.9	 percent	 in	 the	 last	 15	 years.	 Several	 low‐	 and	 middle‐income	
countries	performed	remarkably	and	reduced	under‐five	mortality	rates	by	two‐thirds	
or	 more.	 This	 includes	 countries	 such	 as	 Ethiopia,	 Uganda,	 Tanzania,	 Bangladesh,	 and	
Indonesia.	Despite	this	progress,	5.9	million	children	still	die	prematurely.	Over	half	of	
these	deaths	are	either	preventable	or	treatable	through	simple	interventions.		
	
Children	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa	are	at	highest	risk:	they	are	14	times	more	likely	to	die	
prematurely	than	children	in	other	developed	countries.	Within	countries,	there	are	big	
disparities	between	children	in	rich	and	poor	families.	Under‐five	mortality	rates	in	the	
bottom	 40	 percent	 tend	 to	 be	 twice	 as	 high	 as	 the	 rates	 among	 the	 top	 60	 percent.	 In	
some	 countries,	 such	 as	 Mali,	 the	 difference	 is	 even	 more	 pronounced:	 mortality	 rates	
for	the	bottom	40	percent	are	close	to	120	per	1,000	live	births,	three	times	the	rate	of	
40	for	the	top	60	percent.		
	
Addressing	 the	 gaps	 in	 health	 outcomes	 requires,	 in	 part,	 greater	 and	 smarter	
investments	in	public	health	services.	It	is	particularly	important	to	expand	the	coverage	
of	health	services	such	that	they	reach	poor	and	underserved	areas.	The	private	sector	
and	 community‐based	 providers	 can	 be	 important	 partners	 in	 increasing	 coverage.	
Decentralization,	as	in	the	case	of	Mexico,	can	be	an	effective	strategy	to	reach	remote	
areas	 when	 coupled	 with	 good	 governance.	 As	 with	 education,	 investments	 on	 health	
that	 focus	 on	 early	 childhood	 should	 be	 a	 priority	 for	 policy	 makers.	 This	 is	 because	
health	deficiencies	at	an	early	age	carry	negative	repercussions	for	an	individual	in	the	
long‐run.	In	developing	countries,	as	many	as	200	million	children	under	five	years	old	
are	 exposed	 to	 nutritional	 and	 infectious	 disease	 risk	 factors	 that	 compromise	 their	
development	potential.	This	ultimately	hinders	their	ability	to	participate	in	productive	
employment	opportunities.		
	
By	itself,	greater	spending	is	unlikely	to	solve	the	problem.	Health	systems	in	developing	
countries	are	frequently	subject	to	severe	institutional	constraints	that	limit	the	delivery	
of	 quality	 service.	 Absenteeism	 of	 health	 professionals	 is	 a	 phenomenon	 that	 is,	
unfortunately,	 too	 common	 in	 developing	 countries,	 ranging	 from	 20	 percent	 in	
Mozambique	 to	 an	 overwhelming	 74	 percent	 in	 rural	 Bangladesh	 in	 the	 early	 2000s.	
Evidence	from	India	also	suggests	that,	when	doctors	show	up,	they	exert	a	low	level	of	
effort.	 In	 order	 to	 counter	 these	 problems,	 it	 is	 essential	 for	 public	 health	 systems	 to	

                                                  	
                                                 37	
	
align	 incentives	 with	 performance.	 Experimental	 research	 from	 Brazil	 suggests	 that	
granting	 greater	 autonomy	 to	 public	 hospitals	 –	 in	 the	 form	 of	 managerial	 authority	
regarding	 hiring,	 firing,	 and	 wage‐setting	 decisions	 –	 has	 led	 to	 improvements	 on	 the	
quality	 and	 efficiency	 of	 health	 service	 provision.	 	 Another	 way	 to	 improve	 providers’	
responsiveness	 to	 users	 is	 through	 user	 supervision.	 In	 Uganda,	 for	 example,	
community‐based	monitoring	improved	both	the	quality	and	quantity	of	primary	health	
care	services.				
	
Finally,	 complementary	 investments	 in	 a	 range	 of	 public	 services	 are	 needed.	 In	
Malaysia,	 investments	 in	 public	 hospitals	 and	 training	 of	 maternal	 health	 providers	
were	 coupled	 with	 additional	 investments	 in	 rural	 infrastructure	 and	 women’s	
education,	 leading	 to	 dramatic	 reductions	 in	 maternal	 mortality.	 	 Family	 planning	
programs	 are	 also	 important	 determinants	 of	 maternal	 health,	 as	 both	 pregnancy	 and	
delivery	 tend	 to	 carry	 health	 risks	 in	 developing	 countries.	 In	 particular,	 non‐coercive	
interventions	that	seek	to	increase	household	knowledge	of	and	access	to	contraceptive	
options—such	as	the	family	planning	program	implemented	in	Bangladesh—are	known	
to	 be	 effective	 in	 boosting	 contraceptive	 use	 and	 reducing	 fertility	 rates,	 thus	
contributing	to	improved	maternal	health.	The	availability	of	safe	water	and	sanitation	
(discussed	below)	is	 another	complementary	public	good	that	has	a	strong	 bearing	on	
the	achievement	of	better	health	outcomes.	
	
Water	 and	 sanitation.	 Investments	 in	 improved	 water	 sources	 and	 sanitation	 are	
valuable	 complements	 to	 a	 government’s	 policies	 in	 health	 and	 education.	 Safe	 water	
and	 sanitation	 provide:	 health	 benefits	 by	 reducing	 the	 incidence	 of	 water‐borne	
diseases;	 education	 benefits	 by	 raising	 school	 attendance	 and	 completion	 rates	
(especially	among	girls);	and	economic	benefits	in	the	form	of	productivity	gains	in	the	
workplace	and	reduced	health	care	costs.	Globally,	the	use	of	improved	drinking	water	
sources	rose	from	76	percent	in	1990	to	91	percent	in	2015,	representing	a	gain	for	over	
2.5	 billion	 individuals.	 Still,	 663	 million	 individuals	 lack	 access	 to	 improved	 water	
sources,	 with	 half	 of	 them	 located	 in	 Sub‐Saharan	 Africa	 and	 one‐fifth	 based	 in	 South	
Asia.	Across	regions,	Sub‐Saharan	Africa	continues	to	lag	behind	others	as	32	percent	of	
its	 population	 relies	 on	 unimproved	 water	 sources.	 Within	 regions,	 access	 is	 highly	
differentiated	 between	 urban	 and	 rural	 households,	 and	 is	 strongly	 correlated	 with	
wealth:	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa,	90	percent	of	the	richest	quintile	has	access	to	safe	water,	
but	only	35	percent	of	the	poorest	quintile	does.			
	
The	 progress	 in	 sanitation	 has	 been	 slower.	 Between	 1990	 and	 2015,	 the	 global	
coverage	of	improved	sanitation	facilities	rose	from	54	to	68	percent.	However,	as	many	
as	 2.4	 billion	 people	 continue	 to	 lack	 access	 today:	 these	 individuals	 are	 concentrated	
primarily	 in	 South	 Asia	 (accounting	 for	 40	 percent	 of	 this	 subset)	 and	 Sub‐Saharan	
Africa	 (accounting	 for	 29	 percent).	 In	 Africa	 less	 than	 a	 third	 of	 the	 population	 has	
access	 to	 improved	 sanitation	 facilities.	 As	 with	 safe	 water,	 access	 to	 sanitation	
continues	to	be	unequal	within	countries:	in	India,	the	rich	are	ten	times	more	likely	to	
have	 proper	 sanitation	 than	 the	 poor.	 In	 many	 Sub‐Saharan	 African	 countries,	 the	
poorest	 fifth	 has	 near‐zero	 coverage	 rates,	 with	 only	 a	 handful	 of	 countries	 (such	 as	
Cameroon,	Rwanda,	and	Senegal)	having	raised	coverage	rates	above	20	percent	for	the	
poorest	quintile	group.				
	
These	 investments	 are	 vital	 in	 the	 poorest	 countries	 where	 the	 burden	 of	 infectious	
disease	remains	high.	Providing	clean	water,	sanitation,	waste	disposal	and	drainage	can	
go	 a	 long	 way	 to	 improve	 health	 outcomes	 and	 reduce	 early	 childhood	 mortality.	
Increasing	piped	water	in	urban	Argentina,	for	example,	reduced	the	burden	of	diseases	
associated	 with	 unsafe	 water	 and	 reduced	 child	 mortality	 by	 8	 percent.	 In	 the	 United	
States,	 improved	 access	 to	 clean	 water	 in	 the	 early	 20th	 century	 led	 to	 a	 reduction	 in	

                                                  	
                                                 38	
	
infant	 mortality	 by	 three‐quarters	 and	 under‐five	 child	 mortality	 by	 two‐thirds.		
Investments	 in	 clean	 water	 and	 sanitation	 also	 help	 support	 cognitive	 development	 of	
children	 by	 providing	 a	 disease‐free	 environment,	 reducing	 instances	 of	
malnourishment	 and	 increasing	 learning.	 Unlocking	 these	 benefits	 requires	 devoting	
greater	 resources	 to	 water	 and	 sanitation,	 specifically	 in	 rural	 areas,	 which	 tend	 to	
receive	less	than	10	percent	of	total	financing.	More	emphasis	should	also	be	placed	in	
improving	water	and	sanitation	in	schools	and	health	centers,	where	the	risk	of	disease	
outbreaks	is	greatest.	Finally,	governments	must	adopt	monitoring	systems,	set	targets,	
and	develop	their	human	resources	to	deliver	services	efficiently.	
	
Good	 governance.	 	The	prerequisite	for	making	effective	public	investments	in	health,	
education,	 and	 water	 and	 sanitation	 is	 good	 governance.	 In	 the	 absence	 of	 adequate	
governance,	the	efficiency	of	government	spending	is	decreased	as	public	resources	may	
be	diverted	from	their	developmental	objectives	toward	dubious	alternative	uses.	Good	
governance	 enables	 a	 government	 to	 set	 goals	 and	 monitoring	 systems	 to	 track	 the	
performance	of	investments,	and	enables	policymakers	to	allocate	resources	where	they	
are	 most	 needed.	 Governance	 also	 needs	 to	 be	 fostered	 at	 the	 level	 of	 social	 service	
providers.	 As	 discussed	 above,	 the	 quality	 of	 service	 delivery	 is	 enhanced	 when	
providers	face	the	right	incentives	to	do	their	work	 well,	adopt	monitoring	systems	to	
track	 their	 own	 performance,	 collect	 input	 from	 the	 people	 they	 serve,	 and	 undertake	
actions	with	the	goal	of	achieving	improvements	in	human	development	outcomes.		
	
The	 key	 to	 better	 governance	 is	 accountability.	 Mechanisms	 that	 strengthen:	 the	
accountability	 of	 the	 government	 to	 citizens	 (such	 as	 elections);	 the	 accountability	 of	
providers	 to	 government	 (for	 example,	 performance‐based	 contracts);	 and	 the	
accountability	 of	 providers	 to	 citizens	 (such	 as	 community	 participation	 in	 service	
provision)	 can	 all	 lead	 to	 better	 governance	 and	 more	 effective	 investments	 in	 human	
development.	 	 The	 upcoming	 2017	 World	 Development	 Report	 on	 Governance	 and	 the	
Law	assesses	the	approaches	to	institute	“good	enough	governance.”		
	
Insure—Policies	to	reduce	vulnerability	to	risk	
	
The	first	two	components	of	the	3‐point	strategy	focus	on	generating	opportunities	for	
the	poor	to	utilize	their	most	abundant	asset	–	labor	–	and	improving	the	returns	to	this	
asset	through	investments	in	human	capital.	But	this	is	often	not	enough	to	end	extreme	
poverty.	 Too	 many	 of	 the	 world’s	 poor	 are	 stuck	 in	 circumstances	 where	 they	 cannot	
take	 advantage	 of	 the	 opportunities	 brought	 by	 labor‐intensive	 growth.	 This	 includes	
individuals	 who	 are	 old,	 sick	 or	 disabled;	 those	 who	 are	 stuck	 in	 remote	 and	 poor	
regions;	and	also	individuals	who	face	discrimination	due	to	gender	or	ethnicity.	Even	in	
countries	that	have	managed	to	greatly	reduce	poverty	through	growth,	like	China	and	
Thailand,	 deep	 pockets	 of	 poverty	 remain	 among	 minority	 populations	 and	 in	 remote	
areas.	 In	 Latin	 America,	 one	 out	 of	 five	 people	 are	 classified	 as	 “chronically	 poor”,	 a	
condition	that	often	spirals	into	intergenerational	cycles	of	poverty.	Moreover,	countries	
that	 have	 made	 significant	 strides	 in	 poverty	 reduction	 can	 experience	 setbacks.	
Households	may	face	adverse	shocks	–	such	as	illness,	poor	weather,	or	natural	disasters	
–	pushing	them	back	into	poverty.		

As	a	result,	the	objective	for	this	third	component	is	to	assist	the	destitute	and	protect	
the	 vulnerable,	 through	 an	 emphasis	 on	 three	 priorities:	 social	 assistance,	 social	
insurance,	 and	 protection	 against	 pandemics	 and	 large‐scale	 natural	 disasters.	 The	
extent	of	adoption	of	these	priorities	should	match	a	country’s	specific	situation.	Social	
assistance	will	be	most	valuable	for	countries	that	continue	to	experience	deep	forms	of	
chronic	poverty;	social	insurance	is	most	helpful	for	successful	developers	as	a	means	of	
preserving	 their	 gains;	 and	 finally,	 protection	 against	 pandemics	 and	 natural	 disasters	

                                                  	
                                                 39	
	
needs	to	be	employed	in	regions	that	are	most	vulnerable	to	these	shocks.	

Social	 assistance.	 Direct	 transfers	 to	 the	 poor	 in	 the	 form	 of	 non‐contributory	 social	
assistance	 can	 help	 all	 countries	 end	 cycles	 of	 chronic	 and	 intergenerational	 poverty.	
This	is	achieved	by:	first,	ensuring	that	those	who	are	trapped	in	poverty	and	unable	to	
access	 opportunities	 in	 the	 labor	 market	 have	 the	 means	 to	 meet	 their	 basic	 needs;	
second,	 by	 encouraging	 households	 to	 undertake	 investments	 in	 the	 human	 capital	 of	
their	 children	 such	 that	 they	 are	 able	 to	 exit	 poverty	 in	 the	 future	 through	 productive	
employment;	and	third,	by	helping	the	poor	withstand	the	setbacks	of	shocks.	
	
Conditional	 cash	 transfers	 have	 a	 proven	 record	 in	 helping	 to	 reduce	 poverty	 both	
through	 their	 direct	 impacts	 on	 household	 income,	 and	 indirectly	 by	 building	 human	
capital	assets.	These	programs	are	particularly	attractive	as	they	address	both	present	
and	future	poverty,	in	a	manner	that	supports	the	first	two	components	of	the	3‐point	
strategy.	Rigorous	evaluations	of	early	CCT	programs,	such	as	Mexico’s	 Progresa,	show	
increases	on	secondary	school	enrollment	(a	24	percent	average	increase),	especially	for	
girls.	Participation	in	 Progresa	was	also	associated	with	an	increased	use	of	preventive	
health	services,	a	reduction	of	22	percentage	points	in	the	prevalence	of	stunting	among	
children	under	two	years	of	age,	and	a	reduction	of	almost	12	percentage	points	in	the	
prevalence	 of	 anemia	 in	 young	 children.	 Comparable	 results	 have	 been	 found	 for	
programs	in	Brazil,	Colombia,	Honduras,	Jamaica	and	Nicaragua.	Overall	CCTs	have	been	
well	targeted,	with	the	largest	share	of	benefits	generally	going	to	the	poor.	Compared	to	
other	 transfer	 programs,	 CCTs	 are	 better	 at	 concentrating	 benefits	 among	 the	 poorest	
segments	 of	 the	 population,	 with	 the	 added	 benefit	 of	 supporting	 human	 capital	
investments.		
	
The	 success	 of	 first‐generation	 CCTs	 in	 numerous	 countries	 (especially	 in	 Latin	
America)	 has	 led	 to	 a	 set	 of	 second‐generation	 challenges.	 These	 range	 from	 how	 to	
operate	 CCTs	 successfully	 in	 more	 complex	 urban	 settings	 to	 how	 to	 link	 CCT	
beneficiaries	 to	 programs	 that	 support	 their	 productive	 integration	 into	 the	 labor	
market,	and	how	to	combine	CCTs	with	psychological	support	for	the	chronically	poor	to	
help	 them	 exit	 poverty.	 Programs	 like	 Chile	 Solidario,	 a	 CCT	 that	 links	 households	 to	
social	worker	services,	are	experimenting	with	these	diverse	angles,	with	some	risk	that	
the	increase	in	complexity	and	size	of	the	programs	may	bring	about	a	dilution	of	focus	
and	effectiveness.	Nevertheless,	CCTs	remain	a	preferred	instrument	within	the	3‐point	
strategy	 because	 they	 complement	 and	 reinforce	 the	 impacts	 of	 the	 first	 two	
components.		
	
Implementing	and	 managing	 a	CCT	requires	an	adequate	level	of	institutional	capacity	
as	 well	 as	 good	 service	 delivery	 mechanisms.	 	 After	 all,	 there	 is	 no	 real	 benefit	 in	
encouraging	 attendance	 at	 schools	 and	 visits	 to	 primary	 health	 clinics	 if	 these	 do	 not	
exist	or	are	not	properly	staffed.	In	poorer	countries	with	weaker	institutional	capacity,	
direct	 cash	 or	 near‐cash	 transfers,	 such	 as	 vouchers,	 may	 be	 easier	 to	 implement	 and	
may	 still	 deliver	 substantial	 benefits.	 These	 transfers	 can	 be	 targeted	 using	 self‐
targeting	 methods,	 such	 as	 through	 public	 works.	 This	 is	 the	 case,	 for	 example,	 of	 the	
Ethiopia	Productive	Safety	Net,	which	has	been	shown	to	have	a	direct	poverty	reducing	
impact.		
	
Alternatively,	cash	or	near‐cash	transfers	can	be	targeted	using	proxy	means	tests	(the	
same	 method	 that	 is	 typically	 used	 for	 CCTs)	 or	 other	 needs‐based	 mechanisms	 to	
identify	 the	 poor.	 Or	 they	 can	 be	 targeted	 to	 specific	 vulnerable	 groups,	 such	 as	 the	
elderly.	Non‐contributory	old	age	pensions	are	important	poverty	alleviation	programs	
in	both	poor	and	middle‐income	countries	(as	well	as	in	richer	countries).	Unlike	CCTs,	
these	programs	do	not	have	the	positive	spillover	of	building	human	capital	assets.		But	

                                                  	
                                                 40	
	
they	can	be	effective	in	direct	poverty	alleviation	if	targeted	properly	and	designed	in	a	
way	that	does	not	affect	the	incentives	or	ability	of	the	poor	to	work.	
	
Other	 common	 social	 assistance	 programs	 include	 food	 stamps,	 vouchers	 or	 coupons.		
These	do	not	grant	the	beneficiaries	the	same	freedom	of	choice	in	how	to	use	a	benefit.		
But	 they	 are	 known	 to	 increase	 food	 consumption	 and	 can	 also	 have	 a	 self‐targeting	
aspect	 if	 limited	 to	 certain	 baskets	 of	 food.	 Unconditional	 cash	 transfers	 (UCTs)	 or	
transfers	 involving	 ‘soft	 conditions’	 and	 ‘social	 marketing’	 can	 be	 another	 useful	
alternative,	particularly	in	countries	with	lower	administrative	capacity.	What	does	not	
work	well	as	a	form	of	social	assistance	are	food	transfers	or	food	price	subsidies,	which	
can	be	easily	captured	and	often	exclude	the	poor.	Even	worse	are	universal	subsidies	
(on	 food,	 electricity	 or	 kerosene),	 as	 they	 are	 highly	 inefficient,	 costly,	 and	 regressive,	
benefitting	the	non‐poor	at	least	as	much	as	the	poor.	
	
Social	 insurance.	 Countries	 that	 are	 successful	 in	 greatly	 reducing	 the	 number	 of	
people	 living	 in	 extreme	 poverty	 soon	 have	 to	 face	 another	 challenge:	 preserving	 the	
gains	in	poverty	reduction	by	protecting	vulnerable	households	from	shocks	that	could	
push	 them	 back	 into	 poverty.	 Some	 of	 these	 shocks	 may	 be	 individual	 in	 nature.	 The	
illness	 of	 a	 family	 member,	 especially	 a	 working	 member,	 is	 a	 common	 cause	 of	
impoverishment	 due	 to	 loss	 of	 income.	 Other	 shocks	 are	 more	 systemic	 in	 nature.	
Macroeconomic	 crises	 (such	 as	 the	 financial	 crisis	 in	 2008‐2009)	 lead	 to	 widespread	
unemployment,	 pushing	 many	 working	 households	 into	 poverty.	 Droughts	 and	
inclement	 weather	 conditions	 create	 risks	 to	 income	 generation,	 especially	 when	
household	earnings	are	tied	to	agricultural	activities.		
	
During	the	financial	crisis	of	2008,	many	individuals	who	were	affected	were	not	among	
the	 ranks	 of	 the	 extreme	 poor,	 but	 rather	 among	 those	 employed	 in	 sectors	 that	
experienced	 large	 contractions.	 This	 means	 typically	 urban	 residents,	 employed	 in	
services	or	manufacturing,	who	either	saw	their	jobs	disappear	or	their	work	hours	fall	
sharply.	In	Mexico,	they	were	part	of	the	bottom	40	percent	of	the	population,	but	not	
among	those	targeted	 by	 traditional	 social	assistance	programs.		 This	 was	also	true	in	
countries	 like	 Indonesia	 and	 Thailand.	 The	 realization	 that	 many	 families	 hit	 by	 the	
financial	 crisis	 could	 not	 be	 reached	 through	 traditional	 poverty	 safety	 nets	 mobilized	
many	 middle‐income	 governments	 to	 start	 thinking	 about	 broader	 social	 insurance	
targeted	 not	 at	 the	 poor,	 but	 at	 broader	 segments	 of	 the	 population	 vulnerable	 to	
poverty.		
	
Putting	in	place	programs	to	reach	these	populations	requires	a	different	approach	than	
what	 is	 used	 to	 target	 the	 extreme	 or	 chronic	 poor.	 The	 vulnerable	 and	 non‐poor	
population	 is	 much	 more	 diverse	 than	 the	 chronic	 poor,	 more	 likely	 to	 be	 urban	 and	
mobile,	and	their	vulnerability	to	different	types	of	risks	also	varies	depending	on	their	
particular	 situation.	 Hence,	 the	 usual	 approach	 is	 to	 design	 programs	 that	 target	 the	
type	of	risk,	not	the	type	of	beneficiary.		Designing	effective	social	insurance	programs,	
however,	 is	 complex.	 	 Benefits	 need	 to	 be	 designed	 in	 a	 way	 that	 does	 not	 introduce	
moral	hazard	(which	encourages	potential	beneficiaries	to	engage	in	more	risk	behavior	
than	 they	 would	 otherwise);	 they	 need	 to	 minimize	 disincentives	 (to	 work	 effort,	 for	
example);	and	they	need	to	be	funded	in	an	adequate	and	sustainable	manner.	They	also	
involve	supporting	the	development	of	domestic	private	insurance	markets,	as	it	is	often	
not	feasible	for	the	state	to	meet	all	of	the	insurance	needs	of	its	citizens.	Addressing	the	
missing	 market	 of	 insurance	 also	 results	 in	 efficiency	 gains	 for	 the	 economy,	 which	
materialize	every	year	regardless	of	whether	a	shock	takes	place.				
	
Health	risks	are	of	prime	importance	among	the	risks	that	often	lead	to	impoverishment.	
Countries	 provide	 health	 coverage	 in	 many	 ways:	 some	 rely	 on	 insurance‐based	

                                                  	
                                                 41	
	
schemes,	typically	tied	to	a	labor	contract.	This	has	the	disadvantage	of	typically	making	
labor	more	expensive	(which	weakens	the	first	component	of	the	3‐point	strategy),	and	
failing	to	cover	those	who	are	out	of	work.	To	make	up	for	these	issues,	some	countries,	
like	 Mexico,	 operate	 parallel	 systems:	 a	 contributory	 system	 of	 health	 insurance	 for	
formal	workers,	and	a	non‐contributory	scheme	for	those	not	covered	by	insurance.		Yet,	
this	introduces	its	own	set	of	disincentives.	Many	have	argued	that	the	provision	of	non‐
contributory	 benefits,	 which	 rival	 the	 quality	 of	 contributory	 ones,	 discourages	
formalization	 in	 the	 Mexican	 labor	 market.	 	 As	 an	 alternative,	 other	 countries	 have	
chosen	to	finance	near	universal	health	coverage	out	of	general	revenues.	
	
Global	experience	suggests	that	expanding	health	insurance	coverage	for	the	poor	and	
near‐poor	 does	 increase	 utilization	 rates.	 It	 also	 reduces	 out	 of	 pocket	 payments,	
although	 it	 does	 not	 eliminate	 them	 entirely.	 How	 have	 countries	 managed	 to	
successfully	cover	their	populations,	especially	those	groups	who	are	not	under	formal	
employment?	 One	 approach	 has	 been	 to	 finance	 coverage	 through	 general	 revenues.	
This	 is	 the	 approach	 that	 Thailand	 took	 when	 it	 implemented	 its	 30	 baht	 scheme,	 for	
example.	A	second	approach	has	been	to	use	donor	funding	to	finance	coverage.	This	is	
the	 case	 of	 Cambodia,	 which	 introduced	 health	 equity	 funds	 with	 donor	 assistance	 to	
provide	 free	 services	 at	 select	 government	 health	 providers	 and	 offer	 access	 to	 free	
maternal	care	through	targeted	vouchers.	Both	approaches	are	compatible	with	the	first	
two	 components	 of	 the	 3‐point	 strategy	 by	 supporting	 household	 health	 without	
dissuading	individuals	from	working.				
	
Unemployment	and	macroeconomic	crises	are	another	type	of	risk	that	can	push	a	family	
into	poverty.		Countries	that	have	CCTs	or	other	forms	of	targeted	cash	transfer	in	place	
can	use	them	to	protect	the	poor	from	spells	of	unemployment;	but	such	programs	will	
be	less	effective	when	the	family	affected	was	not	identified	as	poor	prior	to	the	shock.	
Workfare	 or	 labor‐intensive	 public	 work	 schemes	 can	 provide	 an	 alternative.	 These	
programs	 are	 often	 a	 good	 choice	 in	 a	 post‐crisis	 situation	 when	 unemployment	 is	
widespread,	as	in	Korea	following	the	1997	economic	crisis	and	in	Argentina	following	
the	 peso	 crisis	 in	 1999.	 	 They	 are	 also	 useful	 when	 infrastructure	 reconstruction	 and	
employment	generation	are	both	priorities	as	in	Sri	Lanka	following	the	2004	tsunami.	
Middle‐income	 countries	 with	 good	 institutional	 capacity	 and	 sufficiently	 deep	 private	
capital	 and	 insurance	 markets	 can	 also	 look	 to	 private‐public	 solutions	 for	 providing	
unemployment	insurance.	Chile’s	experience	with	individual	Unemployment	Insurance	
Savings	Accounts	(UISA)	is	one	example.		These	accounts	are	managed	by	private	funds	
but	 regulated	 by	 the	 public	 sector	 with	 a	 subsidy	 for	 poor	 workers	 (from	 a	 Solidarity	
Fund	based	on	risk‐pooling).	This	approach	has	allowed	for	greater	economic	mobility	
and	 better	 protection	 than	 the	 severance	 pay	 scheme	 that	 was	 used	 prior	 to	 reform.	
Countries	with	lower	institutional	capacity	can	opt	for	a	simpler,	yet	effective	workfare	
program,	such	as	India’s	National	Rural	Employment	Guarantee	scheme.		
	
Variation	 in	 income	 tied	 to	 weather	 patterns	 is	 a	 major	 source	 of	 risk	 for	 rural	
households.	 Increasing	 variability	 in	 weather	 not	 only	 poses	 a	 poverty	 risk	 to	 farmers	
but	also	often	 reduces	livelihood	options	as	risk‐averse	farmers	may	be	less	 willing	to	
invest	 in	 improved	 seeds	 or	 other	 agricultural	 inputs	 when	 faced	 with	 substantial	
weather	 uncertainty.	 Weather	 index‐based	 insurance	 is	 one	 option	 that	 can	 help	
farmers	manage	this	type	of	risk.		Through	this	instrument,	an	insured	farmer	receives	a	
payment	 whenever	 rainfall	 falls	 below	 a	 pre‐determined	 threshold.	 This	 insurance	
scheme	 overcomes	 challenges	 of	 moral	 hazard	 given	 that	 weather	 is	 unrelated	 to	 an	
individual’s	 behavior.	 In	 addition,	 the	 scheme	 is	 easier	 to	 administer	 and	 offers	 faster	
payments	than	traditional	forms	of	crop	insurance.	Nevertheless,	this	form	of	insurance	
faces	some	limitations,	as	the	index	may	not	always	adequately	reflect	the	experience	of	
farmers.	As	a	result,	basis	risk	remains	a	challenge.		

                                                 	
                                                42	
	
Area	 yield	 indexes	 offer	 an	 alternative	 to	 overcome	 some	 of	 these	 issues.	 Area	 yield	
indexes	use	average	yields	in	a	given	area	as	the	index	that	determines	payments	to	the	
farmer.	 The	 index	 provides	 a	 better	 reflection	 of	 farmers’	 actual	 experience,	 as	 it	
accounts	for	the	entire	impact	of	weather	on	yields	(not	just	related	to	rainfall)	and	non‐
weather	 risks,	 such	 as	 crop	 disease.	 This	 form	 of	 insurance	 has	 been	 adopted	
extensively	 in	 many	 states	 of	 India,	 receiving	 much	 support	 from	 the	 public	 sector,	
which	provides	subsidies	on	the	premiums.	Adopting	an	effective	index‐based	insurance	
scheme	 requires	a	 degree	of	sophistication	on	part	of	the	insurer	to	operate	at	a	large	
scale	 and	 diversify	 its	 risk	 exposure.	 It	 also	 needs	 accurate	 historical	 data	 on	 rainfall	
patters	and	yields	to	price	the	service	appropriately	and	determine	payouts.	In	addition,	
it	 is	 important	 to	 note	 that	 these	 instruments	 do	 not	 eliminate	 basis	 risk.	 For	 these	
reasons,	 weather	 insurance	 –	 while	 promising	 –	 should	 be	 complemented	 with	
additional	 strategies.	 Other	 financial	 services,	 such	 as	 microcredit	 and	 savings,	 are	
viable	 alternatives:	 they	 have	 been	 used	 to	 great	 effect	 in	 Bangladesh	 to	 protect	
households	 against	 weather	 shocks.	 Social	 assistance	 programs	 can	 also	 address	
agricultural	risk.	An	example	is	Kenya’s	Hunger	Safety	Net,	which	offers	cash	transfers	
to	vulnerable	households	and	scales	up	in	event	of	a	drought.	
	
Global	 insurance.	 Some	 shocks	 transcend	 national	 borders	 and	 threaten	 populations	
from	several	countries	at	once.	The	severity	of	the	recent	Ebola	crisis,	which	extended	
across	Guinea,	Liberia,	and	Sierra	Leone	and	caused	economic	losses	of	$2.8	billion,	is	a	
reminder	 that	 pandemics	 pose	 a	 serious	 threat	 to	 the	 prosperity	 of	 developing	
countries,	especially	to	the	poorest.	Large‐scale	natural	disasters	that	afflict	more	than	
one	 country	 are	 another	 form	 of	 a	 global	 shock.	 	 The	 Indian	 Ocean	 Tsunami	 of	 2004	
affected	 14	 countries	 with	 close	 proximity	 to	 the	 Indian	 Ocean,	 causing	 major	 loss	 of	
life—close	 to	 230,000	 deaths—and	 substantial	 economic	 damages	 amounting	 to	 $10	
billion.	The	magnitude	and	frequency	of	extreme	weather	is	likely	to	be	exacerbated	by	
climate	 change.	 A	 common	 feature	 of	 global	 shocks	 is	 the	 substantial	 strain	 that	 these	
events	place	on	a	country’s	capacity	 to	 respond.	 The	burden	 of	a	global	shock	extends	
beyond	 the	 ability	 of	 a	 single	 country	 to	 cope.	 As	 a	 result,	 national	 and	 international	
action	is	required	to	adopt	prevention	mechanisms	and	ensure	a	timely	response	to	the	
shock.			
	
Pandemics,	such	as	the	Ebola	crisis,	wreak	substantial	social	and	economic	havoc	in	all	
affected	countries.	A	combination	of	weak	public	health	systems,	which	fail	to	detect	an	
emerging	 threat,	 and	 greater	 integration	 among	 countries	 through	 mobility	 and	 trade,	
sets	the	stage	for	the	fast	spread	of	disease.	The	poorest	countries	and	communities	are	
at	highest	risk	from	pandemics.	Poor	countries	not	only	exhibit	the	greatest	deficiencies	
in	public	health	systems,	but	are	also	predominantly	rural	and	reliant	on	agriculture.	As	
most	pathogens	that	can	lead	to	a	pandemic	are	animal‐borne,	this	means	that	the	poor	
are	 in	 a	 particularly	 vulnerable	 position.	 The	 economic	 toll	 on	 a	 country	 that	
experiences	 a	 pandemic	 is	 staggering:	 by	 some	 estimates,	 a	 severe	 flu	 outbreak	 could	
cost	$3	trillion,	representing	a	contraction	of	4.8	percent	in	global	GDP.	Ending	extreme	
poverty	 will	 require	 vulnerable	 countries—together	 with	 the	 support	 of	 the	
international	community—to	adopt	protective	measures	against	these	serious	threats.				
	
Protecting	a	vulnerable	country	against	pandemics	requires	a	focus	on	both	prevention	
and	 preparedness.	 This	 means	 undertaking	 greater	 investments	 to	 strengthen	 public	
health	systems,	as	well	as	veterinary	systems.	It	is	estimated	that	an	annual	investment	
of	$3.4	billion	is	required	to	raise	the	quality	of	developing	countries’	health	systems	up	
to	 a	 minimum	 standard.	 The	 economic	 return	 to	 these	 investments,	 however,	 is	
significant	 and	 ranges	 from	 50	 to	 123	 percent.	 In	 addition,	 the	 strengthening	 of	 early	
warning	systems	is	critical	to	detect	a	disease	on	time.	Public	health	authorities	as	well	
as	 providers	 of	 crucial	 services,	 such	 as	 electricity	 and	 transport,	 must	 develop	

                                                  	
                                                 43	
	
contingency	 plans	 that	 can	 be	 implemented	 during	 a	 pandemic.	 Once	 a	 pandemic	 is	
underway,	 financial	 resources	 must	 be	 readily	 available	 to	 help	 contain	 the	 outbreak.	
The	 international	 community	 has	 an	 important	 role	 to	 play	 in	 supporting	 vulnerable	
countries	before	and	during	a	pandemic.	To	this	end,	the	World	Bank	has	established	a	
Pandemic	 Emergency	 Facility,	 which	 functions	 as	 a	 global	 insurance	 mechanism	 for	
pandemics,	 providing	 expedited	 disbursements	 to	 countries	 during	 a	 crisis	 along	 with	
investments	to	avoid	a	crisis	in	the	first	place.		
	
Natural	disasters	and	extreme	weather	events	also	threaten	the	economic	prosperity	of	
countries	and	their	ability	to	end	extreme	poverty.	As	with	pandemics,	natural	disasters	
pose	the	greatest	threat	to	developing	countries,	especially	those	that	are	least	prepared	
for	 the	 shock.	 In	 fact,	 three	 out	 of	 four	 deaths	 associated	 with	 natural	 disasters	 take	
place	 in	 developing	 countries	 and	 small	 island	 states.	 The	 economic	 consequences	 of	
natural	disasters	are	severe	and	range	from	$10	billion	to	$15	billion	in	low‐income	and	
middle‐income	 countries.	 Climate	 change	 adds	 an	 extra	 layer	 of	 complexity	 to	 the	
challenge	 of	 managing	 and	 responding	 to	 natural	 disasters.	 Rising	 temperatures	 are	
expected	 to	 increase	 both	 the	 severity	 and	 the	 frequency	 of	 extreme	 weather	 events,	
elevate	 the	risk	 of	floods	near	 the	coasts,	 and	 exacerbate	 the	 threat	 of	droughts	 in	the	
tropics.	Developing	countries	will	once	again	bear	the	brunt	of	the	costs	associated	with	
climate	change.	In	Sub‐Saharan	Africa,	even	a	2‐degree	temperature	rise	is	foreseen	to	
generate	a	permanent	reduction	of	almost	5	percent	in	annual	GDP	per	capita.				
	
These	risks	are,	unfortunately,	not	entirely	avoidable.	As	such,	countries	that	are	most	
exposed	 to	 the	 risks	 of	 extreme	 weather	 events	 must	 take	 action	 to	 enhance	 their	
preparedness	 and	 ability	 to	 respond	 during	 a	 time	 of	 crisis.	 This	 includes	 developing	
early	warning	and	climate	monitoring	systems	to	identify	threats	early.	Public	officials	
must	also	have	response	plans	in	place	to	implement	if	a	crisis	occurs.	Countries	that	are	
most	vulnerable	will	also	need	to	consider	climate	risks	in	their	urban	planning.	Cities,	
such	as	Tunis,	are	preparing	against	the	risk	of	floods	by	improving	drainage,	building	
seawalls,	 and	 relocating	 new	 infrastructure	 developments	 away	 from	 high‐risk	 areas.	
Countries	that	are	reliant	on	agriculture	and	are	at	high	risk	of	droughts,	such	as	in	Sub‐
Saharan	 Africa,	 will	 need	 to	 adapt	 by	 investing	 in	 drought‐resistant	 crops,	 irrigation	
systems,	and	effective	markets	that	facilitate	the	adoption	of	new	technologies.	Moving	
away	 from	 a	 rainfall‐dependent	 agricultural	 economy	 will	 help	 these	 countries	 reduce	
their	 exposure	 to	 risk.	 Finally,	 governments	 must	 have	 access	 to	 funds	 that	 can	 be	
immediately	 deployed	 for	 reconstruction	 and	 as	 safety	 nets	 if	 a	 disaster	 strikes.	 Here,	
international	 cooperation	 is	 imperative.	 To	 assist	 in	 this	 effort,	 the	 World	 Bank	 has	
worked	 with	 donors	 and	 the	 private	 sector	 to	 develop	 a	 Disaster	 Risk	 Financing	 and	
Insurance	(DRFI)	facility	to	quickly	fund	emergency	responses.	
	
Information	 systems.	 A	 prerequisite	 to	 helping	 the	 destitute	 and	 vulnerable	 through	
insurance	is	the	availability	of	information	systems.	These	systems	take	different	forms	
and	 play	 different	 roles	 depending	 on	 a	 country’s	 situation.	 The	 provision	 of	 social	
assistance	requires	policy	makers	to	 gain	a	 good	understanding	 of	poverty	in	order	to	
identify	the	poor	and	the	geographic	areas	where	an	intervention	would	help	most.	This	
requires	periodic	data	collection	through	household	surveys.	In	addition,	panel	surveys	
are	 especially	 helpful	 for	 identifying	 the	 chronic	 poor.	 By	 shedding	 light	 on	 poverty	
dynamics	 and	 identifying	 vulnerable,	 yet	 non‐poor,	 populations,	 they	 also	 help	 design	
social	 insurance	 systems	 that	 complement	 the	 growth	 and	 investment	 components	 of	
the	 three‐point	 strategy.	 	 Some	 forms	 of	 social	 insurance	 require	 specialized	 forms	 of	
data.	For	weather	index‐based	insurance,	for	example,	historical	and	disaggregated	data	
on	 rainfall	 patterns	 is	 crucial	 for	 a	 functional	 insurance	 scheme.	 Last,	 information	
systems	are	crucial	for	monitoring	the	risks	of	pandemics	and	natural	disasters.	Climate	
models	and	satellite	technology	can	be	valuable	tools	for	mapping	high‐risk	areas.		

                                                  	
                                                 44	
	
The	development	of	information	systems	requires	investments	in	these	technologies,	as	
well	 as	 complementary	 investments	 in	 research,	 education,	 and	 training.	 The	 2016	
World	Development	Report	Digital	Dividends	makes	this	case	well.	
	
	
                         2030—Ending	Extreme	Poverty	
	
The	 1990	 World	 Development	 Report	 analyzed	 the	 association	 between	 poverty	 and	
policies	 of	 the	 1970s	 and	 1980s	 and	 came	 to	 the	 conclusion	 that	 sustained	 poverty	
reduction	 is	 possible	 through	 a	 combination	 of	 labor‐intensive	 growth,	 investments	 in	
human	 capital,	 and	 supplemental	 social	 assistance	 or	 insurance.	 A	 quick	 review	 of	 the	
record	 of	 poverty	 reduction	 in	 the	 1990s	 and	 2000s	 validates	 this	 2.5‐point	 strategy.		
But	with	the	reduction	of	global	extreme	poverty	from	more	than	half	to	less	than	a	fifth,	
changes	 need	 to	 be	 made.	 The	 question	 is:	 In	 light	 of	 these	 developments,	 where	 and	
how	much	does	the	2.5‐point	strategy	need	be	altered?		
	
The	 evidence	 over	 the	 last	 three	 decades	 (see	 Box	 3	 below	 for	 a	 summary	 of	 key	
reforms)	 indicates	 considerable	 support	 for	 the	 2.5‐point	 strategy	 that	 was	 pioneered	
by	the	East	Asian	countries,	but	with	one	important	change:	in	countries	where	$1.90	a	
day	poverty	has	been	reduced	to	low	levels,	governments	should	consider	expanding	the	
third	component	 from	 a	partial	supplement	to	 a	full	complement.	 The	 reasons	have	to	
do	with	both	necessity	and	feasibility.	With	reduction	in	extreme	poverty	rates	in	Asia	
and	Latin	America	to	relatively	low	levels,	there	have	been	two	changes	in	the	profile	of	
poverty.		The	first	is	that	with	success	in	addressing	extreme	poverty,	it	is	progressively	
harder	 to	 tackle,	 because	 of	 demographic,	 geographic,	 and	 cultural	 reasons.	 It	 is	
increasingly	found	 among	the	 marginalized	and	the	disabled,	and	in	parts	of	countries	
that	are	remote	because	of	economic	distance	or	cultural	divisions.	The	second	is	that,	as	
of	 2012,	 more	 than	 1.2	 billion	 people	 are	 living	 on	 between	 $1.90	 and	 $3.10	 a	 day:	
around	 600	 million	 in	 South	 Asia,	 about	 300	 million	 in	 East	 Asia,	 over	 200	 million	 in	
Sub‐Saharan	 Africa,	 and	 almost	 40	 million	 in	 Latin	 America.	 This	 segment	 of	 the	
population	 is	 vulnerable	 to	 shocks—emanating	 from	 the	 economy,	 their	 own	 health,	
pandemics,	and	nature—that	can	easily	push	them	back	into	extreme	poverty.			
	
The	2000	 World	Development	Report	had	raised	this	concern	directly	by	emphasizing	
the	problem	of	insecurity:	
	
         “Actions	 are	 needed	 in	 three	 complementary	 areas:	 first,	 promoting	 economic	
         opportunities	 for	 poor	 people	 through	 equitable	 growth,	 better	 access	 to	
         markets,	 and	 expanded	 assets;	 second,	 facilitating	 empowerment	 by	 making	
         state	institutions	more	responsive	to	poor	people	and	removing	social	barriers	
         that	 exclude	 women,	 ethnic	 and	 racial	 groups,	 and	 the	 socially	 disadvantaged;	
         finally,	 enhancing	 security	 by	 preventing	 and	 managing	 economy‐wide	 shocks	
         and	 providing	 mechanisms	 to	 reduce	 the	 sources	 of	 vulnerability	 that	 poor	
         people	face.”	
	
For	 these	 reasons,	 successful	 countries	 should	 consider	 gradually	 increasing	 social	
insurance	coverage.		But	for	this	to	be	done	in	a	manner	consistent	with	the	ambition	of	
ending	extreme	poverty	by	2030,	this	complement	has	to	share	a	feature	with	the	first	
two:	it	should	reinforce,	not	weaken,	the	other	components	of	the	strategy.		Examples	of	
social	 assistance	 programs	 that	 qualify	 are	 cash	 transfers	 conditioned	 on	 private	
investments	in	education	and	health—the	investment	component	of	the	3‐point	strategy.		
An	example	of	social	insurance	schemes	that	do	not	meet	this	test	are	those	financed	by	



                                                 	
                                                45	
	
high	 taxes	 on	 wages	 and	 employment—which	 would	 weaken	 the	 labor‐using	 growth	
component	of	the	3‐point	strategy.			
	
Box	3:	Selected	Reforms	and	Estimated	Impact	
	
Country	 Period	         Reform	and	impact	

Korea,	      1946‐55	      Land	reform.	More	than	60	percent	of	arable	land	was	transferred	to	
Rep.	                      owner‐farmers.		Productivity	shot	up,	as	did	school	achievement.			
                           		
Taiwan	      1949‐63	      Land	reform.	In	1949,	64	percent	of	farming	population	were	tenants;	
                           and	 rent	 was	 50	 percent	 of	 the	 income	 from	 harvests.	 	 Reform	 in	
                           three	phases:	(1)	rent	reduction;	(2)	sale	of	government	land	to	tillers	
                           and	 (3)	 land‐to‐the‐tiller	 program.	 By	 1965,	 only	 10	 percent	 of	 land	
                           operated	by	tenants.		
Indonesia	 1968‐96	        Green	 Revolution.	 Agricultural	 total	 factor	 productivity	 grew	 at	 2.5	
                           percent	 annually	 between	 1968	 and	 1996.	 	 40	 percent	 of	 rural	
                           workers	escaped	poverty	while	staying	in	agriculture.		
China	       1979	         Household	 responsibility	 system.	 Agricultural	 productivity	 growth	
                           rose	 from	 2.7	 percent	 annually	 between	 1970‐78	 to	 7.1	 percent	
                           between	1979‐84.	Extreme	poverty	fell	from	88	percent	in	1981	to	76	
                           in	1984,	or	from	878	million	people	to	785	million	(and	then	to	660	
                           million	by	1987).			
Vietnam	     1988‐99	      Land	 reform.	 In	 1986	 Vietnam	 imported	 0.5	 million	 tons	 of	 rice.	 	 By	
                           2009,	 it	 exported	 5	 million	 tons.	 Now	 one	 three	 largest	 exporters	 of	
                           rice	(others	are	Thailand	and	India).	
Thailand	    1968‐96	      Family	 Planning:	 Mechai	 program.	 	 Thailand’s	 fertility	 declines	 as	
                           rapid	 at	 China’s	 (from	 6	 in	 1966	 to	 less	 than	 2	 by	 1996),	 without	
                           coercion	 and	 with	 relatively	 low	 female	 education	 levels.	 One	 of	 the	
                           most	successful	public	private	partnerships	ever.	
Thailand	    2001	         30	 Baht	 Program.	 Universal	 health	 insurance—most	 visits	 cost	 less	
                           than	$1.	By	2005,	covered	more	than	85	percent	of	population	at	cost	
                           of	less	than	4.5	percent	of	GDP.		
Brazil	      1994‐97	      Real	Plan.	Inflation	had	stayed	above	100%	a	year	since	1982;	2500	
                           percent	 in	 1993.	 1993‐2004	 is	 the	 time	 of	 restoration	 of	 macro	
                           stability.	 Extreme	 poverty	 rate	 was	 cut	 by	 half:	 from	 20	 percent	 in	
                           1993	to	10	percent	in	2005.		
Mexico	      1990s	        Progresa	 conditional	 cash	 transfers.	 By	 1999,	 covered	 2.6	 million	
                           rural	families.	Increased	education	attainment	of	poor	rural	children	
                           by	 10	 percent	 (0.66	 years),	 improved	 under‐five	 morbidity	 by	 12	
                           percent,	 increased	 prenatal	 visits	 by	 8	 percent,	 and	 adult	 morbidity	
                           fell	by	17	percent.		
Ghana	       1990s	        Reforms	 to	 cocoa	 marketing	 board.	 Allowed	 new	 purchasers	 to	
                           compete	 and	 offer	 better	 prices	 for	 farmers’	 products;	 established	 a	
                           private	market	for	the	distribution	of	inputs.	Between	2001	and	2010,	
                           land	productivity	grew	at	5.5%	per	year.				

Sources:	See	earlier	sections.		
	
	
The	 3‐point	 strategy	 should	 be	 considered	 after	 a	 country	 develops	 adequate	
administrative	 capacity.	 It	 may	 also	 require	 developing	 countries	 to	 consider	 policy	
design	that	is	different	from	what	today’s	developed	economies	have	instituted.		When	
instituting	social	insurance	programs,	for	example,	developing	countries	might	consider	
financing	the	schemes	through	taxes	on	energy	use	instead	of	labor	use.			
	

                                                    	
                                                   46	
	
Our	assessment	also	sheds	light	on	three	additional	questions	that	come	up	in	poverty‐
related	debates:	first,	how	much	poverty	reduction	can	economic	growth	generate	and	
how	 much	 will	 have	 to	 be	 done	 through	 redistribution?	 	 Second,	 does	 focusing	 on	 a	
money‐based	poverty	target	jeopardize	progress	in	other	measures	of	wellbeing	such	as	
education,	 longevity,	 and	 health?	 	 Third,	 is	 a	 focus	 on	 extreme	 poverty—measured	 by	
the	poverty	lines	of	the	poorest	15	countries—setting	the	bar	too	low?		Our	view	is:		
	
     The	success	of	a	strategy	that	relies	on	growth	in	private	economic	activity	and	
        rapid	 improvements	 in	 essential	 public	 services—two	 mutually	 reinforcing	
        elements—complemented	 by	 targeted	 interventions	 to	 help	 the	 most	 needy,	
        should	discourage	“growth	versus	redistribution”	extremism.	
        		
       Evidence	 in	 support	 of	 this	 strategy	 should	 reassure	 those	 who	 worry	 that	 a	
        “narrow	focus”	on	monetary	poverty	risks	neglect	of	non‐monetary	measures	of	
        human	welfare.	In	fact,	quick	and	sustained	progress	in	achieving	the	3	percent	
        extreme	poverty	goal	is	not	possible	without	augmenting	the	assets	of	the	poor,	
        principally	through	public	support	for	investments	in	education	and	health.	
	
       By	recognizing	that	individuals	who	escape	extreme	poverty	are	still	vulnerable	
        to	falling	back	into	destitution,	and	proposing	policy	actions	to	prevent	this	from	
        happening,	the	strategy	should	at	least	partially	address	the	criticism	of	setting	
        the	bar	too	low.			
	
The	evidence	from	China,	Vietnam,	India,	and	other	countries	that	have	reduced	extreme	
poverty	 rates	 to	 relatively	 low	 levels	 supports	 the	 three‐point	 strategy.	 If	 ending	
extreme	poverty	is	the	goal,	the	growth	versus	redistribution	debate,	and	doubts	about	
the	 adequacy	 of	 the	 consumption‐based	 poverty	 as	 a	 development	 goal	 are	 not	 the	
issues	that	policy	makers	should	worry	about	too	much.		Instead,	policy	makers	should	
be	 trying	 to	 figure	 out	 how	 this	 strategy	 can	 be	 implemented	 in	 countries	 where	 the	
incidence	of	extreme	poverty	is	still	high.		They	will	likely	find	that	the	2.5‐point	strategy	
is	better	suited	for	such	countries.		When	implemented	well,	extreme	poverty	rates	will	
fall	quickly,	and	the	2.5‐point	plan	should	give	way	to	the	3‐point	strategy.		
			
Whatever	 the	 conclusion	 of	 these	 debates,	 finishing	 off	 extreme	 poverty	 will	 soon	
become	 much	 the	 same	 thing	 as	 ending	 extreme	 poverty	 in	 Sub‐Saharan	 Africa	 and	
conflict‐affected	 countries	 elsewhere.	 Just	 as	 progress	 in	 East	 Asia	 required	 rapid	
progress	 in	 China	 and	 poverty	 reduction	 in	 South	 Asia	 is	 almost	 the	 same	 thing	 as	
eliminating	 extreme	 poverty	 in	 India,	 progress	 in	 Sub‐Saharan	 Africa	 will	 not	 happen	
unless	 Ethiopia	 and	 other	 strong	 performers	 in	 East	 Africa	 keep	 doing	 as	 well	 as	 they	
have	 in	 the	 last	 decade,	 and	 Nigeria,	 the	 Democratic	 Republic	 of	 Congo,	 Madagascar,	
Angola,	and	others	in	West	and	Southern	Africa	start	doing	a	lot	better	than	in	the	past.	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

                                                 	
                                                47	
	
Selected	References	
	

Akyeampong,	K.	2011.	“(Re)Assessing	the	Impact	of	School	Capitation	Grants	on	Educational	
Access	in	Ghana.”	Center	for	International	Education,	University	of	Sussex,	Research	Monograph	
No.71.	

African	Development	Bank	et	al.	2011.	“Supporting	Infrastructure	Development	in	Low‐Income	
Countries”.	Submission	to	the	G20	by	the	MDB	Working	Group	on	Infrastructure.	

Azevedo,	J.P.	et	al.2013.	“Is	Labor	Income	Responsible	for	Poverty	Reduction?	A	Decomposition	
Approach.”	World	Bank,	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	6414.	

Banerjee,	A.	et	al.	2006.	Understanding	Poverty.	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press.	

Banerjee,	A.	and	Duflo,	E.	2011.		Poor	Economics.	New	York:	Public	Affairs.	

Beegle,	K.	et	al.	2014.	“Enhancing	Africa’s	Contribution	to	the	Eradication	of	Extreme	Poverty	by	
2010.”	World	Bank.	Washington,	DC.	Processed.		

Bhagwati,	J.	1988.	“Poverty	and	Public	Policy.”	World	Development,	Vol.	6,	No.	5,	539‐555.	

Blanchet,	N.,	Fink,	G.,	and	Osei‐Akoto,	I.	2012.	“The	Effect	of	Ghana’s	National	Health	Insurance	
Scheme	on	Health	Care	Utilisation”,	Ghana	Medical	Journal,	Volume	46,	No.	2.	76‐84.	

Byamugisha,	F.	2014.	Agricultural	Land	Redistribution	and	Land	Administration	in	Sub‐Saharan	
Africa.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

Center	for	Global	Development.	Undated.	“Reducing	Fertility	in	Bangladesh:		Case	13”.		Millions	
Saved:		What	Works	in	International	Development?			

Choudhary,	V.	et	al.	2015.	Ghana:	Agricultural	Sector	Risk	Assessment	‐	Risk	Prioritization.	
Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.		

Chow,	G.	2006.	“Rural	Poverty	in	China:	Problem	and	Policy.”	Princeton	University,	CEPS	Working	
Paper	No.	134.				

Chuhan‐Pole,	P.	and	Angwafo,	M.	2011.	Yes,	Africa	Can:	Success	Stories	from	a	Dynamic	Continent.	
Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

Claessens,	S.	1993.	“Interest	Rates,	Growth,	and	External	Debt:	The	Macroeconomic	Impact	of	
Mexico's	Brady	Deal.”	World	Bank,	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	WPS	1147.	

Coady,	D.	2003.	“Alleviating	Structural	Poverty	in	Developing	Countries:	The	Approach	of	
Progresa	In	Mexico.”	International	Food	Policy	Research	Institute.	

Currie‐Alder,	B.	et	al.	2014.	International	Development:	Ideas,	Experience,	and	Prospects.	New	
York:	Oxford	University	Press.			

Damrongplasit,	K.	and	Melnick,	G.	2009.	“Early	Results	from	Thailand's	30	Baht	Health	Reform:	
Something	to	Smile	About”,	Health	Affairs,	28,	No.	3,	457‐466.	

Darvas,	P.	and	Balwanz,	D.	2014.	Basic	Education	beyond	the	Millennium	Development	Goals	in	
Ghana.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

Devarajan,	S.	2014.	“Growth	Without	Apology.”	World	Bank.	Future	Development:	Economics	to	
End	Poverty.		

Dollar,	D.	et	al.	2014.	“Growth,	Inequality,	and	Social	Welfare:	Cross‐Country	Evidence.”	World	
Bank	Development	Research	Group,	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	6842.	



                                                  	
                                                 48	
	
Duflo,	E.,	Dupas,	P.	&	Kremer,	M.	2015.	"School	governance,	teacher	incentives,	and	pupil–teacher	
ratios:	Experimental	evidence	from	Kenyan	primary	schools,"	Journal	of	Public	Economics,	Vol.	
123(C),	92‐110.		

The	Economist.	2014.	“China’s	Economy:	Poverty	Elucidation	Day.”	Oct.	20,	2014.	

The	Economist.	2014.	“Poverty	in	Indonesia:	Muted	Music.”	May	3,	2014.	

Edward,	P.	and	Sumner,	A.	2013.	“The	Future	of	Global	Poverty	in	a	Multi‐Speed	World:	New	
Estimates	of	Scale,	Location,	and	Cost.”	King’s	International	Development	Institute,	King’s	College	
London.	

Ferreira	et	al.	2015.	“A	Global	Count	of	the	Extreme	Poor	in	2012:	Data	Issues,	Methodology	and	
Initial	Results.”	World	Bank,	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	7432.	

Fiszbein,	A.	et	al.	2009.	Conditional	Cash	Transfers:	Reducing	Present	and	Future	Poverty.	
Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

Gertler,	P.	et	al.	2012.	“Investing	Cash	Transfers	to	Raise	Long‐Term	Living	Standards.”	American	
Economic	Journal:	Applied	Economics,	Vol.	4,	No.	1,	164‐192.	

Gill,	I.	and	Kharas,	H.	2007.	An	East	Asian	Renaissance:	Ideas	for	Economic	Growth.	Washington,	
DC:	World	Bank.			

Gilligan	et	al.	2009.	“An	Impact	Evaluation	of	Ethiopia’s	Productive	Safety	Net	Program.”	Mimeo,	
International	Food	Policy	Research	Institute.	Washington,	DC.	

Gockowski,	J.	2012.	“Policy‐led	Intensification	and	Returns	to	Input	Use	among	Ghanaian	Cocoa	
Farmers.”	Sustainable	Tree	Crop	Program	of	the	International	Institute	of	Tropical	Agriculture.	

Government	of	Ghana.	2013.	“The	Livelihood	Empowerment	Against	Poverty	(LEAP)	
Programme.”	Ministry	of	Gender,	Children	and	Social	Protection,	Briefing	Paper.	

Greatrex	H.	et	al.	2015.	“Scaling	Up	Index	Insurance	for	Smallholder	Farmers:	Recent	Evidence	
and	Insights.”	CGIAR	Research	Program	on	Climate	Change,	Agriculture	and	Food	Security,	CCAFS	
Report	No.	14.	

Handa,	S.,	M.J.	Park,	R.O.	Darko,	I.	Osei‐Akoto,	B.	Davis,	S.	Diadone.	2013.	“Livelihood	
Empowerment	against	Poverty	Impact	Evaluation,”	Carolina	Population	Center,	University	of	
North	Carolina.	

Hanson,	G.	2012.	“Understanding	Mexico’s	Economic	Underperformance.”	Migration	Policy	
Institute.	

Heckman,	J.	2012.	“The	Case	for	Investing	in	Disadvantaged	Young	Children”.		
HeckmanEquation.Org.	

Inchauste,	G.	and	Saavedra‐Chanduvi,	J.	2014.	“Opportunity	Knocks:	Deeping	Our	Understanding	
of	Poverty	Reduction.”	In	Understanding	Changes	in	Poverty,	1‐13.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.		

Inoue,	K.	et	al.	2015.	Out‐of‐School	Youth	in	Sub‐Saharan	Africa:	A	Policy	Perspective.	Directions	in	
Development.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank	

Islam,	R.	1985.	Strategies	for	Alleviating	Poverty	in	Rural	Asia.	Geneva:	International	Labour	
Organisation.		

Jonas,	O.	2013.	“Pandemic	Risk.”	Background	paper	for	the	World	Development	Report	2014.	

Jonas.	O.	2014.	“Pandemic	Risk”.	Finance	and	Development,	December	2014.	

Kim,	J.	2014.	Speech	by	World	Bank	Group	President	Jim	Yong	Kim:	“The	Importance	Of	Safety	
Nets:	Mexico’s	Leadership.”	

                                                  	
                                                 49	
	
Kraay,	A.	2004.	“When	is	Growth	Pro‐Poor?	Evidence	from	a	Panel	of	Countries.”	World	Bank.		

Kwon,	H.	and	Yi,	I.	2009.	“Economic	Development	and	Poverty	Reduction	in	Korea:	Governing	
Multifunctional	Institutions.”	Development	and	Change,	40(4):	769‐792.	

Legislative	Council	of	Hong	Kong.	Undated.	“Information	Note:	Poverty	Combating	Strategy	in	
South	Korea.”	Research	and	Library	Services	Division,	IN34/04‐05.	

Leipziger,	D.	and	Thomas,	V.	1993.	Lessons	of	East	Asia.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

Levy,	S.	and	Walton.	M.	2009.	No	Growth	without	Equity?	Inequality,	Interests,	and	Competition	in	
Mexico.	New	York:	Palgrave	Macmillan.	

Lipton,	M.	2014.	“Farming,	Fertility,	Food:	Why	Has	Bangladesh	Done	Better	than	Expected?	Can	
It	Continue	to	Do	So?”	1st	Bangladesh	Economic	Forum	Paper,	Dhaka.	

Liu,	Y.	and	Deininger,	K.	2010.	“Poverty	Impacts	of	India's	National	Rural	Employment	Guarantee	
Scheme:	Evidence	from	Andhra	Pradesh.”	Agricultural	&	Applied	Economics	Association	2010	
AAEA,CAES,	&	WAEA	Joint	Annual	Meeting	Paper.	

Lobell,	D.B.	and	Burke,	M.	2009.	Climate	change	and	food	security:	Adapting	Agriculture	to	a	
Warmer	World.	New	York:	Springer	Science	&	Business	Media.	

Lopez‐Acevedo,	G.	2008.	“Mexico:	Quality	of	Public	Expenditure.”	Note	No.	4	–	June	2008.	

McCaig,	B.	and	Pavcnik,	N.	2013.	“Moving	out	of	Agriculture:	Structural	Change	in	Vietnam.”	
National	Bureau	of	Economic	Research,	Working	Paper	No.	19616.	

McNamara,	R.	1973.	Speech	by	World	Bank	Group	President	Robert	S.	McNamara:	“Address	to	
the	Board	of	Governors.”	

Merrick,	T.	2002.	“Population	and	Poverty:	New	Views	on	an	Old	Controversy.”	International	
Family	Planning	Perspectives,	Vol.	28,	No.	1,	41‐46.	

Molini,	V.	and	Paci.	P.	2015.	Poverty	Reduction	in	Ghana:	Progress	and	Challenges.	Washington,	DC:	
World	Bank.	

Mu,	R.	and	van	de	Walle.	D.	2009.	“Rural	Roads	and	Local	Market	Development	in	Vietnam.”	The	
Journal	of	Development	Studies,	Vol.	47,	No.	5,	709‐734.	

Musacchio,	A.	2012.	"Mexico's	Financial	Crisis	of	1994‐1995."	Harvard	Business	School	Working	
Paper,	No.	12–101.	

Oks.	D.	1992.	“Stabilization	and	Growth	Recovery	in	Mexico.”	World	Bank,	Policy	Research	
Working	Paper	WPS	833.	

Olinto,	P.	et	al.	2013.	“The	State	of	the	Poor:	Where	are	the	Poor,	Where	is	Extreme	Poverty	
Harder	to	End,	and	What	is	the	Current	Profile	of	the	World’s	Poor?”,	World	Bank	Economic	
Premise,	Number	125.	

Otoo,	N.	et	al.	2014.	“Universal	Health	Coverage	for	Inclusive	and	Sustainable	Development:	
Country	Summary	Report	for	Ghana.”	Health,	Nutrition	and	Population	Global	Practice,	World	
Bank	Group	Report.	

Parker,	S.	2003.	“The	Oportunidades	program	in	Mexico.” Shanghai	Poverty	Conference	‐	Scaling	
Up	Poverty	Reduction.	

Perkins,	D.	et	al.	2012.	Economics	of	Development,	7th	ed.	New	York:	W.W.	Norton	and	Co.	

Radelet,	S.	and	Sachs,	J.	1997.	“Asia’s	Reemergence.”	Foreign	Affairs,	Nov/Dec	1997,	44‐59.	



                                                 	
                                                50	
	
Ravallion,	M.	2009.	“A	Comparative	Perspective	on	Poverty	Reduction	in	Brazil,	China	and	India.”	
World	Bank	Development	Research	Group,	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	5080.	

Ravallion,	M.	2010.	“Poverty	Lines	across	the	World.”	World	Bank	Development	Research	Group,	
Policy	Research	Working	Paper	5284.	

Ravallion,	M.	2013.	“The	Idea	of	Anti‐Poverty	Policy.”	National	Bureau	of	Economic	Research,	
Working	Paper	19210.		

Ravallion,	M.	2016.	The	Economics	of	Poverty.	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press.		

Ravallion,	M.	and	Chen,	S.	2007.	“China’s	Uneven	Progress	against	Poverty.”	Journal	of	
Development	Economics,	82,	1‐42.	

Ravi,	S.	and	Engler,	M.	2015.	“Workfare	as	an	Effective	Way	to	Fight	Poverty:	The	Case	of	India’s	
NREGS.” World	Development,	Vol.	67,	issue	C,	57‐71.	

Rodgers,	L.	and	Fletcher,	G.	2014.	“Indian	Ocean	Tsunami:	Then	and	Now.”	BBC	News.	December	
25,	2014.	

Rodrik,	D.	2001.	“Trading	in	Illusions.”	Foreign	Policy,	March/April	2001.	54‐62.	

Rubio,	G.	2011.	“The	Mexican	Government’s	M&E	System.”	World	Bank,	PREM	Notes,	No.14.	
Spence,	M.	and	Lewis,	M.	2009.	Health	and	Growth:	Commission	on	Growth	and	Development.	
Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

Stiglitz,	J.	and	Yusuf,	S.	2001.	Rethinking	the	East	Asian	Miracle.	New	York:	Oxford	University	
Press.	

Stiglitz,	J.	1996.	“Some	Lessons	from	the	East	Asian	Miracle.”	The	World	Bank	Research	Observer,	
Vol.	11,	No.	2:	151‐177.			

Sumner,	A.	2013.	“Aid	Agencies	of	the	Future:	Poverty,	Geography,	and	the	Double	Dilemma.”	The	
Economist.	June	3,	2013.	

Taylor,	A.	2014.	“Ten	Years	Since	the	2004	Indian	Ocean	Tsunami.”	The	Atlantic.	December	26,	
2014.	

UNESCO	Institute	for	Statistics	and	the	Education	for	All	Global	Monitoring	Report.	2015.	“A	
Growing	Number	of	Children	and	Adolescents	are	Out	of	School	as	Aid	Fails	to	Meet	the	Mark.”	
Policy	Paper	22	/	Fact	Sheet	31	

UNICEF.	2015.	Levels	&	Trends	in	Child	Mortality. UN	Inter‐Agency	Group	for	Child	Mortality	
Estimation.	2015	Report.	

UNICEF	and	World	Health	Organization.	2015.	Progress	on	sanitation	and	drinking	water	–	2015	
update	and	MDG	assessment.	

United	Nations	Development	Programme.	2011.	“Mexico:	Scaling	Up	Progresa/Oportunidades	–	
Conditional	Cash	Transfer	Programme.”	Special	Unit	for	South‐South	Cooperation.	

United	Nations	Development	Programme.	2015.	“Ghana	Millennium	Development	Goals.”	2015	
Report.	

Wagstaff,	A.	2014.	“We	Just	Learned	a	Whole	Lot	More	About	Achieving	Universal	Health	
Coverage.”	World	Bank,	Let’s	Talk	Development.	

Wang,	C.	2012.	“History	of	the	Chinese	Family	Planning	program:	1970‐2010.”	Contraception,	
85(6):	563‐9.	

Walker,	S.	et	al.		2007.		“Child	development:		risk	factors	for	adverse	outcomes	in	developing	
countries.”		The	Lancet	369,	145‐157.	

                                                  	
                                                 51	
	
Warr,	P.	2011.	“Thailand’s	Development	Strategy	and	Growth	Performance.”	United	Nations	
University	World	Institute	for	Development	Economics	Research,	Working	Paper	No.	2011/02.	

Wodon,	Q.	2012.	Improving	the	Targeting	of	Social	Programs	in	Ghana.	Washington,	DC:	World	
Bank.	

Wolter,	D.	2009.	“Ghana:	Agriculture	is	Becoming	a	Business”,	OECD	Journal:	General	Papers,	Vol.	
2009/2.	

World	Bank.	1980.	World	Development	Report	1980.	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press.		

World	Bank.	1990.	World	Development	Report	1990:	Poverty.	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press.	

World	Bank.	1990.	“Indonesia:	Strategy	for	a	Sustained	Reduction	in	Poverty.”	World	Bank	
Country	Study,	Report	10009.	

World	Bank.	1993.	The	East	Asian	Miracle:	Economic	Growth	and	Public	Policy.	New	York:	Oxford	
University	Press.	

World	Bank.	2001.	World	Development	Report	2000/2001:	Attacking	Poverty.	New	York:	Oxford	
University	Press.		

World	Bank.	2003.	World	Development	Report	2004:	Making	Services	Work	for	Poor	People.	
Washington,	DC:	World	Bank	and	Oxford	University	Press.	

World	Bank.	2004.	“Poverty	in	Mexico:	An	Assessment	of	Conditions,	Trends	and	Government	
Strategy.”	Report	No.	28612‐ME.	

World	Bank.	2005.	“Mexico	Income	Generation	and	Social	Protection	for	the	Poor.”	Report	No.	
32884‐MX.	

World	Bank.	2006.	World	Development	Report	2007:	Development	and	the	Next	Generation.	
Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

World	Bank.	2006.	“Decentralized	Service	Delivery	for	the	Poor.”	Report	No.	35692	

World	Bank.	2006.	“Making	the	New	Indonesia	Work	for	the	Poor.”	Report	No.	37349‐ID.	

World	Bank.	2007.	World	Development	Report	2008:	Agriculture	for	Development.	Washington,	
DC:	World	Bank.		

World	Bank.	2007.	“Mexico	2006–2012	Creating	the	Foundations	for	Equitable	Growth.”	Report	
No.	39993‐MX.	

World	Bank.	2009.	World	Development	Report	2009:	Reshaping	Economic	Geography.	Washington,	
DC:	World	Bank.	

World	Bank.	2010.	World	Development	Report	2010:	Development	and	Climate	Change.	
Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.		

World	Bank.	2011.	World	Development	Report	2012:	Gender	Equality	and	Development.	
Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.			

World	Bank.	2011.	“Republic	of	Ghana:	Tackling	Poverty	in	Northern	Ghana.”	Report	No.	53991‐
GH.		

World	Bank.	2012.	“Agribusiness	Indicators:	Ghana.”	Report	Number	68163‐GH.	Washington,	DC:	
World	Bank.	

World	Bank.	2013.	World	Development	Report	2014:	Risk	and	Opportunity.	Washington,	DC:	
World	Bank	



                                                	
                                               52	
	
World	Bank.	2013.	“Bangladesh	Poverty	Assessment:	Assessing	a	Decade	of	Progress	in	Reducing	
Poverty,	2000‐2010.”	Bangladesh	Development	Series,	Paper	No.	31.	

World	Bank.	2015.	Rising	through	Cities	in	Ghana:	Ghana	Urbanization	Review.	Washington,	DC:	
World	Bank.	

World	Bank.	2015.	Ethiopia	Poverty	Assessment	2014.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

World	Bank.	2015.	World	Development	Report	2016:	Digital	Dividends.	Washington,	DC:	World	
Bank.	

World	Bank.	2016.	“World	Bank	Group	Launches	Groundbreaking	Financing	Facility	to	Protect	
Poorest	Countries	against	Pandemics.”	World	Bank,	May	21,	2016	Press	Release.		

World	Bank.	forthcoming.	World	Development	Report	2017:	Governance	and	the	Law.	Washington,	
DC:	World	Bank.	

World	Bank	and	GFDRR.	2012.	“Disaster	Risk	Financing	and	Insurance	Program.”	GFDRR.		

World	Bank	and	World	Trade	Organization,	2015.	The	Role	of	Trade	in	Ending	Poverty.	World	
Trade	Organization:	Geneva.	

World	Bank	and	International	Monetary	Fund.	2016.	Global	Monitoring	Report	2015/2016:	
Development	Goals	in	an	Era	of	Demographic	Change.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.		

World	Bank.	Undated.	Transformation	through	Infrastructure:	Infrastructure	Strategy	Update	
FY2012‐2015.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

World	Health	Organization.	2014.	“Investing	In	Water	and	Sanitation:	Increasing	Access,	
Reducing	Inequalities.”	UN‐Water	Global	Analysis	and	Assessment	of	Sanitation	and	Drinking‐
Water,	GLAAS	2014	Report.		




                                               	
                                              53	
	
