                                                     WPS7964


Policy Research Working Paper                       7964




      Services in the Trans-Pacific Partnership
                          What Would Be Lost?

                                  Batshur Gootiiz
                                  Aaditya Mattoo




Development Research Group
Trade and International Integration Team
February 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7964


  Abstract
 As the fate of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) hangs                           trading partners, more sectors and are in some cases closer
 in balance, an evaluation of what it offers could inform                           to applied policies than their commitments under previ-
 current decisions and shape future negotiations. The TPPs                          ous agreements. Furthermore, new TPP rules, including
 services component has been hailed as one of the agree-                            on state-owned enterprises, government procurement and
 ment’s major accomplishments. To assess the agreement’s                            competition policy, could enhance services market access.
 impact on national policy in the major services sectors, we                        In particular, the TPP breaks new ground in prohibiting
 created a new public database. This database reveals that                          restrictions on international data flows, while at the same
 TPP commitments seldom go beyond countries’ applied                                time creating unprecedented obligations on all parties to
 policies, suggesting the explicit liberalization resulting from                    protect consumers from fraud and protect privacy. These
 the agreement is limited only to a few countries and a few                         dual obligations on importing and exporting countries
 areas. However, the TPP enhances transparency and policy                           represent a model for regulatory cooperation that could
 certainty because parties’ services commitments cover more                         elicit greater market opening if applied to other areas.




  This paper is a product of the Trade and International Integration Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at bgootiiz@worldbank.org; amattoo@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
  Services in the Trans-Pacific Partnership: What Would Be Lost?
                                     Batshur Gootiiz and Aaditya Mattoo




JEL classification codes: F13, F14, L80
Keywords: Services trade barriers, TPP, regionalism, STRI, liberalization of trade in services



*World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433. Contact information: Batshur Gootiiz is a consultant to the
World Bank (bgootiiz@gmail.com) and Aaditya Mattoo is a research manager at the World Bank
(amattoo@worldbank.org). The authors would like to thank Deanna Easton, Jonathan McHale, Martha Lawless,
Christopher Melly, Anne Katrin Pfister, and Sebastian Saez for valuable comments and helpful discussions. We are
grateful for updates on policy information from the following law firms: Cheok Advocates &Solicitors in Brunei,
Guerrero Olivos in Chile, Raja, Daryl and Loh in Malaysia, Hogan Lovells BSTL in Mexico, and LuatViet Advocates
& Solicitors in Vietnam. This paper is part of a World Bank research project on trade in services, supported in part by
the Multidonor Trust Fund for Trade and Development and by the Strategic Research Program. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily
represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated
organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent, or any of the
aforementioned individuals or institutions.
I. INTRODUCTION

The fate of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) hangs in balance. An evaluation of what it offers
could lead to more informed decisions today and influence the shape of future negotiations. The
services component in particular has been hailed as a one of the agreement’s major
accomplishments. The World Bank’s Global Economic Prospects 2016 cites research by Petri and
Plummer (2015) suggesting that about one quarter of the gains from the agreement, estimated to
be on average 1.4 percent of participating countries’ GDP by 2030, would come from services
liberalization.1 The USTR website states that the “TPP lifts complex restrictions and bans on
access for U.S. businesses—including many small businesses—that export American services like
retail, communications, logistics, entertainment, software and more.”2 US exports of services are
projected to increase by $149 billion, and exports of all TPP members by $225 billion by 2030
(Hufbauer, 2016, Petri and Plummer, 2016). This paper takes a closer look at what precisely the
TPP accomplished in services.

There are three possible criteria for assessing how much value the TPP added. The first and least
demanding is the multilateral benchmark, in terms of the rules and commitments agreed during
the WTO’s Uruguay Round in the mid-1990s, and the offers made in the early 2000s during the
unfinished Doha negotiations. A second, stricter standard is the openness that each TPP country
had already promised one or more of the other TPP countries as part of the 29 preferential trade
agreements (PTAs) they had signed prior to the TPP. Even though a comparison of commitments
across negotiating fora would tell us how much additional legal security the TPP offers, it would
not tell us whether the agreement produced explicit liberalization. The third and most meaningful
comparison is between TPP commitments and actual policy in the TPP members.3

In order to make each of these comparisons, we created a new public database of information on
the TPP countries legal commitments and applied policies in five major services sectors –
financial, basic telecommunications, retail distribution, transport and selected professional
services.4 This database includes: information on TPP countries’ commitments under the TPP and
under earlier multilateral (WTO) and preferential trade agreements; and information on their
applied policies in 2008, just after the TPP negotiations began, and in 2015, just before the
negotiations concluded.5

Our main findings can be summarized as follows. First of all, TPP commitments seldom go
beyond countries’ applied policies and, therefore, the explicit liberalization resulting from the
agreement in these five services sectors is limited to a few members and a few areas. We can
distinguish between three categories of liberalization in terms of timing: over the course of the
																																																								
1
  https://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/GEP/GEP2016a/Global-Economic-Prospects-January-2016-
Spillovers-amid-weak-growth.pdf. The United States International Trade Commission (2016) has estimated that the
US services sector would see a gain of $42.3 billion (0.1 percent) in output thanks to the TPP.
2
  https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/TPP-Overall-US-Benefits-Fact-Sheet.pdf
3
  While several attempts have been made to compare the GATS with the PTAs (Roy, 2011 and Marchetti et al, 2013,
USITC, 2016), a comparison of PTAs with applied policies is relatively rare (Gootiiz and Mattoo, 2015).
4
  Available from the website of the WB Services Trade Restrictions Database:
http://iresearch.worldbank.org/servicetrade/home.htm
5
  At the end of 2015, we updated the previous applied policy information for most of the developing country TPP
members, including Vietnam, Malaysia, Mexico and Chile.


	                                                                                                            2
negotiations, for example by Malaysia in financial, telecommunications and legal services; at the
conclusion of the negotiations, for example by Mexico in road freight transport services; and
within a certain period after the entry into force of the agreement, for example by Vietnam in
telecommunications and retail services.

Second, the TPP does enhance transparency and policy certainty because parties’ services
commitments cover more trading partners, more sectors and are in some cases closer to applied
policies than their commitments under previous agreements. However, the TPP does not fully
accomplish its goal of consolidating existing agreements between TPP countries, because the
Australia, Canada, Japan, the United States are among the countries which retain the right to offer
better treatment to other countries under previous agreements.

Finally, and importantly, the new rules that the TPP creates, including on state-owned enterprises,
government procurement and competition policy, could enhance services market access. In
particular, the TPP breaks new ground in prohibiting restrictions on international data flows, while
at the same time creating unprecedented obligations on all parties to protect consumers from fraud
and protect privacy. These dual obligations – on importing countries not to restrict flows and on
exporting countries to protect foreign consumers – represent a model for regulatory cooperation
that could elicit greater market opening if applied to other areas.

In Section II, we discuss the services-specific disciplines in the TPP. Section III describes the data
sources and the measurement of services policies and commitments. Section IV provides a
comparative analysis of TPP commitments. Section V describe the other rules in the agreement
that matter for services trade, and Section VI concludes.


II. SERVICES-SPECIFIC DISCIPLINES IN THE TPP: HOW MUCH VALUE ADDED?

In this section, we describe the key disciplines on services trade in the TPP. These disciplines are
distributed across several provisions, of which the most important are: Chapter 9 on investment
across all goods and services sectors; Chapter 10 on cross border trade in services; Chapter 11 on
financial services; Chapter 12 on temporary entry for business persons; Chapter 13 on
telecommunications services; and Chapter 14 on electronic commerce. In this section, we discuss
the core Chapters 9, 10, and 12 and consider aspects of other services related chapters in the
following sections. Our goal is not to provide a comprehensive discussion of all aspects of the
TPP but to focus on a few areas to assess how the TPP adds value to existing agreements and
applied policy in the five major services sectors for which we have applied policy information.
The following sections draw on information contained in TPP members’ websites, in particular,
the USTR website.6




																																																								
6
    Retrievable at: https://ustr.gov/tpp/


	                                                                                                   3
Cross Border Trade in Services (Chapter 10)

Cross-Border Trade in Services under the TPP encompasses three GATS modes: cross-border
supply (mode 1), consumption abroad (mode 2) and presence of natural persons (mode 4) (i.e. all
modes other than commercial presence (mode 3)). Chapter 10 includes three core obligations
which mirror similar obligations in the GATS: national treatment, which stipulates that no country
shall discriminate in favor of its own services or service suppliers; most-favored nation treatment,
which provides that no country shall discriminate in favor of one TPP country over another TPP
country, or a non-TPP country; market access, which provides that no country may impose
quantitative restrictions on the supply of services (e.g., a limit on the number of suppliers or
number of transactions) or require a specific type of legal entity or joint venture. The TPP goes
further than the GATS in including Article 10.6 on local presence, as do the previous US free trade
agreements.7 This article provides that no country may require a supplier from another country to
establish an office or affiliate, or to be resident, in its territory in order to supply the service. The
provision creates a strong provision in favor of liberal cross border trade.

TPP countries have agreed to accept these four core obligations on a “negative-list basis.” This
means that countries allow full access to their markets and are committed to these core obligations,
except in those sectors included in a country-specific lists of specific reservations recorded in two
annexes to the agreement on non-conforming measures. Annex I contains a list of current
measures that would otherwise violate one or more of the chapter’s core obligations, but which the
country has determined that it needs to maintain in force. In listing a measure in Annex I, the
country commits to a “standstill,” which ensures that the measure will not become more restrictive
in the future, as well as a “ratchet,” which means that if the measure is amended in the future to
become less restrictive, the new, more favorable treatment will set the benchmark for the standstill
requirement. Annex II contains a list of reservations that enable a country to have full discretion
to maintain existing non-conforming measures or adopt new restrictions without any consequence
under the agreement.

On domestic regulation, Article 10.8 of the TPP builds to a limited extent on existing GATS
disciplines. The agreement requires parties to “endeavor to ensure” that its regulatory measures
are based on objective and transparent criteria but stops short of including a test of whether
measures are necessary to achieve legitimate objectives. The agreement also seeks to make the
process of applying for authorization more transparent and streamlined, by requiring parties “to
the extent practical” to establish an indicative timeframe for the processing of an application,
inform applicants of their status, and provide reasons for the rejection of applications.

Chapter 10 has two sector specific annexes as in some previous US PTAs (e.g. US-Australia, US-
Chile, and US-Peru). The annex on professional services encourages members to set up
mechanisms, in particular a	 Professional Services Working Group, to work towards the mutual
recognition of professional qualifications, and to facilitate licensing and registration procedures.
The annex also encourages parties to grant temporary licenses or registration to engineers in the
context of specific projects, and to allow transnational legal services to provide services on a “fly-
in, fly-out” basis as well as through web-based communications - to an extent not covered in
																																																								
7	All
    six US FTAs include this provision, but some other PTAs don’t cover this provision, such as the Japan and
Brunei FTA and the ASEAN Framework Agreement in Services.	


	                                                                                                               4
previous US PTAs. Consistently with previous PTAs, Annex 10-B on Express Delivery mandates
each party to maintain prevailing levels of market openness for express delivery services. It goes
further than previous PTAs by introducing rules for postal monopolies of the parties, by limiting
cross-subsidization, prohibiting regulators to require express delivery suppliers to provide
universal postal services, and ensuring independence of the regulator from any supplier.

Cross Border Investment in Services (Chapter 9)

The WTO covers investment only in services, as commercial presence (mode 3) under the GATS.
The TPP investment disciplines span goods and services. Chapter 9 on investment include the
following core obligations which have counterparts in the GATS: national treatment, i.e.
treatment no less favorable than a TPP country provides, in like circumstances, to its own investors
or investments; most-favored-nation treatment, i.e., treatment no less favorable than a TPP country
provides, in like circumstances, to another country’s foreign investors or investments; allowing
for the transfer of funds related to an investment covered under the agreement subject to certain
exceptions.

The TPP goes further than the GATS in including provisions: relating to a “minimum standard of
treatment” for investments, which includes protections against denial of justice and failure to
provide police protection; requiring that any expropriation of an investment by a TPP government
be for a public purpose, in accordance with due process of law, and subject to compensation;
barring specified “performance requirements,” including local content requirements, export
requirements, and technology transfer or technology localization requirements; ensuring investors
have the ability to appoint senior managers without regard to nationality, and that any nationality-
based restrictions on the appointment of board members do not impair an investor’s control over
its investment.

The TPP went beyond previous PTAs (such as the US-Australia FTA) by extending the obligations
not only to the central government, but also to regional authorities and state owned enterprises or
any other body that exercised government authority (Article 9.2.2). Also, the TPP improved upon
other PTAs by prohibiting the Parties from requiring the purchase and use, in its territory, of
technology of the Party and from preventing the purchase and use of particular technology (Article
9.10.1 (h)). Furthermore, the area that this chapter went beyond all previous PTAs is the area of
investor-Party dispute settlement. TPP investors will have the right to pursue neutral, international
arbitration in the event of a dispute between an investor of a TPP Party and another TPP Party over
a violation of one of the commitments of the Investment chapter. The chapter specifies these
proceedings will be conducted in a transparent manner, with opportunities for public participation
and safeguards to prevent abuse and help deter frivolous or otherwise non-meritorious claims.

As in the case of cross border trade in services, TPP countries have agreed to accept the core
obligations on a “negative-list basis,” and any violations to these core obligations are listed in the
non-conforming measures of Annex I and Annex II.




	                                                                                                   5
Temporary Entry of Business Persons (Chapter 12)

The TPP, like some previous PTAs, covers the temporary entry of business persons.8 It covers not
only business visitors, i.e. individuals who do not make direct sales or supply goods or services
themselves, but also other categories of natural persons who do. Chapter 12 defines business
persons as someone “who is engaged in trade in goods, the supply of services or the conduct of
investment activities.” It covers business visitors, service sale persons, installers and servicers,
contractual service suppliers, independent professionals, professionals and technicians, and other
types of professionals. The general provisions of the chapter focus on enhancing transparency,
with regard to both the general policy regime and individual applications, as well as on
encouraging cooperation between TPP countries. The substance of the chapter lies in Annex 12-
A, where TPP Parties (except the United States) have listed country-specific reciprocal
commitments on access for each other’s business persons. In some cases, countries such as
Canada, made a number of preferential commitments, e.g. waiver of economic needs tests for
business persons and their spouses seeking temporary entry. These preferences went beyond the
GATS and some PTA commitments.	

The TPP commitments specify the conditions and limitations for entry and temporary stay,
including length of stay for each category of business persons specified by the Party. The United
States did not make commitments on additional visas for temporary entry, and only agreed to
measures on regulatory transparency and predictability. According to the USTR, these rules would
not require any change in U.S. immigration laws or regulations, and dispute settlement for this
chapter is limited to very specific circumstances. Other TPP parties, however, have made
additional access commitments on the temporary entry of business persons, including on length of
stay and types of occupations. For example, Australia provides categories defining "business
visitors" and spells out the conditions and limitations for each category such as "service sellers"
who are permitted an initial stay of 6 months up to a maximum of 12 months.


III. SERVICES TRADE POLICY AND COMMITMENTS: DATA AND MEASUREMENT

Our goal is to compare the market openness agreed in the TPP with three other benchmarks: Doha
offers, bilateral and plurilateral agreements, and applied MFN policy. The approach taken is
similar to that in Borchert, Gootiiz, and Mattoo (2011) which compared Doha offers with applied
policy. We define the scope of the comparison and the approach to quantification on the basis of
the World Bank Services Trade Restrictions Database, the most comprehensive source of
information on applied policies in services. The updated Database covers key services sectors of
12 TPP countries. We use the same methodology to measure the commitments in each negotiating
fora.9 The applied policy information is from a survey conducted in 2008 and updated for some of
																																																								
8	Some of the previous PTAs examined, namely the NAFTA, the US- Singapore, the US- Chile, Canada-Peru FTAs
contain a chapter on temporary entry of business persons, while other FTAs such as the US-Australia, US-Peru
FTAs do not have such chapters.
	
9
 A detailed description of the World Bank Services Trade Restrictions Database—including details on the data
collection process, the policy measures covered and the questionnaire used in the data collection—is provided at
http://iresearch.worldbank.org/servicetrade. The global policy patterns of services trade policy emerging from the
Database are presented in Borchert, Gootiiz and Mattoo (2014). We updated the applied policy information for


	                                                                                                                    6
the countries at the end of 2015. 10 For the OECD countries, we relied on publicly available
information and policy information from the OECD STRI database (Geloso Grosso et al., 2015).

This paper focuses on five major services sectors and modes, covered by the Database. The five
major services sectors are disaggregated into further subsector-modes (as shown in Annex Table
1): financial (banking and insurance), telecommunications, retail distribution, transportation
(international maritime shipping, maritime auxiliary, road freight, and rail freight services) and
professional services (accounting, auditing and legal). Within each subsector, the database covers
the most relevant modes of supplying the respective service: establishing commercial presence or
FDI (mode 3 in WTO parlance) in every subsector; cross-border trade in services (mode 1) in
financial, transportation and some professional services; and the presence of service supplying
individuals (mode 4) in professional services.

Among the TPP countries, there are 29 regional and bilateral trade agreements with services
components. Among the 66 country pairs within the TPP region, 43 country pairs have PTAs
covering services (Annex Table 2). Chile has the most number of PTAs (with all 11 TPP partners),
while Canada has only four PTAs (with the US, Mexico, Peru and Chile). We reviewed these
agreements and their annexes for reservations made for the 27 sub-sector modes covered by the
database (for the sector list see Annex Table 1). For each subsector-mode, we identified the
measures and commitments made under the PTAs, and the PTA with the most open regime was
used as the benchmark.11

It is hard to measure precisely policies affecting services trade because of their variety and
complexity (see, for example, Hoekman (1996) and the overview by Deardoff and Stern (2008)).
We rely on a measure of the restrictiveness of a country’s policy regime for any subsector-mode,
the “services trade restrictions index” (STRI), which has the weakness of being subjective but the
virtue of being simple, transparent and robust (Borchert et al. 2014). This measure is most
convenient to depict broad patterns in policy, across countries, modes, and sectors. Essentially,
we assess policy regimes in their entirety and assign them into five broad categories: completely
open, i.e. no restrictions at all; completely closed, i.e. no entry allowed at all; virtually open but
with minor restrictions; virtually closed but with very limited opportunities to enter and operate;
and a final residual “intermediate” category of regimes which allow entry and operations but
impose restrictions that are neither trivial nor stringent. It is convenient to assign a value to each
of these five categories of regimes on an openness scale from 0 to 1 with intervals of 0.25. We
call the resulting score a services trade restrictions index (STRI). Once a score has been attached
to each regime, STRI values can be aggregated across sectors and modes of supply taking weighted
averages which reflect the importance of the different modes in each sector and the individual
sectors in a standardized country. Details of the quantification method are provided in Annex
Tables A -8 and A- 9 and Borchert et al (2014).

																																																								
number of countries at the end of 2015 in order to compare the TPP commitments with the most recent applied
policy information.
10
   The information was updated for Vietnam, Malaysia, Mexico and Chile.
11
   For GATS commitments and PTAs that use a positive listing approach (e.g. ASEAN Framework Agreement in
Services), if a certain sector is not included, we consider it “unbound” and a score of 1 was assigned. For PTAs that
use a negative listing approach, if a certain sector-mode is not listed in the reservations list, we consider the sector
completely open and a score of 0 was assigned.	


	                                                                                                                      7
IV. A COMPARITIVE ASSESSMENT OF TPP COMMITMENTS

The main findings are summarized in Figure 1 below. In the following sub-sections, we will
compare TPP commitments with Doha offers, the best commitments under PTAs and applied
policies.

Figure 1: STRI for TPP Members - Doha Offers, ‘Best PTA’, TPP Commitments and
Applied Policy of 2015


                                                                Overall STRI: Doha, PTA, TPP and applied policy
                                           100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
                                           75
                                           50
                                           25
                                           0




                                                   BRN MYS CHL SGP MEX CAN VNM USA PER JPN AUS NZL
                                                                                          Doha                      PTA
                                                                                          TPP                       Policy '15
                                                 Note: Absense of a bar means there are no restrictions (STRI score is zero)

Note 1: BRN =Brunei, MYS =Malaysia, CHL = Chile, SGP= Singapore, MEX= Mexico, CAN= Canada,
VNM = Vietnam, USA =United States, PER = Peru, JPN= Japan, AUS = Australia; NLZ = New Zealand.
Note 2: The country STRI is an aggregate score of indices for services sectors covered, the country STRI
comprises STRIs of five major sectors, financial, telecom, retailing, transportation, and professional
services. These five sectors contain different subsectors and the relevant modes. Source: The World Bank
TPP database, 2016.


Doha offers and the TPP commitments

The TPP commitments of the majority of countries are a significant improvement on their Doha
offers. On average, TPP countries’ commitments improved upon the Doha round offers by about
40 percent - the TPP members’ average Doha offer score was 46 and the TPP commitments score
was 28. The largest improvements upon the offers are from Chile, Brunei, Mexico, Peru and



	                                                                                                                                8
Singapore. Other countries, e.g. Vietnam, Australia, and New Zealand, made only small
improvements in the TPP upon their Doha offers.

The TPP has brought much greater policy transparency and policy certainty than that in the UR
schedules or in the Doha offers.12 In the GATS, when a country scheduled “Unbound” or if there
was no commitment for a subsector mode, it was hard to assess how open the sector was. In the
TPP, countries have generally provided much more information on their non-conforming
measures. The TPP commitments widened the coverage of the sector-modes covered by the GATS
commitments of Brunei and Vietnam and the Doha offers of the other countries. Out of the 97
sector-modes, for which the twelve countries listed “unbound”, they made TPP commitments on
47 of them.

Consider the TPP improvements by sector of those countries that have made significant TPP
improvement upon offers. For Chile, the TPP gain came from all five sectors covered, financial,
telecommunications, retail, transport, and professional services; some of these sectors were not
included in the GATS commitments or in the Doha offers, while the TPP covered these sectors
and specified the non-conforming measures. Chile specified that it would apply discretionary
economic needs tests (ENT) in decisions on licensing in banking insurance, and
telecommunications sectors, but eliminated this requirement under the TPP; in retailing, all modes
of transport (maritime shipping, auxiliary, road, and rail), and domestic legal advisory services,
Chile did not have commitments under the GATS, while under the TPP, Chile has no restrictions
in these sectors. Brunei’s TPP improvement mainly came from its TPP commitment in financial
services, retailing, and professional services, because none of these sectors was listed in its GATS
schedule and Doha offer. Peru’s overall TPP gain is attributable to its TPP commitment in transport
sector because none of the transport subsectors was listed in its GATS/Doha.

TPP commitments and the Best PTAs

Perhaps a more relevant benchmark to assess the TPP are the best commitments made under
regional agreements by the TPP parties. We find that TPP commitments have generally not gone
further than the best commitments under existing PTAs. The average commitment score for the
TPP member countries was 27.8 and their average PTA commitment score was 26.5. The
exception is Brunei, where its TPP commitment is twice as liberal as the commitment under the
“best PTA”. For a number of countries, including Chile, Mexico, Japan, Australia, and New
Zealand, the TPP commitments are roughly at the same level as their best PTAs. For the remaining
countries, like the United States and Canada, the TPP commitments are in fact more restrictive
than their most ambitious PTA commitments. However, for countries that did not have previous
PTAs with each other, the TPP improvement was significant. Of the 66 TPP country pairs, 43 had
previous agreements and 23 did not. For example, the US, Canada, Mexico, Chile, and Peru did
not have PTAs with Brunei and Malaysia.

In general, TPP members have not removed the restrictions they maintain under existing
agreements, like NAFTA or AFAS, but some have. For example, Mexico’s NAFTA commitment
for foreign legal consultancy shows the sector is open subject to reciprocity, and the TPP
																																																								
12
  Borchert et al. (2011) demonstrated that the best service offers submitted in the context of the Doha negotiations
improved only slightly on countries’ Uruguay Round commitments.


	                                                                                                                      9
commitment also contains this requirement: “Foreign interest greater than 49% in an enterprise
that provides legal services need to obtain approval from NCFI. Investment approval is subject to
reciprocity.” (Source: TPP- Mexico’s Annex I, page 38). However, Malaysia and Singapore’s
commitments for life and non-life insurance under the AFAS were improved under the TPP.
Malaysia’s commitment under the AFAS limits foreign equity participation to 30 percent for new
firms, 51 percent for existing firms, and entry through a branch is not allowed, the TPP
commitment keeps the restriction on entry via a branch but lifts the limits on the foreign equity
participation. For insurance sector (mode 3), Singapore maintains 49 percent equity limit in
acquiring existing firms under the AFAS but this restriction was removed under the TPP.

One of the virtues of the TPP was supposed to be the consolidation of existing bilateral and
plurilateral agreements between TPP countries, and the extension of their benefits to all TPP
members. Therefore, it is striking that the TPP countries listed a significant reservation to the
Most-Favored-Nation Treatment (Articles 9.4 and 10.3) for all cross-border trade in services and
investment. For example: “The United States reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
that accords differential treatment to countries under any bilateral or multilateral international
agreement in force or signed prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement.” (Annex II of
the United States, page 11). Virtually identical language is to be found in Annex II of Australia,
Canada, Chile, Japan, Mexico, Peru and all four ASEAN member countries.

If the TPP commitments were more liberal than those made in earlier agreements, then these
reservations would be inconsequential. But that is not the case: in several instances, TPP
commitments are more restrictive than those under earlier agreements. Consider, for example,
commitments made under the ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services (AFAS) by Singapore
and Malaysia. Singapore commitments on land transport and auxiliary services under AFAS
assure partners of no restrictions, but under the TPP, Singapore reserves the right to maintain or
adopt any measure affecting the supply of land transport services (Annex II, SGP 28). Similarly,
Malaysia’s commitments on auxiliary maritime services under AFAS allow entry subject to a
foreign equity limit of 49 percent but under the TPP, Malaysia reserves the right “to adopt or
maintain any measure that accords rights, preferences and differential treatment to countries under
any international agreement in force or signed after the date of entry into force of this Agreement
involving maritime and port services” (Annex II, p7). In maritime transport, Peru listed some
restrictions under the TPP such as a nationality requirement in ownership and crew members in
international maritime shipping (TPP Annex I of Peru, page 25), but there are no restrictions or
reservations in Peru’s PTAs with the US, Canada and Singapore.

TPP commitments and the applied policy status quo

Figure 1 above shows that the TPP commitments improved upon the Doha round offers, but for
no country is the average openness implied by TPP commitments greater than that offered by
currently applied policies in the sectors we cover. The average commitment score for the TPP
member countries was 27.8 while the average applied policy score was 18.6 for 2015 policies,
implying that applied policies were about one-third more open than the TPP commitments. The
biggest closing of gaps between TPP commitments and applied policy was in the case of Japan,
Australia, Vietnam, Canada and Mexico. Their TPP commitments scored much closer to their
applied policy score. On the other hand, Singapore, which has the largest gap between its open



	                                                                                               10	
applied policy (average score of 11) and its conservative Doha offer (67), remained cautious in the
TPP (39).

In comparing TPP commitments with the policy status quo, our measures may underestimate the
liberalizing impact of the TPP in two ways. First, the TPP negotiating process could already have
induced changes in applied policies before the date at which we measure the policy status quo.
Second, some of the TPP commitments specify liberalization several years after the completion of
the agreement whereas we focus on changes in policies at the conclusion of the agreement.

Changes in the “status quo”: TPP induced?

The TPP was concluded in October 2015 after seven years of negotiations. Could it be the case
that important national reforms were induced by the TPP negotiations, became part of applied
national policy and therefore are not credited to the TPP when we compare commitments under
the agreement with applied policy?

Our applied policy information is from 2008, about the time the TPP negotiations began, and we
updated applied policy information for a number of TPP members as of 2015, when the TPP
agreement was concluded. We find that between 2008 and 2015, a few countries undertook reforms
in their key services sectors. For example, Mexico’s telecommunications policy was reformed in
2013, and Malaysia carried out several services sector reforms between 2009 and 2013 in financial
services, telecommunications, and professional services. Both countries removed certain
restrictions on foreign ownership in these sectors. These reforms are discussed in more detail in
the sectoral discussions below.

Most evidence suggests that the primary impulse in favor of the new laws in both countries was
an emerging national consensus in favor of reform not necessarily connected to the TPP. But it is
possible that the governments of the two countries were sensitive to demands from TPP negotiating
partners, and chose to enact reforms in anticipation of the conclusion of the negotiations. In any
case, most reforms in both countries offer improved access on an MFN basis and their benefits
were not limited to TPP countries.

Commitment to future liberalization
Some countries used the TPP to commit to liberalization not immediately but in the future. The
rationale may have been to give domestic firms time to prepare for foreign competition. Vietnam’s
TPP commitment in retail distribution states that the Economic Needs Test (ENT) currently
applied for the establishment of outlets for retail services would be phased out five years after the
date of entry into force of the agreement for Viet Nam. In telecommunications services, Vietnam
has promised to relax or eliminate foreign equity restrictions over the same time frame. Similar	
assurances	to	phase‐in	liberalization	appear	in	the	financial	sector	commitments	of	Malaysia.	
Cross‐border	direct	insurance	of	risks	relating	to	directors’	and	officers’	liability	is	allowed	
five	years	after	the	date	of	entry	into	force	of	the	Agreement,	and	any	measures	relating	to	
the	development	of	the	pension	system	in	Malaysia	will	cease	to	be	applicable	three	years	
after	the	date	of	entry	into	force	of	this	Agreement	(Annex	III	of	Malaysia,	page	16).	




	                                                                                                11	
TPP commitments, best PTAs, and applied policies in key sectors and modes

Financial Services

In terms of the basic rules, the TPP Financial Services chapter differs from financial services
chapters in previous PTAs in creating new disciplines on the supply of insurance services by postal
insurance entities and on electronic payment card services. The disciplines on postal insurance
entities requires parties to ensure competitive conditions in insurance services by applying the
same regulations to postal insurance entities that apply to private insurance suppliers, giving the
postal insurance entities the same conditions and rights to distribution channels as those for private
suppliers and requiring postal entities to publish the details of financial statements. The section on
electronic payment card services requires parties to allow the cross-border supply of electronic
payment services though parties may condition such services on registration with the relevant
authorities and designation of an agent or representative office in the party’s territory.

As far as non-conforming measures are concerned, the TPP commitments of most countries in
financial services improved on their Doha offers, but did not improve on the most ambitious PTAs
and are much closer to, but not more open than, their applied policies (Figure 2). As far as cross
border supply of financial services is concerned, the TPP limits the obligation to the few areas also
specified in the WTO’s Financial Services Understanding, which include reinsurance services but
not commercial banking, life or automobile insurance.13

Brunei, Chile, Mexico and Peru made significant improvements over their Doha offers. For
example, Brunei did not make any commitment under the GATS or the AFAS or a Doha offer on
commercial presence in the banking sector and cross-border delivery in the insurance sectors, but
under the TPP, Brunei has promised to lock in open access in these areas. In Chile’s case, the
Doha offer mentions that licensing is subject to an economic needs test (ENT) for commercial
presence in banking and insurance sectors, but the TPP commitment does not mention the ENT
requirement. In this respect, the TPP reflects the most open PTAs signed (with the US, Australia,
Peru, and New Zealand). For Mexico’s banking and insurance sector, TPP commitments no longer
mention the 49 percent foreign equity limitations that Mexico’s Doha offer maintains but its
applied policy does not. In case of Peru, the life insurance sector had an FDI limit of 45 percent,
which is no longer maintained in practice or the TPP; cross border reinsurance was unbound, but
is allowed in practice and the TPP.

Some countries appear to have committed under the TPP to improve on applied policies. For
example, in reinsurance services, Australia extended to all TPP countries a benefit that it had
hitherto only provided to the United States as part of their bilateral agreement. It eliminated
specific approval requirements for foreign establishments for the acquisition of a domestic
company or the establishment of a new operation with assets in excess of certain thresholds. In
both banking and insurance services, Peru eliminated the limitation it maintained that at least 80

																																																								
13
   The areas covered in the WTO’s Financial Services Understanding are: (a) insurance of risks relating to (i)
maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), (ii) goods in
international transit; (b) reinsurance and retrocession and the services auxiliary to insurance; (c) provision and
transfer of financial information and financial data processing and advisory and other auxiliary services, excluding
intermediation, relating to banking and other financial services.


	                                                                                                                  12	
percent of employees must be nationals, and 70 percent of wages be paid to national employees.
Furthermore, Peru allows cross-border supply of reinsurance services which it previously did not.

Some of the most significant developments in financial services reform after the commencement
of TPP negotiations were witnessed in Malaysia, and are reflected in its TPP commitments. In
2008, primary entry as the branch of a financial institution was not allowed, and entry through a
subsidiary was temporarily not allowed, since no new licenses were being issued. Although there
was no limit on foreign ownership in a subsidiary, the limit on foreign ownership was 30 percent
for acquisition of a local bank. With the enactment of the Financial Services Act 2013 and the
Islamic Financial Services Act 2013 in June 2013, there has been a comprehensive modernization
and streamlining of Malaysia’s regime on licensing and foreign equity limits in the banking and
insurance sector (conventional and Islamic). In both conventional and Islamic finance, application
for a license is now based on the prudential and “best interest of Malaysia” criteria. Similarly, the
acquisition of a significant foreign equity interest in Malaysian banks and insurance companies
could be up to 100 percent, subject to meeting the aforementioned criteria.

Figure 2: STRI for Financial services - Doha Offers, ‘Best PTA’, TPP Commitments and
Applied Policy of 2015

                                                                       Financial: Doha, PTA, TPP and applied policy
                                            100
     Services trade restrictiveness index
                                            75
                                            50
                                            25
                                            0




                                                     BRN       MYS       CHL       SGP       MEX       CAN       VNM        USA      PER     JPN   AUS   NZL
                                                                                                 Doha                           PTA
                                                                                                 TPP                            Policy '15
                                                  Note: Absense of a bar means there are no restrictions (STRI score is zero)


Source: The World Bank TPP Database, 2016

Malaysia’s TPP commitment enhances transparency and predictability of applied policies.
Although the commitment states that the license is subject to “best interest” of Malaysia, it spells
out the criteria that the Minister or the Bank will use to determine whether the investment will
meet the “best interest” criteria.14 Furthermore, the Central bank is mandated to make a decision
																																																								
14
  The criteria include (a) the effect of the investment on the level and nature of economic activity in Malaysia,
including on productivity, efficiency and quality of financial services; (b) the contribution towards enhancing


	                                                                                                                                                              13	
on the application within 120 days and required to notify the applicant of the decision and provide
the reasons for why an application was not deemed to be in the best interest of Malaysia.
Malaysia’s commitment in banking services grants preferences to TPP parties, with some of the
preferences subject to reciprocity. Whereas foreign banks are allowed to establish only up to eight
new physical branches and not allowed to establish new off-premise electronic terminals, locally
incorporated foreign banks from the other TPP parties can establish an additional eight new
physical branches and establish new off-premise ATMs if their home country allows Malaysian
banks to do the same (Annex III of Malaysia, page 11).


Telecommunications

TPP’s telecommunications chapter contains the key disciplines mandated by the GATS telecom
annex and telecom reference paper and the disciplines of telecom chapter of the previous PTAs,
with couple of new features. The TPP extends pro-competitive network access rules to mobile
suppliers. In addition, there is a new provision on international mobile roaming that no previous
PTAs addressed. The provision aims to prevent unreasonable mobile roaming rates from affecting
both voice and data services and to ensure that roaming rates are publicly available to consumers
of the parties.

In terms of specific commitments for telecommunications, for most TPP countries, there is a
remarkable similarity between their Doha offers, TPP commitments and applied policy in
telecommunications. In the case of Chile, Mexico, Malaysia and Singapore, the TPP commitments
improve on Doha offers and reflect currently open policies. In these countries’ telecommunications
sector, foreign equity limitations and economic needs tests specified in the Doha offers are no
longer maintained in practice. For example, Mexico maintained a foreign ownership limit of 49
percent in 2008 but had completely relaxed this limitation as part of its new telecommunications
law introduced in 2013. Malaysia’s telecom sector was liberalized as part of the services
liberalization reforms the country undertook in 2009 and 2011. Malaysia is progressively removing
foreign equity limits in the telecom sector. Currently the foreign equity limit is 70 percent for
network facilities providers and 100 percent for applications service providers.

The comparison of PTAs with TPP shows that only Brunei and Vietnam did not extend their
existing AFAS (ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services) commitments to TPP. Other
members’ TPP commitment reflects their PTA commitment in telecom.

However, Vietnam has pre-committed to further liberalization. For facilities based provider of
value-added services, the maximum foreign equity limit of 51 percent will be raised to 65 percent
no later than five years after the date of entry into force of this agreement. Whereas non-facilities
based providers of basic and valued added services must currently operate as a joint venture or
through the purchase of shares in a Vietnamese enterprise, with foreign equity not exceeding 65
percent, these restrictions shall be eliminated no later than five years after the date of entry into
force of the Agreement (Annex I of Vietnam, page 9). There is no promise to relax the requirement
																																																								
international trade and investment linkages between Malaysia and other countries, (c) effect of the investment on the
stability of the financial system, including on conduct and behaviors that could pose a risk to the financial system, or
(d) the degree and significance of participation of Malaysians in the financial sector (Annex III of Malaysia, page 6).


	                                                                                                                   14	
that facilities-based providers of basic telecom services must operate as a joint venture with a
foreign equity limit of 49 percent.

Figure 3: STRI for Telecommunications - Doha Offers, ‘Best PTA’, TPP Commitments and
Applied Policy of 2015
                                                                       Telecom: Doha, PTA, TPP and applied policy
                                            100
     Services trade restrictiveness index
                                            75
                                            50
                                            25
                                            0




                                                    BRN       MYS        CHL      SGP       MEX       CAN       VNM       USA        PER     JPN   AUS   NZL
                                                                                                Doha                            PTA
                                                                                                TPP                             Policy '15
                                                  Note: Absense of a bar means there are no restrictions (STRI score is zero)


Source: The World Bank TPP Database, 2016


Retail Distribution

No country made TPP commitments that went beyond its applied policies. Many countries –
Australia, Chile, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and United States -maintain no explicit
restrictions and their TPP countries reflect that. Four countries made TPP commitments that went
beyond Doha offers and the rest maintained what they already offered during the Doha
negotiations. Chile and Brunei did not include the retail sector in their Uruguay Round
commitments or Doha offer, but in the TPP, these countries have placed no limitations on retailing.

Most countries’ TPP commitments reflect their best commitments under their PTA, except that
Malaysia and Singapore’s TPP commitments are more restrictive than their AFAS commitments.
Malaysia’s TPP commitment lists several limitations: for example, foreigners are not allowed to
operate supermarkets or mini markets and no less than 30 per cent of the equity in hypermarkets,
superstores and convenience stores is to be held by the Bumiputera (i.e. native Malay).15 Singapore
																																																								
15
  Other restrictions include the following: All distributive trade companies with foreign equity are required to
appoint Bumiputera director/directors. Hypermarkets, superstores, convenience stores and departmental stores are
required to allocate 30 percent of the Stock Keeping Units displayed on the shelf space for Bumiputera SME goods
and products in each outlet within 3 years. One hypermarket will be allowed for every 250,000 residents and one
superstore for every 200,000 residents. Foreigners are not permitted to provide wholesale and distribution services
for fabrics and apparels of batik, motor vehicles including motorcycles and scooters, passenger cars and commercial
vehicles (excluding automotive components and parts of these vehicles) (Annex I of Malaysia, p24).


	                                                                                                                                                              15	
reserves the right to adopt measures related to the list of products and export and import licensing.
These limitations do not appear in their respective AFAS schedules.

Vietnam has pre-committed to liberalize retail distribution. It will phase out in five years after the
date of entry into force of the agreement the Economic Needs Test (ENT) to which it currently
subjects the establishment of outlets for retail services (beyond the first one) (Annex I of Vietnam,
page 6).16

Figure 4: STRI for Retail Distribution - Doha Offers, ‘Best PTA’, TPP Commitments and
Applied Policy of 2015
                                                                          Retailing: Doha, PTA, TPP and applied policy
                                             100
      Services trade restrictiveness index
                                             75
                                             50
                                             25
                                             0




                                                       BRN       MYS       CHL       SGP        MEX       CAN       VNM           USA   PER     JPN   AUS   NZL
                                                                                                    Doha                           PTA
                                                                                                    TPP                            Policy '15
                                                    Note: Absense of a bar means there are no restrictions (STRI score is zero)


Source: The World Bank TPP Database, 2016


Transportation

Transport services are among the most protected services in many countries (Borchert et al., 2014).
One of the ironies of services trade negotiations is that these services which are most in need of
coordinated liberalization, have, de jure (air transport) or de facto (maritime transport), often been
carved out of the scope of the GATS and other earlier trade agreements. The TPP too has not fully
grasped this nettle. Although the TPP expanded the coverage of auxiliary air transport services to
include ground handling, airport operations and specialty air services, the cross-border air traffic
services are excluded. Thus we read in Article 10.2.5 that:

                                                   “This Chapter [on cross-border trade in services] shall not apply to air services, including
                                                   domestic and international air transportation services, whether scheduled or non-
                                                   scheduled, or to related services in support of air services…”

																																																								
16
  The ENT is based on pre-established publicly available procedures, and approval is based on objective criteria,
including the number of existing service suppliers in a particular geographic area, the stability of market and
geographic scale.


	                                                                                                                                                                 16	
The United States has also carved out maritime transport services from the scope of its
commitments under the TPP:

                                             “The United States reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure relating to the
                                            provision of maritime transportation services and the operation of U.S.-flagged vessels…”
                                            (TPP Agreement, Annex II-US-5, Annex II, Schedule of the United States).

Other countries have not gone as far as the United States, but many countries, such as Australia
and Mexico, have chosen to exclude maritime cabotage from the scope of their commitments.
Countries, such as Mexico in railroad services, and Singapore and Brunei in land transport, have
not made any commitments to allow foreign investment provision.

TPP commitments in maritime shipping, maritime auxiliary, rail freight, and road freight transport
largely reflect the commitments under the “most ambitious” PTAs. For two countries Singapore
and Peru, TPP commitments fell short of the best PTA commitments. Under the TPP, Singapore
reserves the right to adopt any measure in road freight transport; under the AFAS and Singapore
Japan PTA, Singapore made commitment in road transport of certain types of freight, such as
refrigerated goods, liquids or gases, containerized goods, and furniture. Under the TPP, Peru listed
some restrictions such as a nationality requirement in ownership and crew members in
international maritime shipping (TPP Annex I of Peru, page 25), while there are no restrictions or
reservations in Peru’s PTAs with the US, Canada and Singapore.

Figure 5: STRI for Transportation - Doha Offers, ‘Best PTA’, TPP Commitments and
Applied Policy of 2015


                                                                Transportation: Doha, PTA, TPP and applied policy
                                           100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
                                           75
                                           50
                                           25
                                           0




                                                   BRN MYS CHL SGP MEX CAN VNM USA                                             PER     JPN   AUS   NZL
                                                                                              Doha                        PTA
                                                                                              TPP                         Policy '15
                                                 Note: Absense of a bar means there are no restrictions (STRI score is zero)




	                                                                                                                                                        17	
Source: The World Bank TPP Database, 2016

Professional Services

TPP countries have not liberalized the professional services sector beyond existing levels of
openness and most countries commitments under the TPP reflect the level of openness in their
existing PTAs. The exceptions are Malaysia and Singapore’s commitments on cross-border trade
in accounting and auditing services that go slightly beyond their applied policies. Under
Malaysia’s applied policy, auditing services cannot be provided cross-border but the TPP does not
mention this restriction in the non-conforming measure list. In Singapore, local presence was
required for the cross-border supply of accounting and auditing services but the TPP does not
specify this restriction.


Figure 6: STRI for Professional services - Doha Offers, ‘Best PTA’, TPP Commitments and
Applied Policy of 2015


                                                                 Professional: Doha, PTA, TPP and applied policy
                                           100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
                                           75
                                           50
                                           25
                                           0




                                                   BRN MYS CHL SGP MEX CAN VNM USA PER JPN AUS NZL
                                                                                           Doha                      PTA
                                                                                           TPP                       Policy '15
                                                 Note: Absense of a bar means there are no restrictions (STRI score is zero)


Source: The World Bank TPP Database, 2016

Temporary Entry of Business Persons

As noted above, TPP commitments in Chapter 12 on the Temporary Entry for Business Persons
cover not just business visitors (who do not actually provide services), but also installers and
servicers, contractual service suppliers, independent executives and intra-corporate transferees.
The US did not make any specific commitment in this area, while the other 11 TPP Parties agreed


	                                                                                                                                 18	
upon country-specific reciprocal commitments on access for each other’s business persons.17 Most
countries commit to allow business visitors to stay in the country for up to 90-180 days and to
allow professionals and service suppliers to stay up to 12 months.

Generally most countries’ TPP commitments reflect their cross-sectoral GATS and Doha offers
on the presence of natural persons (mode 4). For example, Australia reserved the right to adopt or
maintain any measure with respect to the supply of a service by the presence of natural persons
that is not inconsistent with Australia’s obligations under Article XVI of GATS (Annex II of
Australia, page 2). Even though the US did not make specific commitments, it stated that
“…Information contained in this document is drawn from the US Revised Offer of 2005” (Annex
I, page 17 and Annex II, page 13), indicating that the TPP commitments would have been based
on their Doha offer on mode 4.

The TPP does contribute to transparency because some countries provided information on the
overall quota, economic needs test, and labor market test, and licensing qualification information.
Countries such as New Zealand indicated that entry of independent professionals is subject to an
economic needs test (ENT). Countries such as Vietnam and Peru maintain an overall quota on
foreign employees. Vietnam’s TPP commitment in this category maintains what it offered in the
accession schedule of the WTO; the commitment states that at least 20 percent of the total number
of managers and executives, and specialists shall be Vietnamese nationals, but a minimum of 3
non-Vietnamese managers, executives and specialists are permitted. Peru indicates foreign natural
persons may not represent more than 20 percent of the total number of employees of an enterprise
and their pay may not exceed 30 percent of the total payroll for wages and salaries of the enterprise.
Mexico’s committed temporary entry of professionals and technicians subject to reciprocal
treatments of other members.

Qualifications and licensing applicable to professionals are generally not included in the main part
of Chapter 12 on the Temporary Entry for Business Persons.18 Instead, Annex 10A of the chapter
on Cross-Border Trade in Services contains broad provisions encouraging recognition and
facilitating licensing and registration of professionals. It also encourages adoption of the APEC
registry of engineers and architects and allowing foreign lawyers to practice foreign law in the host
country on the basis of their qualifications in their home countries (Annex 10A, provision 9-10).

V. OTHER SERVICES-RELATED RULES IN THE TPP

In the discussion of Sections II and IV, we showed how the TPP has enhanced the transparency
and legal certainty of services policy. In this section, we consider how other services-related rules
have also contributed to transparency, predictability and enhanced market access. We argue that
the provisions on cross-border data flows in Chapter 14 on electronic commerce are the most


																																																								
17	While  the U.S. did not submit a schedule of specific commitments on temporary entry, the U.S. would have been
obliged to observe the provisions on transparency and cooperation contained in the main text of Chapter 12.			
18
   A few countries did specify their qualification and licensing requirements in Annex 12A. For example, Japan
specifies the qualifications and licensing requirements to practice certain professions. Canada’s commitment notes
that professionals from certain countries such as Australia can practice without meeting additional professional
qualifications subject to reciprocity.


	                                                                                                               19	
ambitious, but there is value added also in the chapters on competition policy (Chapter 16), state-
owned enterprises (17) and regulatory coherence (25), and government procurement (15)

Data Flows and Cross-Border Trade in Services

The TPP provision on data flows, contained in Chapter 14 on Electronic Commerce, has been
widely and justifiably described as far-reaching. As the USTR website states, “TPP will help
preserve the open Internet and prevent its breakup into multiple, balkanized networks in which
data flows are more expensive and more frequently blocked.” We do not consider the full scope
of this undoubtedly important chapter, but a narrower question: how does the TPP add value to
what was already contained in the GATS and the electronic commerce chapter of the previous
PTAs?

A key issue is whether commitments under the GATS and previous PTAs, especially on cross-
border trade, already cover the data flows that are required to supply the specified services. The
simple answer is: probably yes, but it helps to have greater clarity through the TPP’s explicit
obligation under Article 14.11.2 that “Each Party shall allow the cross-border transfer of
information by electronic means, including personal information, when this activity is for the
conduct of the business of a covered person.” Similarly, even though data localization
requirements could arguably fall foul of the GATS national treatment obligation because they
could be regarded as de-facto discriminatory, it helps to have an explicit obligation in Article
14.13.2 that “No Party shall require a covered person to use or locate computing facilities in that
Party’s territory as a condition for conducting business in that territory.”

The question still arises: what is the value of commitments on international data flows when
parties do not allow cross-border trade in services? The less promising aspect of the TPP is that
the United States and some other countries have circumscribed the scope of their TPP
commitments on cross-border trade in services to match only their GATS commitments.19 Some
additions have been made to the GATS commitments, but the improvements are marginal in the
sectors covered in this paper (for example, some additional US states are brought within the scope
of commitments in foreign legal consulting services and accounting and auditing services). More
significant commitments are made in areas not covered in this paper, such as express delivery,
audiovisual and environmental services, which reflect the improved US offer in the context of the
Doha negotiations.

Under the GATS, implicit commitments on data flows co-exist with an exceptions provision
(Article XIV(c), which allows WTO members– provided they do not arbitrarily or unjustifiably
discriminate or restrict trade in services - to take any measures necessary to prevent deception and
fraud and protect the privacy of individuals. Thus, the security offered by GATS obligations
depends on how far the certainty offered by a country’s commitments is eroded by its freedom to
unilaterally act to prevent fraud and protect privacy to an extent that it deems appropriate.


																																																								
19
  For example, Annex II of the United States shows that “The United States reserves the right to adopt or maintain
any measure that is not inconsistent with the United States’ obligations under Article XVI of the General Agreement
on Trade in Services as set out in the U.S. Schedule of Specific Commitments under the GATS” (Annex II of the
United States, page 11).			


	                                                                                                               20	
The remarkable innovation in the TPP is that, even though there is an exceptions provision similar
to that in the GATS (TPP Article 14.11.3), the TPP breaks new ground in creating obligations on
exporting countries to prevent fraud and deception and protect personal information. Thus, Article
14.7.2 on Online Consumer Protection requires that “Each Party shall adopt or maintain consumer
protection laws to proscribe fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities that cause harm or
potential harm to consumers engaged in online commercial activities.” Article 14.8.2 on Personal
Information Protection requires that “each Party shall adopt or maintain a legal framework that
provides for the protection of the personal information of the users of electronic commerce.” And
Article 14.8.3 stipulates that “Each Party shall endeavor to adopt non-discriminatory practices in
protecting users of electronic commerce from personal information protection violations occurring
within its jurisdiction.” Finally, Article 14.7.3 encourages cooperation in this respect between
national consumer protection agencies and 14.8.5 encourages the development of mechanisms to
promote compatibility between these different data protection regimes.

As argued in Mattoo (2015), such obligations on exporting countries are a key element of the
regulatory cooperation that is needed to reassure importing countries that their commitments to
openness will not place their consumers or broader regulatory needs at the mercy of indifferent
foreign regulators. Moreover, the existence of such shared obligations also reduces the scope for
unilateral action by importing countries under the exceptions provisions and, therefore, creates
greater security of access for exporters. It still remains to be seen how parties will interpret and
implement the Article 14.8.3 stipulation to “endeavor to adopt non-discriminatory practices in
protecting users of electronic commerce,” and whether all consumers and contracts will be
adequately covered regardless of jurisdiction in which they are located. Nevertheless, the TPP
approach to data flows may well be a model for the form of regulatory cooperation that would
induce wider and deeper commitments in services trade.

The close link between unrestricted data flows and regulatory cooperation was also evident in the
decision to exempt the financial services industry from the TPP rules safeguarding the cross-border
flow of data. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew was reported to have defended the US insistence on
this exclusion, stating that “One of the issues here is the requirements of our regulators in terms of
... what they need to have their prudential reviews of financial institutions. We can’t give away
something that our financial regulators would need here in the United States.” 20 In future
negotiations, if countries were to promise to “extradite” data needed for prudential reviews to the
concerned regulator, then there would be less need for local data storage and the exclusion of
financial services from the data flow obligation.


Competition policy

Competition policy can have a significant impact on the operation of services market. The TPP
builds in this area on previous agreements, and requires members to agree to adopt or maintain
national competition laws that proscribe anticompetitive business conduct in their territories
(16.1). The TPP also includes a range of obligations related to procedural fairness in the
implementation of the law (16.2). Interestingly, a provision on “Private Rights of Action” (16.3)
																																																								
20
  Law360, New York (February 11, 2016, 5:35 PM ET).
http://www.law360.com/articles/758328/treasury-s-lew-vouches-for-tpp-s-banking-data-exemption	


	                                                                                                  21	
grants an independent right to seek redress for injury caused by a violation of a party’s competition
law or to request that a Party’s competition authority initiate an investigation. TPP parties agree
to cooperate in the area of competition policy and competition law enforcement, including through
notification, consultation and exchange of information (16.4). Finally, there is also agreement to
adopt or maintain laws that proscribe fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities, which are
similar to some of the provisions in Chapter 14 on Electronic Commerce. None of these provisions
is subject to dispute settlement. The question of how much responsibility a competition authority
has to address anti-competitive behavior outside its territory by entities incorporated in its territory
is not completely clear. A more detailed discussion of the competition provision is to be found in
Gadbaw (2016).

State-owned enterprises

In a range of services sectors, from transport to telecommunications, insurance to postal services,
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) still have a significant presence in a number of TPP countries. The
TPP chapter on SOEs (17) builds on WTO principles, notably in Article XVII of GATT 1994, and
on previous PTAs. It covers state-owned enterprises and designated monopolies of a Party that
affect trade or investment between parties (17.2). Fleury and Marcoux (2016) and Miner (2016)
have compared the SOE disciplines of the TPP with the disciplines in the previous US PTAs. The
authors concluded that the TPP’s SOE disciplines contain innovations, first of all, in the definition
of SOEs which also includes designated monopolies. Accordingly, the requirement that SOEs act
in accordance with commercial considerations and not discriminate in the purchase or sale of a
good or service is also extended to designated monopolies (17.4). The chapter innovates in
extending subsidies rules to services exports of SOEs and obliges each party to ensure that its
SOEs do not cause adverse effects to the interests of another party through the use of non-
commercial assistance, including through commercial presence or cross-border supply of a service
outside its territory. However, there are several exclusions and carve-outs: parties can list in their
schedule to Annex IV, non-conforming activities of SOEs and designated monopolies, Annex 17-
D also lists obligations that are not applicable to the SOEs owned or controlled and designated by
subnational governments. This sub-central entities exclusion is set to be renegotiated five years
after the entry into force of the agreement (Article 17.9). Finally, Article 17.9 mentions the
application of specific annexes for Singapore (Annex 17-E) and Malaysia (Annex 17-F).

Regulatory coherence

The TPP is the first trade agreement to include a chapter on regulatory coherence (Chapter 25).
Given the pervasive influence of regulations in services, this chapter is relevant to services.
However, the provisions are not binding or subject to dispute settlement, and the chapter at this
stage reflects good intentions rather than meaningful regulatory cooperation. The chapter
encourages TPP parties to take three types of actions. First, to conduct impact evaluation of
individual pieces of new regulation to ensure that the benefits outweigh the costs (25.5). Second,
to promote greater coordination between national regulatory agencies to avoid duplication and
inconsistencies (Article 25.4). Third, to enhance international cooperation between regulatory
agencies by creating an intergovernmental Committee on Regulatory Coherence (25.6) and
stipulating cooperation through information exchanges and dialogue with other parties and other
stakeholders (25.7). These are valuable steps, but they fall short of efforts designed to address



	                                                                                                    22	
regulatory externalities (as in the case of the data flow provisions in Chapter 14) and to directly
address regulatory heterogeneity (as in the case of the professional services provisions in Annex
10a).

Government Procurement

The TPP Government Procurement chapter covers both goods and services and includes core
commitments on national treatment and on most-favored-nation treatment, as well as on fair and
transparent procurement procedures, flexible and fair technical specifications and conditions for
participation, and impartial administrative or judicial review of complaints. The eight TPP Parties
which had already agreed to cover their government procurement in past trade agreements with
the United States somewhat expanded their commitment, while Vietnam, Malaysia, and Brunei
committed to opening government procurement market for the first time in TPP. The United States
continued to exclude from coverage “Buy America” requirements for state and local mass transit
and highway projects, small business and other set-asides, and transportation services. There is
no doubt that the TPP rules have added value in the areas of government procurements of services,
especially for Vietnam, Malaysia, and Brunei. A fuller discussion of this dimension is contained
in Moran (2016).



VI. CONCLUSION

Even though the ratification of the TPP is uncertain, we hope that this assessment will contribute
to more informed decisions today and shape future negotiations. The database accompanying this
paper may also contribute to enhanced transparency of both applied policies and commitments
made by the TPP countries in different fora.

Our main findings are the following. First, TPP commitments seldom go beyond countries’ applied
policies and the explicit liberalization resulting from the agreement in the five services sectors
covered in this paper is limited to a few members and a few areas. Second, the TPP enhances
transparency and policy certainty because parties’ services commitments cover more trading
partners, more sectors and are in some cases closer to applied policies than their commitments
under previous agreements. Third, the new rules that the TPP creates, including on state-owned
enterprises, government procurement, competition policy and data flows, could enhance services
market access.

Our findings need to be qualified in two respects. First, our paper covers five major services
sectors but not all the sectors that were included in the TPP negotiations. Some of the excluded
sectors where the TPP reportedly made an impact are express delivery, portfolio management,
energy and mining related services, and certain services auxiliary to air transport. Since we did
not have information on applied policies in these sectors, it was not possible for us to assess how
far the TPP improved on the status quo. Second, our scoring methodology focuses on explicit
restrictions and is not equipped to assess the value of broad rules covering SOEs, government
procurement, and competition policy. We are also not evaluating the benefits of the increased
transparency and policy certainty created by the TPP.



	                                                                                               23	
The question naturally arises: what would have made it possible to achieve greater services
liberalization in the TPP? We may learn from the one area in which the TPP clearly breaks new
ground, i.e. in prohibiting restrictions on international data flows. The quid pro quo was an
unprecedented obligation on all parties to protect consumers from fraud and protect privacy. These
dual obligations on importing and exporting countries represent a model for regulatory cooperation
that could have elicited greater market opening if applied to other sectors. The model remains
relevant for future services negotiations.




	                                                                                              24	
References
Borchert, Ingo, Batshur Gootiiz and Aaditya Mattoo (2011), “Services in Doha: What’s on the
Table?”, Chap. 5 in: Will Martin and Aaditya Mattoo (eds.), Unfinished Business? The WTO’s
Doha Agenda, London: CEPR and World Bank, pp. 115-143.

Borchert, Ingo, Batshur Gootiiz and Aaditya Mattoo (2014): “Policy Barriers to International
Trade in Services: Evidence from a New Database,” World Bank Economic Review, vol. 28(1),
162-188.

Deardorff, Alan V. and Robert M. Stern (2008), “Empirical Analysis of Barriers to International
Services Transactions and the Consequences of Liberalization”, Chapter 5 in: Aaditya Mattoo,
Robert M. Stern and Gianni Zanini (eds.), A Handbook of International Trade in Services, Oxford
University Press, pp. 169-220.

Fleury, Julien Sylvestre and Jean-Michel Marcoux (2016), “The US Shaping of State-owned
Enterprise Disciplines in the Trans-Pacific Partnership”, Journal of International Economic Law,
2016,         Vol      -19,      p      445-465.        Accessed       the      paper     online:
http://jiel.oxfordjournals.org/content/19/2/445.full.pdf?etoc

Gadbaw, Michael (2016), “Competition Policy”, Chapter 18 in “Trans-Pacific Partnership: An
Assessment”, edited by Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs and Jeffrey Schott, Peterson Institute for
International Economics

Geloso Grosso, M., et al. (2015), "Services Trade Restrictiveness Index (STRI): Scoring and
Weighting Methodology", OECD Trade Policy Papers, No. 177, OECD Publishing, Paris.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js7n8wbtk9r-en

Gootiiz, Batshur, and Aaditya Mattoo (2015), Regionalism in Services: A Study of ASEAN,
forthcoming in the World Economy. DOI: 10.1111/twec.12328

Hoekman, Bernard (1996), Assessing the General Agreement on Trade in Services, in: Will Martin
and L. Alan Winters (eds.), The Uruguay Round and the developing countries, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 88-124.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde (February 2016) “Liberalization of Services Trade”, Chapter 7 of
“Assessing the Trans-Pacific Partnership”, Volume 1: Market Access and Sectoral Issues, Peterson
Institute for International Economics Briefing 16-1.

Marchetti, Juan and Martin Roy (2013), “The TISA Initiative: An Overview of Market Access
Issues”, World Trade Organization, Economic Research and Statistics Division, Staff Working
Paper ERSD-2013-11.

Mattoo (2015): “Services Trade and Regulatory Cooperation,” E15 Expert Group on Services
Trade, ICTSD, Geneva.




	                                                                                             25	
Miner, Sean (2016), “Commitments on state-owned enterprises”, Chapter 19 in “Trans-Pacific
Partnership: An Assessment”, edited by Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs and Jeffrey Schott, Peterson
Institute for International Economics

Moran, Tyler (2016), “Government procurement”, Chapter 7 in “Trans-Pacific Partnership: An
Assessment”, edited by Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs and Jeffrey Schott, Peterson Institute for
International Economics

Petri, P., M. Plummer (2015), “Mega-Regional Trade Agreements and Developing Economies”.
Washington DC: World Bank. Mimeo

Petri, Peter and Michael Plummer (2016), “The Economic Effects of the TPP: New Estimates”,
Chapter 1 of “Assessing the Trans-Pacific Partnership”, Volume 1: Market Access and Sectoral
Issues, Peterson Institute for International Economics Briefing 16-1.

Roy, Martin (2011), “Services Commitments in Preferential Trade Agreements: An expanded
Dataset”, World Trade Organization, Economic Research and Statistics Division, Staff Working
Paper ERSD -2011-18

United States International Trade Commission (2016). “Trans Pacific Partnership Agreement:
Likely Impact on the US Economy and on Specific Industry Sectors”. Publication number: 4607.

United States International Trade Commission (June, 2016). “Economic	 Impact	 of	 Trade	
Agreements	Implemented	Under	Trade	Authorities	Procedures,	2016	Report”.	Publication	
number	4614.	

World Bank Group (2016). Global Economic Prospects June 2016: Divergences and Risks.
Washington, D.C. World Bank.




	                                                                                        26	
Annex tables
Table	A1:	 Coverage	of	sectors	and	modes	of	supply	
    Sector/Subsector              Mode 1   Mode 3   Mode 4

    Retail banking                X        X

    Insurance
       Non-life                   X        X
       Life                       X        X
       Reinsurance                X        X

    Telecom
     Fixed                                 X
     Mobile                                X

    Retailing                              X

    Transport
       Maritime shipping
    international                 X        X
       Maritime auxiliary                  X
       Road freight                        X
       Rail freight                        X

    Professional
      Accounting                  X        X        X
      Auditing                    X        X        X
      Legal advice domestic law            X        X
      Legal advice foreign law    X        X        X
Source: The WB TPP Database, 2016




	                                                            27	
Annex Table 2: TPP members’ existing PTAs

                  USA          CAN      MEX      AUS        NZL      JPN      SGP        BRN          PER       CHL   MYS   VNM
    USA
                  NAFTA
    Canada        (1994)
                  NAFTA        NAFTA
    Mexico        (1994)       (1994)

                  USA-AUS
    Australia     FTA (2005)
                                                 AUS-NZL
                                                 CERTA
    New Zealand                                  (1989)
                                        MEX-
                                        JPN      AUS-JPN
                                        FTA      FTA
    Japan                               (2005)   (2015)
                                                            NZL-     JPN -
                                                 SGP-AUS    SGP      SGP
                  USA-SGP                        FTA        FTA      FTA
    Singapore     FTA (2004)                     (2010)     (2001)   (2002)

                                                                     BRN-     AFAS 8th
                                                            AANZF    JPN      Package
                                                 AANZFT     TA       FTA      (2010)
    Brunei                                       A (2010)   (2010)   (2008)
                               CAN-     MEX-                         PER-     PER-
                               PER      PER                          JPN      SGP
                  PER-USA      FTA      FTA                          FTA      FTA
    Peru          FTA (2009)   (2009)   (2012)                       (2012)   (2009)
                                                            CHL-              CHL-
                                                            NZL-              NZL-
                               CAN-     CHL-                SGP-     CHL-     SGP-
                               CHL      MEX      AUS-       BRN      JPN      BRN        CHL-NZL-     CHL-PER
                  CHL-USA      FTA      FTA      CHL FTA    TPS      FTA      TPS        SGP-BRN      FTA
    Chile         FTA (2004)   (1997)   (1999)   (2009)     (2006)   (2007)   (2006)     TPS (2006)   (2009)



	                                                                                                                           28	
                                                                 NZL-      JPN -
                                                    MYL-         MYL       MYL        AFAS 8th   AFAS 8th
                                                    AUS FTA      FTA       EPA        Package    Package
    Malaysia                                        (2010)       (2010)    (2006)     (2010)     (2010)

                                                                           JPN-                                        AFAS
                US-                                              AANZF     VNM        AFAS 8th   AFAS 8th              8th
                Vietnam                             AANZFT       TA        EPA        Package    Package               Package
    Vietnam     BTA                                 A (2010)     (2010)    (2008)     (2010)     (2010)                (2010)

Source: WTO, RTA database; Organization of American States- Foreign Trade Information System, www.sice.oas.org/trade




	                                                                                                                                29	
Table A1: Overall STRI by country
                                                               Policy
    Country   UR        DOHA       PTA      TPP                (2015)
    Overall   50.9      45.9       26.5     27.8               18.6
    AUS       30.5      20.8       19.2     19.2               14.3
    BRN       86.9      86.9       75.0     36.4               23.1
    CAN       41.5      36.8       14.8     33.9               27.8
    CHL       75.3      74.3       16.3     17.1               6.7
    JPN       34.0      24.0       16.3     17.8               15.4
    MEX       52.1      47.5       25.0     24.7               22.6
    MYS       77.3      77.3       51.2     51.8               37.6
    NZL       15.8      13.2       13.2     13.2               7.9
    PER       59.4      32.3       14.4     15.8               8.0
    SGP       66.9      66.9       22.3     39.1               11.1
    USA       34.1      34.1       21.4     27.7               16.9
    VNM      36.7        36.7     28.6        37.2             31.9
Note: AUS is Australia, BRN means Brunei Darussalam, CAN is Canada, CHL is Chile, JPN is Japan, MEX is
Mexico, MYS is Malaysia, NZL is New Zealand, PER is Peru, SGP is Singapore, and VNM is Vietnam.


Table A2: Overall STRI by sector
                                 UR        Doha         PTA             TPP    Policy
    Sector STRI                                                                (2015)
    Overall                      50.9      45.9         26.5            27.8   18.6
    Financial                    42.1      40.4         26.2            26.7   17.6
         Banking                 45.1      43.3         29.9            30.9   17.3
         Insurance               37.4      35.8         20.3            20.1   18.0
         Auto insurance          37.7      34.0         24.8            24.8   22.7
         Life insurance          39.8      39.8         25.4            26.7   22.5
              Reinsurance        34.6      33.8         10.8            8.8    8.8
    Telecommunications           32.3      32.3         12.5            20.8   20.8
    Retailing                    41.7      37.5         14.6            12.5   6.3
    Transport                    70.2      58.0         32.5            37.2   20.2
         Maritime shipping       69.0      53.3         30.2            39.0   18.1
         Maritime auxiliary      75.0      56.3         33.3            37.5   16.7
           Road                  68.8      66.7         27.1            33.3   22.9
           Rail                  70.8      54.2         31.3            31.3   17.5
    Professional                 64.0      58.3         43.6            45.7   33.4
         Accounting              54.2      50.4         36.7            34.6   25.4
         Auditing                50.4      48.8         35.8            41.7   32.5
         Legal advice domestic   87.5      77.1         61.5            67.7   45.8
         Legal advice foreign    63.8      57.1         40.4            38.8   30.0




	                                                                                                  30	
            Table A3: Restrictiveness of UR commitments by country and sector


                                                                                                                       Maritime        Maritime                                      Domestic
country         Overall     Banking        Insurance      Telecom       Retailing       Road           Rail            shipping        auxiliary       Accounting      Auditing      law             Foreign law
Overall         50.9        45.1           37.4           32.3          41.7            68.8           70.8            69.0            75.0            54.2            50.4          87.5            63.8
AUS             30.5        36.3           23.3           25.0          0.0             0.0            100.0           32.5            50.0            50.0            40.0          100.0           50.0
BRN             86.9        100.0          55.0           50.0          100.0           100.0          100.0           100.0           100.0           100.0           60.0          100.0           100.0
CAN             41.5        36.3           43.3           50.0          25.0            50.0           0.0             100.0           25.0            40.0            55.0          100.0           40.0
CHL             75.3        57.5           45.0           50.0          100.0           100.0          100.0           100.0           100.0           50.0            50.0          100.0           50.0
JPN             34.0        15.0           30.0           25.0          0.0             25.0           100.0           100.0           75.0            65.0            65.0          62.5            60.0
MEX             52.1        57.5           46.7           37.5          0.0             100.0          100.0           100.0           100.0           50.0            50.0          100.0           100.0
MYS             77.3        57.5           74.2           50.0          100.0           100.0          100.0           50.0            100.0           50.0            60.0          100.0           60.0
NZL             15.8        15.0           6.7            25.0          0.0             0.0            0.0             30.0            50.0            30.0            30.0          37.5            30.0
PER             59.4        36.3           50.0           0.0           50.0            100.0          100.0           100.0           100.0           70.0            60.0          100.0           100.0
SGP             66.9        57.5           36.7           25.0          100.0           100.0          100.0           0.0             50.0            55.0            45.0          100.0           100.0
USA             34.1        36.3           23.3           0.0           0.0             100.0          0.0             100.0           100.0           50.0            50.0          62.5            45.0
VNM             36.7        36.3           14.2           50.0          25.0            50.0           50.0            15.0            50.0            40.0            40.0          87.5            30.0

Table A4:         Restrictiveness of Doha Round offers by country and sector
                                                                                                                                                                                             Domestic        Foreign
                                                                                                                               Maritime        Maritime                                      law             law
country           Overall          Banking        Insurance      Telecom        Retailing       Road           Rail            shipping        auxiliary       Accounting     Auditing


Overall           45.9             43.3           35.8           32.3           37.5            66.7           54.2            53.3            56.3            50.4           48.8           77.1            57.1
AUS               20.8             36.3           23.3           25.0           0.0             0.0            0.0             32.5            0.0             50.0           40.0           37.5            50.0
BRN               86.9             100.0          55.0           50.0           100.0           100.0          100.0           100.0           100.0           100.0          60.0           100.0           100.0
CAN               36.8             36.3           43.3           50.0           25.0            25.0           0.0             32.5            25.0            40.0           55.0           100.0           30.0
CHL               74.3             57.5           45.0           50.0           100.0           100.0          100.0           100.0           100.0           50.0           50.0           100.0           30.0
JPN               24.0             15.0           13.3           25.0           0.0             25.0           100.0           30.0            0.0             40.0           55.0           62.5            60.0
MEX               47.5             57.5           46.7           37.5           0.0             100.0          100.0           50.0            50.0            50.0           50.0           100.0           100.0
MYS               77.3             57.5           74.2           50.0           100.0           100.0          100.0           50.0            100.0           50.0           60.0           100.0           60.0



            	                                                                                                                                                                                         31	
NZL             13.2     15.0       6.7           25.0            0.0           0.0      0.0                 30.0           0.0             30.0            30.0           37.5            30.0
PER             32.3     15.0       48.3          0.0             0.0           100.0    0.0                 100.0          100.0           50.0            50.0           37.5            50.0
SGP             66.9     57.5       36.7          25.0            100.0         100.0    100.0               0.0            50.0            55.0            45.0           100.0           100.0
USA             34.1     36.3       23.3          0.0             0.0           100.0    0.0                 100.0          100.0           50.0            50.0           62.5            45.0
VNM             36.7     36.3       14.2          50.0            25.0          50.0     50.0                15.0           50.0            40.0            40.0           87.5            30.0

          Table A5: Restrictiveness of PTAs by country and sector


                                                                                                      Maritime        Maritime                                     Domestic         Foreign
Country       Overall   Banking     Insurance      Telecom        Retailing     Road    Rail          shipping        auxiliary      Accounting      Auditing      law              law


Overall       26.5      29.9        20.3           12.5           14.6          27.1    31.3          30.2            33.3           36.7            35.8          61.5             40.4
AUS           19.2      36.3        23.3           25.0           0.0           0.0     0.0           32.5            0.0            30.0            40.0          37.5             40.0
BRN           75.0      78.8        23.3           25.0           100.0         100.0   50.0          15.0            50.0           90.0            50.0          100.0            90.0
CAN           14.8      25.0        18.3           0.0            0.0           0.0     0.0           32.5            25.0           30.0            30.0          37.5             30.0
CHL           16.3      15.0        22.5           0.0            0.0           0.0     0.0           50.0            50.0           30.0            30.0          50.0             30.0
JPN           16.3      15.0        5.8            25.0           0.0           0.0     0.0           15.0            0.0            40.0            55.0          50.0             55.0
MEX           25.0      25.0        46.7           0.0            0.0           25.0    75.0          42.5            25.0           30.0            30.0          75.0             40.0
MYS           51.2      57.5        59.2           25.0           50.0          50.0    100.0         15.0            50.0           40.0            20.0          100.0            60.0
NZL           13.2      15.0        6.7            25.0           0.0           0.0     0.0           30.0            0.0            30.0            30.0          37.5             30.0
PER           14.4      15.0        6.7            0.0            0.0           50.0    0.0           15.0            0.0            30.0            50.0          37.5             30.0
SGP           22.3      36.3        6.7            0.0            0.0           50.0    100.0         0.0             50.0           30.0            45.0          75.0             30.0
USA           21.4      25.0        18.3           0.0            0.0           0.0     0.0           100.0           100.0          30.0            30.0          50.0             20.0
VNM           28.6      15.0        6.7            25.0           25.0          50.0    50.0          15.0            50.0           30.0            20.0          87.5             30.0


          Table A6: Restrictiveness of TPP by country and sector
                                                                                                               Maritime       Maritime        Accounti                 Domestic      Foreign
Country       Overall     Banking    Insurance          Telecom     Retailing    Road          Rail            shipping       auxiliary       ng            Auditing   law           law


Overall       27.8        30.9       20.1               20.8        12.5         33.3          31.3            39.0           37.5            34.6          41.7       67.7          38.8



          	                                                                                                                                                                        32	
AUS           19.2         36.3       23.3               25.0         0.0          0.0           0.0           32.5          0.0       30.0       40.0       37.5         40.0
BRN           36.4         36.3       23.3               50.0         0.0          100.0         50.0          50.0          50.0       30.0      60.0       100.0        50.0
CAN           33.9         36.3       23.3               50.0         25.0         25.0          0.0           32.5          25.0      40.0       50.0       87.5         30.0
CHL           17.1         15.0       23.3               0.0          0.0          0.0           0.0           50.0          50.0      35.0       40.0       50.0         30.0
JPN           17.8         15.0       6.7                25.0         0.0          0.0           25.0          15.0          0.0        40.0      60.0       50.0         60.0
MEX           24.7         36.3       23.3               0.0          0.0          25.0          100.0         42.5          25.0      30.0       30.0       62.5         40.0
MYS           51.8         57.5       60.0               25.0         50.0         50.0          50.0          50.0          100.0      20.0      20.0       100.0        50.0
NZL           13.2         15.0       6.7                25.0         0.0          0.0           0.0           30.0          0.0        30.0      30.0       37.5         30.0
PER           15.8         15.0       6.7                0.0          0.0          50.0          0.0           50.0          0.0        30.0      50.0       37.5         30.0
SGP           39.1         36.3       6.7                0.0          50.0         100.0         100.0         0.0           50.0      30.0       30.0       100.0        30.0
USA           27.7         36.3       23.3               0.0          0.0          0.0           0.0           100.0         100.0     50.0       50.0       62.5         45.0
VNM           37.2         36.3       14.2               50.0         25.0         50.0          50.0          15.0          50.0       50.0      40.0       87.5         30.0

          Table A7: Restrictiveness of applied policy (2015) by country and sector
                                                                                                         Maritime      Maritime                              Domestic     Foreign
Country       Overall      Banking    Insurance    Telecom      Retailing    Road          Rail          shipping      auxiliary     Accounting   Auditing   law          law


Overall       18.6         17.3       18.0         20.8         6.3          22.9          17.5          18.1          16.7          25.4         32.5       45.8         30.0
AUS           14.3         21.3       19.2         25.0         0.0          0.0           0.0           32.5          0.0           20.0         30.0       25.0         30.0
BRN           23.1         21.3       20.0         50.0         0.0          50.0                        7.5           50.0          20.0         40.0       50.0         20.0
CAN           27.8         21.3       18.3         50.0         25.0         25.0          0.0           15.0          25.0          30.0         35.0       62.5         30.0
CHL           6.7          0.0        23.3         0.0          0.0          0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0           20.0         20.0       25.0         20.0
JPN           15.4         0.0        5.8          25.0         0.0          0.0           25.0          15.0          0.0           40.0         60.0       50.0         60.0
MEX           22.6         11.3       21.7         0.0          0.0          100.0         100.0         42.5          25.0          20.0         20.0       25.0         40.0
MYS           37.6         46.3       56.7         25.0         25.0         50.0          0.0           35.0          50.0          20.0         40.0       75.0         40.0
NZL           7.9          0.0        5.0          25.0         0.0          0.0           0.0           15.0          0.0           20.0         20.0       25.0         20.0
PER           8.0          15.0       6.7          0.0          0.0          0.0           0.0           15.0          0.0           20.0         20.0       25.0         20.0
SGP           11.1         21.3       6.7          0.0          0.0          0.0                         0.0           0.0           25.0         35.0       50.0         20.0
USA           16.9         21.3       21.7         0.0          0.0          0.0           0.0           25.0          0.0           50.0         50.0       62.5         40.0
VNM           31.9         28.8       10.8         50.0         25.0         50.0          50.0          15.0          50.0          20.0         20.0       75.0         20.0



          	                                                                                                                                                             33	
Annex figures

Figure A1:
                                                                                Overall STRI: UR, Doha, PTA, TPP and applied policy
    Services trade restrictiveness index
                                           100
                                           75
                                           50
                                           25
                                           0




                                                                     BRN MYS CHL SGP MEX CAN VNM USA PER                                                 JPN   AUS   NZL
                                                                                                                   UR                           Doha
                                                                                                                   PTA                          TTP
                                                                                                                   Policy '15
                                                                  Note: Absense of a bar means there are no restrictions (STRI score is zero)



Figure A2: Doha, TPP, and applied policy by TPP member
                                                                                        Mexico: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                                            100
                         Services trade restrictiveness index
                            20      40      60
                                             0       80




                                                                      Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing    Transport Professional
                                                                                                     Doha                  PTA
                                                                                                     TPP                   Policy '15
                                                                  Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero




	                                                                                                                                                                          34	
                                                                    Japan: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20      40      60
                        0       80




                                                 Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                Doha                  PTA
                                                                                TPP                   Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero



                                                                     Chile: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20      40      60
                        0       80




                                                 Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                Doha                  PTA
                                                                                TPP                   Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero




	                                                                                                                                  35	
                                                                     Peru: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20       40      60
                        0       80




                                                  Overall       Financial      Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                 Doha                 PTA
                                                                                 TPP                  Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero



                                                                     NZL: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20      40      60
                        0       80




                                                 Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                Doha                  PTA
                                                                                TPP                   Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero




	                                                                                                                                  36	
                                                                  Australia: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20       40      60
                        0       80




                                                 Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                Doha                  PTA
                                                                                TPP                   Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero




                                                                  Malaysia: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20       40      60
                        0       80




                                                 Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                Doha                  PTA
                                                                                TPP                   Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero




	                                                                                                                                  37	
                                                                   Vietnam: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20       40      60
                        0       80




                                                 Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                Doha                  PTA
                                                                                TPP                   Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero



                                                                 Singapore: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20      40      60
                        0       80




                                                  Overall       Financial      Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                 Doha                 PTA
                                                                                 TPP                  Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero




	                                                                                                                                  38	
                                                                   Canada: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20       40      60
                        0       80




                                                 Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                Doha                  PTA
                                                                                TPP                   Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero



                                                                    Brunei: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20      40      600      80




                                                  Overall       Financial      Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                 Doha                 PTA
                                                                                 TPP                  Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero




	                                                                                                                                  39	
                                                                     USA: Doha, PTA, TPP and policy
                                       100
    Services trade restrictiveness index
       20      40      60
                        0       80




                                                 Overall       Financial       Telecom        Retailing   Transport Professional
                                                                                Doha                  PTA
                                                                                TPP                   Policy '15
                                             Note: Absense of a bar means the score is zero




Table	A.8:	 STRI	construction:	sector	and	modal	weighting	schemes	
	
                                                                                                           Modal	      Sector	
                                                                                                           weights	    weights	
                                                                          Subsectors,		                      ( j)
                       Aggregate	sectors	                                 by	mode	of	supply	                wm    	    wj 	
                       Banking	                                           	                                	           0.16	
                                                                          Mode	1		                         	
                                                                          Bank	lending	                    0.15	
                                                                          Mode	3:	                         	
                                                                          Bank	lending	                    0.85	
                                                                                                           	
                       	                   	                                                               	           	
                       Insurance	          	                                                               	           0.10	
                                           Mode	1:	                                                        0.10	
                                           (5)	Life	                                                       0.10	
                                           (6)	Automobile	                                                 0.80	
                                           (7)	Reinsurance	
                                           	                                                               	
                                           Mode	3:	                                                        	
                                           (8)	Life	                                                       0.90	
                                           (9)	Automobile	                                                 0.90	
                                           (10)	Reinsurance	                                               0.20	
                       	                   	                                                               	           	
                       Telecommunications	 	                                                               	           0.10	
                                           Mode	3:	                                                        1.00	
                                           (11)	Fixed‐line	                                                1.00	
                                           (12)	Mobile	



	                                                                                                                                  40	
    	                         	                           	          	
    Retailing	                Mode	3:	                    	          0.25	
                              (13)	Retail	distribution	   1.00	
    	                         	                           	          	
    Transportation	           Mode	1:	                    	          0.19	
                              Maritime	 international	    0.70	      (0.04)	
                              shipping	                   	          	
                              	                           	
                              Mode	3:	                    	
                              Maritime	shipping	          0.30	
                                                          	
                              Maritime	auxiliary	         1.00	      (0.05)	
                              Road	freight	               1.00	      (0.06)	
                              Rail	freight	               1.00	      (0.04)	
    	                         	                           	          	
    Professional	             Mode	1:		                   	          0.21	
    Services	                 Accounting	                 0.20	
                              Auditing	                   0.20	
                              Foreign	law	                0.20	
                              	                           	
                              Mode	3:		                   	
                              Accounting	                 0.40	
                              Auditing	                   0.40	
                              Domestic	law		              0.50	
                              Foreign	law	                0.40	
                              	                           	
                              	                           	
                              Mode	4:		                   	
                              Accounting	                 0.40	
                              Auditing	                   0.40	
                              Domestic	law		              0.50	
                              Foreign	law	                0.40	
                              	                           	
	
Notes:	The	country	STRI	for	UR,	Doha,	TPP,	or	policy	is	constructed	by	using	STRI	indices	(0,	0.25,	0.5,	075,	or	
1)	multiplied	by	sub‐sector	and	modal	weights	provided	here.			



Annex Table A9: How STRI scores are assigned
  Overall                 Policy summary examples for TPP member countries
  policy         5-point  (from the TPP commitments)
  description    scale
                          Singapore: Maritime shipping – mode 1
  Open without 0          “No limitations (since no restriction was mentioned in the
  restrictions            non-conforming                 measures              list)”



    Virtually open 0.25             Canada: Accounting –mode 3
                                    “None except commercial presence must take form of sole
                                    proprietorship or partnership. In 9 provinces, office must be



	                                                                                                            41	
                                           under management of a resident.” Source (Annex I of Canada,
                                           p 36)

         Existence of 0.50                 Malaysia: Road freight – mode 3
         major/non-                        “Only entities that are registered and established in Malaysia
         trivial                           are allowed to provide freight road transportation services in
         restrictions                      Malaysia. Foreigners are not allowed to own more than 49 per
                                           cent of equity shareholding in any entity providing and
                                           supplying freight transportation services covering
                                           transportation of containerized freight based on a fee or
                                           contractual basis” (Source: Annex I of Malaysia, p 27)


         Virtually          0.75           Vietnam: Legal advice on domestic law–mode 3
         closed                            “The foreign lawyers practicing laws in Viet Nam are not
                                           permitted to advise on Vietnamese laws unless they have
                                           graduated from a Vietnamese law college and satisfy
                                           requirements applied to like Vietnamese lawyers. They are
                                           not allowed to defend or represent clients before the courts of
                                           Viet Nam” (Annex I of Viet Nam, p1)

         Completely         1              The United States: Maritime shipping –mode 3
         closed                            The United States reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
                                           measure relating to the provision of maritime transportation
                                           services and the operation of U.S.-flagged vessels. (Annex II
                                           of the US, p5)

    Notes: As is apparent from the examples shown, most subsector-mode combinations are
    characterized by multiple provisions, in which case the regime assignment reflects the overall
    restrictiveness of all applicable measures.

    Annex Table A10: List of Preferential trade agreements reviewed

        Name   of
#       PTA          Year       Approach     SOURCE
                                negative
1       NAFTA        1994       list         http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/NAFTA/NAFTATCE.ASP
        US-AUS                  negative
2       FTA          2005       list         http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/US-AusFTAFinal/USAusind_e.asp
        USA-SGP                 negative
3       FTA          2004       list         http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/USA-Singapore/USASingind_e.asp
        USA-PER                 negative
4       FTA          2009       list         http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/PER_USA/PER_USA_e/Index_e.asp
        CHL-USA                 negative
5       FTA          2004       list         http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/chiusa_e/chiusaind_e.asp




    	                                                                                                        42	
         US-
         Vietnam              positive
6        BTA           2000   list       http://www.usvtc.org/trade/bta/text/
         CAN-PER              negative
7        FTA           2009   list       http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/CAN_PER/CAN_PER_e/CAN_PER_index_e.asp
         CAN-CHL              negative
8        FTA           1997   list       http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/chican_e/chcatoc.asp
         MEX-JPN              negative
9        FTA           2005   list       http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/MEX_JPN_e/JPN_MEXind_e.asp
         MEX-PER              negative
10       FTA           2012   list       http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/MEX_PER_Integ_Agrmt/MEX_PER_Ind_s.asp
         CHL-MEX              negative
11       FTA           1999   list       http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/chmefta/indice.asp
         AUS-NZL              negative   http://dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/anzcerta/Pages/australia-new-zealand-closer-
12       CERTA         1989   list       economic-relations-trade-agreement.aspx
         AUS-JPN              negative
13       FTA           2015   list       http://www.mofa.go.jp/ecm/ep/page22e_000430.html
         SGP-AUS              negative   http://dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/safta/Pages/singapore-australia-
14       FTA           2010   list       fta.aspx#documents
                              positive   https://www.mfat.govt.nz/en/trade/free-trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements-
15       AANZFTA       2010   list       in-force/aanzfta-asean-australia-new-zealand-fta/annexes/
         AUS-CHL              negative   http://dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/aclfta/Pages/australia-chile-
16       FTA           2009   list       fta.aspx#documents
         MYS-AUS              positive   http://dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/mafta/Pages/malaysia-australia-fta.aspx#full-
17       FTA           2010   list       text
         NZL-SGP              positive
18       FTA           2001   list       http://www.fta.gov.sg/fta_anzscep.asp?hl=9
         Trans-
         Pacific
         Strategic
         Economic
         Partnership
         Agreement
         between
         CHL-NZL-             negative
19       SGP-BRN       2006   list       http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/CHL_Asia_e/TransPacific_ind_e.asp
         NZL-MYL              positive   http://www.mfat.govt.nz/Trade-and-Economic-Relations/2-Trade-Relationships-
20       FTA           2010   list       and-Agreements/Malaysia/index.php#text
         JPN - SGP            positive
21       FTA           2002   list       http://www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/singapore/jsepa.html
         BRN-JPN              positive
22       FTA           2007   list       http://www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/brunei/epa0706/index.html
         PER-JPN              negative
23       FTA           2012   list       http://www.mofa.go.jp/region/latin/peru/epa201105/index.html
         CHL-JPN              negative
24       FTA           2007   list       http://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/economy/fta/chile.html
         JPN - MYL            positive
25       EPA           2006   list       http://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/economy/fta/malaysia.html
         JPN-VNM              positive
26       EPA           2008   list       http://www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/vietnam/epa0812/index.html


     	                                                                                                     43	
         AFAS 8th        positive   http://investasean.asean.org/index.php/page/view/asean-free-trade-area-
27       Package  2010   list       agreements/view/757/newsid/870/asean-framework-agreement-on-services.html
         PER-SGP         negative
28       FTA      2009   list       http://www.sice.oas.org/TPD/PER_SGP/Final_Texts_PER_SGP_e/index_e.asp
         CHL-PER         negative
29       FTA      2009   list       http://www.sice.oas.org/Trade/CHL_PER_FTA/Index_s.asp




     	                                                                                          44	
