                                                    WPS7882


Policy Research Working Paper                      7882




                  Cash Transfers and Health
                         Evidence from Tanzania

                                 David K. Evans
                                Brian Holtemeyer
                                  Katrina Kosec




Africa Region
Office of the Chief Economist
November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7882


  Abstract
 How do conditional cash transfers impact health-related                             Health improvements were concentrated among children
 outcomes? This paper examines the 2010 randomized intro-                            ages 0–5 years rather than the elderly, and took time to
 duction of a program in Tanzania and finds nuanced impacts.                         materialize; the study finds no improvements after 1.5 years,
 An initial surge in clinic visits after 1.5 years—due to more                       but 0.76 fewer sick days per month after 2.5 years, suggest-
 visits by those already complying with program health con-                          ing the importance of looking beyond short-term impacts.
 ditions and by non-compliers—disappeared after 2.5 years,                           Reductions in sick days were largest in villages with more
 largely due to compliers reducing above-minimal visits.                             baseline health workers per capita, consistent with improve-
 The study finds significant increases in take-up of health                          ments being sensitive to capacity constraints. These results
 insurance and the likelihood of seeking treatment when ill.                         are robust to adjustments for multiple hypothesis testing.




  This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, Africa Region. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank
  to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at at
  devans2@worldbank.org and k.kosec@cgiar.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
   Cash Transfers and Health: Evidence from Tanzania
           David K. Evans                 Brian Holtemeyer                Katrina Kosec∗
           The World Bank                      IFPRI                         IFPRI




          JEL Classiﬁcation: I18, I13, O12, H42
          Keywords : Cash transfers, health, government policy, health insurance




   ∗
    This study beneﬁtted at various stages from experts at the World Bank, the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI), the Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) and elsewhere. At TASAF, the
evaluation has been supported by the Executive Director Ladislaus Mwamanga, as well as the former Ex-
ecutive Director Servacius Likwelile. Amadeus Kamagenge has led TASAF input to the evaluation, and
his entire team has contributed with substantive and logistical support. We are also grateful to Harold
Alderman, Domenico Fanizza, Margaret Grosh, Melissa Hidrobo, Jef Leroy, David McKenzie, Berk Özler,
Anna Popova, Dena Ringold, Shalini Roy, and Magnus Saxegaard for comments and helpful discussions.
We received ﬁnancial support from the CGIAR Research Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets,
the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), the Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund (SIEF), and
the Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development (TFESSD). Any comments or
suggestions are welcome; the authors may be contacted at k.kosec@cgiar.org and devans2@worldbank.org.
1     Introduction

What role can cash transfers conditioned on health-seeking behavior play in alleviating the
burden of poor health and limited access to formal medical care in Sub-Saharan Africa? Meta
analyses of programs from around the world suggest that conditional cash transfers (CCTs)
can eﬀectively alleviate extreme poverty and improve a range of human capital outcomes for
children, at least during the period that the program is in place (Fiszbein and Schady, 2009;
Leroy et al., 2009; Independent Evaluation Group, 2011). As the evidence base has grown,
countries have raced to adopt CCTs. Almost every country in Latin America now has a
CCT program (Fiszbein and Schady, 2009). Further, as of 2010, at least 14 countries in Sub-
Saharan Africa had implemented a CCT program (Garcia and Moore, 2012). While there is
considerable evidence about the impacts of cash transfers—conditional and unconditional—
on education outcomes, less is known about their impacts on health. A 2014 global review
found 142 studies showing the impact of cash transfers on education outcomes, but only 41
showing impacts on health and nutrition outcomes (Andrews et al., 2014).
    Nowhere is the global burden of disease greater than in Sub-Saharan Africa. Life ex-
pectancy has increased by 20 years globally since 1970, but by only 10 years in Sub-
Saharan Africa (Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 2013; World Bank, 2013). Fur-
ther, Africa has a lower growth elasticity of poverty than any other region (World Bank,
2013). The region’s health problems are partly due to a pervasive lack of health investment
by the public and private sectors, resulting in limited access to doctors and health facilities.
    Existing literature on the health impacts of cash transfers yields mixed results. There
are several program types: unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) and CCTs conditioned on
health, education, or both. Especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, conditions are often “soft”
(e.g., warnings or small penalties are applied instead of withholding the full transfer), mak-
ing the diﬀerence between CCTs and UCTs less stark (Garcia and Moore, 2012). Relatedly,
Paxson and Schady (2010) ﬁnd that 28 percent of those participating in a UCT program in
Ecuador thought conditions applied. However, even among cash transfer programs of the

                                               2
same type, there are often mixed impacts on health. Among UCTs, Haushofer and Shapiro
(2016) ﬁnd that a transfer program in Kenya improved mental health and increased food
consumption. UCTs have been found to improve anthropometric outcomes for girls—though
not boys—in South Africa (Duﬂo, 2003, 2000). However, Paxson and Schady (2010) ﬁnd null
overall impacts of a UCT in Ecuador on cognitive, behavioral, and physical outcomes for
children, with only those in the bottom expenditure quartile beneﬁting. And Handa et al.
(2015) ﬁnd no overall impacts of a UCT in Zambia on maternal health care utilization,
with positive impacts only for women with better access to health services. CCTs condi-
tioned on health have improved early childhood cognitive development (Macours et al., 2012)
and child nutritional status (Maluccio and Flores, 2005) in Nicaragua, improved child nutri-
tional status for a select group of children (younger children from rural areas) in Colombia
(Attanasio et al., 2005), and had null impacts in Brazil (Morris et al., 2004) and Honduras
(Hoddinott, 2010).1 Finally, several studies explicitly compare the impacts of UCTs versus
CCTs. Akresh et al. (2014) ﬁnd an increase in preventative health care visits for a CCT
in Burkina Faso conditioned on education and health, but not for a comparison UCT arm.
Robertson et al. (2013), in contrast, do not ﬁnd systematic beneﬁts of CCTs over UCTs in
Zimbabwe. And Benhassine et al. (2015) ﬁnd that adding formal conditions to a labeled
cash transfer (LCT) in Morocco—not subject to education conditions, but explicitly labeled
as an education support program—may have decreased the overall impact of the program on
school participation and learning. Similarly, for a CCT in Malawi conditioned on education,
Baird et al. (2011) ﬁnd that the UCT arm saw a greater reduction in teenage pregnancy
among girls who had dropped out of school than did the CCT arm. And in the same study
context, Baird et al. (2013) ﬁnd greater mental health improvements and increases in us-
age of shoes among girls enrolled in school in the UCT arm than in the CCT arm. Given
inconclusive ﬁndings in the literature on the health beneﬁts of cash transfers, even among
  1
    A few studies examine more specialized CCTs. Interventions in India and Nepal oﬀered incentives for
maternal health investments, with mixed results (Powell-Jackson et al., 2015; Powell-Jackson and Hanson,
2012). And interventions in Tanzania and Lesotho have provided incentives to remain free of sexually
transmitted diseases, with positive outcomes (Bjorkman Nyqvist et al., 2015; De Walque et al., 2014).


                                                   3
programs with similar designs, there is a need for greater understanding of the mechanisms
through which cash transfers impact health.
   We examine the impacts of a 2010 pilot CCT program in rural Tanzania on a range of
health investments and outcomes. Among 80 study villages, 40 were randomly assigned to
receive the CCT program, allowing us to estimate its causal impacts. Beneﬁciaries included
both children aged 0–15 and elderly individuals aged 60 and older. Conditions of the program
included visits to health clinics by young children aged 0–5 and by the elderly. Households
were surveyed at baseline in 2009, again in 2011 after 18-21 months (about 1.5 years) of
transfers, and ﬁnally in 2012 after 31-34 months (about 2.5 years) of transfers.
   We ﬁnd nuanced impacts of the CCT program. An initial surge in clinic visits after 1.5
years—due to more visits by both those already complying with program health conditions
and non-compliers—disappeared after 2.5 years, largely due to compliers reducing above-
minimal visits. We also ﬁnd signiﬁcant increases in take-up of health insurance. After 2.5
years, the program made households in treatment villages 36 percentage points more likely
to participate in the government-run health insurance program (the Community Health
Fund, or CHF) and raised the likelihood of ﬁnancing treatment with health insurance by
16 percentage points. These impacts on health insurance are particularly interesting. Little
previous work has examined the impact of cash transfers on participation in health in-
surance programs. Evidence from Mexico suggests that participation in a CCT program
increased participants’ awareness that they were enrolled in a health insurance program, but
in that case, actual enrollment was automatic upon enrollment in the cash transfer program
(Biosca and Brown, 2014). The CCT additionally increased the likelihood of seeking treat-
ment when ill. This latter result is important given recent research showing that timely clinic
attendance when ill improves child health outcomes in Tanzania (Adhvaryu and Nyshadham,
2015). We also ﬁnd that the program led to signiﬁcantly higher investments in preventative
health measures, including an 18 percentage points increase in shoe ownership, which the
public health community associates with lower exposure to helminths (Mascarini-Serra et al.,


                                              4
2011; Birn and Solórzano, 1999). Health improvements were concentrated among young
children aged 0–5, with no detectable health improvements for elderly individuals similarly
required to visit health clinics. Further, health improvements took time to materialize; we
observe no improvements after 1.5 years, but 0.76 fewer sick days per month for 0–5 year olds
after 2.5 years.2 This suggests the importance of looking beyond very short-term impacts.
Reductions in sick days were largest in villages with more baseline health workers per capita,
consistent with improvements being sensitive to capacity constraints.
        Overall, this evidence suggests a variety of mechanisms through which cash transfers may
help to lift the burden of disease in Sub-Saharan Africa. We further show that these results
are robust to adjustments for multiple hypothesis testing, estimation of linear as well as
non-linear models, and both intent-to-treat and treatment on the treated estimates.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background infor-
mation on health and the health care system in Tanzania, as well as the health conditions
of Tanzania’s pilot CCT program. Section 3 describes the evaluation design, data, and out-
comes of interest. Section 4 presents our empirical speciﬁcation, the groups over which we
examine heterogeneous treatment eﬀects, balance tables showing the outcome of our ran-
domization, and analysis of attrition. Section 5 characterizes our main empirical results and
several robustness checks. Section 6 considers how our main impacts vary across diﬀerent
types of villages and households, and what this implies for the mechanisms likely driving
treatment eﬀects. Section 7 concludes.



2         Background

2.1         Health care and health in rural Tanzania

Tanzania is, in many respects, close to the Africa regional average in terms of health statistics.
In 2012, 17.3 percent of the population contracted malaria versus 18.6 percent in Africa as a
    2
        When we refer to illness in the last month, we are in all cases referring to the last four weeks.


                                                          5
whole. Likewise, 3.1 percent of the population was HIV positive, versus 2.8 percent in Africa.
Life expectancy at birth is 61 years versus 58 for Africa. Yet on some measures, Tanzania
diverges signiﬁcantly from the rest of the region. Its under-ﬁve mortality rate (5.4 percent
of live births) is just over half that of Africa as a whole (9.5 percent). Its maternal mortality
ratio is almost 20 percent lower than that of Africa. Yet the health workforce is weaker in
Tanzania, with just 0.1 doctors and 2.4 nurses and midwives per 10,000 population (versus
an average of 2.6 and 12.0, respectively, for Africa) (World Health Organization, 2014).
      Recent evidence from Tanzania demonstrates signiﬁcant health improvements for children
utilizing formal public health facilities (Adhvaryu and Nyshadham, 2015). In the early 1990s,
the Tanzanian government introduced a health insurance program called the Community
Health Fund (CHF). It is a voluntary prepayment scheme; members pay a ﬁxed annual fee
of 5,000 – 10,000 Tanzanian shillings ($3 – $6 US),3 depending on the region. Their entire
family is then exempt from co-payments for visits to primary health care facilities (Marriott,
2011).4 As Tanzania’s CHF cross-subsidizes more costly to reach rural areas, it provides
not only a risk-coping strategy, but also signiﬁcantly reduces total out-of-pocket health
expenses by the poorest (such as CCT program beneﬁciaries in our study regions) (Ekman,
2004; Mtei et al., 2007). This is especially so since the poorest are often credit constrained.
Nonetheless, 10 years after the introduction of the CHF, only 10 percent of Tanzanians were
enrolled; one of the reasons cited was inability to pay (Kamuzora and Gilson, 2007).


2.2      Pilot CCT program

Tanzania’s pilot CCT program, implemented by the Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF,
a social fund agency of the Tanzanian government), began delivering transfers in January of
2010. Its aims were to increase investments in health for young children (ages 0–5) and the
elderly (ages 60 and over) and to increase educational investments for children aged 7–15. It
  3
    In 2009 the exchange rate ranged from 1,280 to 1,467 per U.S. dollar (Bank of Tanzania, 2015).
  4
    Up to 7 family members are exempt from co-payments—though tests and medications are subject to fees.
Upon introduction of the CHF, child and maternal health services were already exempt from co-payments
according to oﬃcial government policy (Babbel, 2012).


                                                   6
operated in three districts—Bagamoyo (70 km from Dar es Salaam), Chamwino (500 km),
and Kibaha (35 km)—where 80 eligible study villages were randomized into treatment and
control groups of 40 villages each, stratiﬁed on village size and district (median village size at
baseline was 560 households). Randomization was carried out after identiﬁcation of potential
beneﬁciary households in all 80 villages. At village meetings held prior to randomization,
TASAF communicated that control villages would receive the program in late 2012, and
the program would continue in treatment villages. Median village size was quite small (560
households at baseline, in 2009), and every village had both a primary school and a public
dispensary or health center, facilitating fulﬁllment of program conditions.
       Treatment households received transfers every two months. Transfer amounts ranged
from US $12 to US $36, depending on household size and composition. The CCT provided
US $3 per month for orphans and vulnerable children up to age 15 (approximately 50 percent
of the food poverty line) and US $6 per month for vulnerable individuals age 60 or older. In
our follow-up surveys, the median size of the last transfer is US $14.12; assuming six annual
payments of this size, this is about 13 percent of annual household expenditures.
       While CCT payments were made at the household level, conditions applied at the indi-
vidual level.5 Children aged 0–5 had to visit a health clinic at least six times per year (the
condition was relaxed for children aged 2–5 to two visits per year starting in 2012),6 those
age 60 or over had to visit at least once per year, and no health conditions applied to others.
Both preventive and curative visits fulﬁlled the health clinic visit conditions of the program,
though visits had to be to a public facility (either a dispensary, health center, or hospital).
There were no further restrictions on the timing of visits, nor on the services to be received.
Children aged 7–15 had to enroll in school and maintain an 80 percent attendance record.
   5
      We lack administrative data on compliance with conditions. However, in each follow-up survey, we asked:
“[For your last transfer payment,] did you receive less money than you usually get?” and “What do you
think was the reason?” While one may hesitate to admit to non-compliance (for fear of sanction) and while
this cannot tell us how many households had at least one payment reduced (it only tells us about the last),
this gives some indication of compliance levels. At midline and endline respectively, 1.9 and 3.0 percent of
treatment households reported receiving less than usual for a reason related to not meeting conditions.
    6
      As our endline survey was carried out during August–October 2012, we deﬁne compliance with clinic
visit conditions at endline for 2–5 year olds as having two or more clinic visits in the last year.


                                                     7
        TASAF worked with an elected community management committee (CMC) in each vil-
lage to select beneﬁciary households.7 The CMC surveyed the poorest half of households,
collecting data on eight household characteristics: roof material, light supply, water supply,
type of toilet, ownership of four diﬀerent assets (vehicle/motorcycle, radio, iron, poultry),
number of windows on the house, household size, and number of meals eaten per day. TASAF
then carried out a proxy means test to propose a ranking of households by poverty level, for
CMC and village leader approval. On average, 23 percent of households became beneﬁciaries.



3        Evaluation Design and Data

3.1        Evaluation design

We evaluate the impacts of the CCT program using three waves of data on beneﬁciaries and
would-be beneﬁciaries (no data were collected from those not selected to be beneﬁciaries).
Table 1 presents the chronology of the program and impact evaluation. A baseline survey
was carried out during January–May 2009 and payments began in January 2010. A midline
survey was conducted during July–September 2011 (18-21 months after transfers began) and
an endline survey was conducted during August–October 2012 (31–34 months after transfers
began). The baseline survey included 1,764 households (a subset of beneﬁciary households)
comprised of 6,918 individuals. The quantitative data collection was supplemented by two
rounds of qualitative data collection (following the midline and endline surveys) employing
focus group discussions and in-depth interviews.


3.2        Data and outcomes

In each of the three survey rounds, we collected individual-level data on total health clinic
visits in the last year,8 ownership of protective footwear (shoes and slippers) by children,
    7
     CMC elections occurred at village meetings; 10–14 members were elected, with secret ballots. To run, a
candidate had to have received ﬁnancial training and successfully managed a past TASAF-supported project.
   8
     We lack data on whether such visits were for preventive or curative purposes, and only know the total.


                                                    8
health (whether an individual was ill in the last month, and for how many days in the last
month they were unable to perform their normal daily activities due to illness), reported
ability to perform ordinary activities (doing vigorous activity, walking uphill, bending over
or stooping, walking more than 1 km, walking more than 100 meters, or using a bath or
toilet), anthropometrics (height, weight, middle upper-arm circumference, and z-scores for
height-for-age, weight-for-age, weight-for-height, and body mass index-for-age), and—for
those ill in the last month—the location where medical care was sought (no treatment sought,
public dispensary, public hospital, public health center, private pharmacy, traditional healer,
private dispensary/ hospital/ clinic, or mission dispensary/ hospital).9 Among those seeking
treatment, we further gathered data on health care ﬁnancing methods (free treatment, loans,
cash or assets, or health insurance). We also collected household-level data on expenditure
on formal insurance10 and—at endline—whether the household participates in the CHF.



4       Methods and Empirical Strategy

4.1     Empirical speciﬁcation

We carried out follow-up surveys in 2011 and in 2012 to capture both short-term (1.5 years)
and medium-term (2.5 years) impacts of the program. Given random assignment to treat-
ment, we recover causal intent-to-treat estimates from the following empirical speciﬁcation:


             hit = β0 + β1 2011t + β2 2012t + δ1 Ti × 2011t + δ2 Ti × 2012t + αi +         it          (1)


where i indexes individuals and t indexes the survey round. hit is a health-related outcome,
αi are individual ﬁxed eﬀects, Ti =1 in a village assigned to treatment and zero otherwise,
2011t =1 at the time of the midline survey (July–September 2011) and zero otherwise, and
    9
     Data on protective footwear were only collected for children aged 0–18, data on anthropometrics for
children aged 0–5, and data on ordinary activities for those aged 60 and over. Individuals sick in the last
month were asked to report the primary health provider and payment method for their main health problem.
  10
     Insurance expenditure data are unfortunately not further disaggregated by type of insurance.


                                                    9
2012t =1 at the time of the endline (August–October 2012) and zero otherwise. When we
consider a household-level outcome, i instead indexes households.
      In treatment villages, 9.0% of households did not receive treatment—likely due to last-
minute changes in community prioritization or household refusal. In control villages, 0.6%
of households received treatment—likely due to their proximity to a treatment village. As a
result, our intent-to-treat estimates represent a lower bound on the actual impact of receiving
transfers. We also estimate the eﬀect of treatment on the treated by using the ﬁtted values
from a regression of treatment on assignment to treatment in place of Ti in equation 1.11


4.2       Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects examined

We estimate the overall impacts of the CCT program as well as its impacts on several sub-
groups. First, we examine impacts by age group. As health conditions applied only to
children aged 0–5 and elderly aged 60 and over, and given that each of these two age groups
has a diﬀerent set of health issues and faced diﬀerent conditions under the CCT program, it
is instructive to examine program impacts on them separately. Overall impacts include all
individuals in the surveyed households, not only all individuals in the two sub-groups.
      Second, for two central outcomes likely to be heavily inﬂuenced by the quality of available
health care—health clinic visits and health during the last month—we examine heterogeneous
impacts of the CCT program by baseline health clinic staﬀ (doctors, nurses, and other
assistants) per capita. Speciﬁcally, we divide villages into two types: those with above-
median and below-median health clinic staﬀ per capita at baseline. This helps us assess if
improvements are sensitive to capacity constraints
      Finally, for outcomes likely to be inﬂuenced by how credit constrained a household is—
shoes and slipper ownership, expenditure on insurance, participation in the CHF, whether
one treats illness and where (public or private facilities), and how one ﬁnances treatment—
we examine heterogeneous impacts by baseline household asset wealth. This allows us to
 11
      We use the Stata package –xtivreg– written by Schaﬀer (2010).



                                                    10
observe how the program aﬀects the moderately poor (top half of beneﬁciaries in terms of
asset wealth) versus the extremely poor (bottom half). To capture asset wealth, we carry out
a principal components analysis (PCA) using dummy variables for ownership of 13 assets.12


4.3     Outcome of the randomization

A comparison of baseline sample means in treatment and control villages reveals balance
on most outcomes (Appendix Table A1, Panel A). Across 41 outcomes, for only six (three)
are there signiﬁcant diﬀerences at the 10 percent (5 percent) level. There are no overall
diﬀerences in health between treatment and control villages, but 0–5 year olds in treatment
villages were 6 percentage points more likely to be ill or injured and had 0.51 more sick days
in the last month than those in control villages. Weight-for-age z-scores were slightly lower
in treatment villages. And 0–18 year olds in treatment villages were 10 percentage points
less likely to own shoes than were those in control villages. Households in treatment villages
also spent slightly more on insurance. However, we see balance on all other outcomes of
interest. Table A1, Panel B shows similar balance on individual and household demographic
characteristics and village characteristics. The only signiﬁcant diﬀerence is that treatment
households are less likely to have an improved ﬂoor. We use individual (or household, for
outcomes that vary at that level) ﬁxed eﬀects to account for baseline imbalances.13


4.4     Attrition

If attrition were correlated with treatment status, one might worry that attrition had com-
promised the internal validity of the results.14 Fortunately, this is not the case, as shown in
Table A2. Columns (1)–(4) consider household attrition, columns (5)–(8) consider individual
  12
     These include whether the household owns an iron, refrigerator, television, mattress or bed, radio, watch
or clock, sewing machine, stove, bicycle, motorcycle, car or truck, wheelbarrow or cart, and mobile phone.
  13
     In the case of anthropometric outcomes, we use village × cohort ﬁxed eﬀects. These results are robust
to instead using individual ﬁxed eﬀects.
  14
     Between baseline and midline, 8.6 percent of households attrited from the sample, and between baseline
and endline, 13.2 percent of households attrited.



                                                     11
attrition, and columns (9)–(12) consider individual attrition for those for whom health condi-
tions applied (children aged 0–5 and those aged 60 and over). For each of the three analyses,
we consider attrition at midline and at endline. Odd-numbered columns regress a dummy
for attrition on our treatment dummy, while even-numbered columns regress a dummy for
attrition on our treatment dummy, an array of controls (gender, age, age-squared, a dummy
for having some education, and a household asset index), and the interactions of these con-
trols with treatment. Where we examine household attrition, we use the values of these
controls for the household head; where we examine individual attrition, we use the values
for the head as well as the individual. In no case does the treatment dummy signiﬁcantly
predict attrition. F-statistics for the joint signiﬁcance of the treatment dummy and the in-
teraction terms further indicate that these coeﬃcients are never jointly signiﬁcant. Overall,
we conclude that attrition does not aﬀect the internal validity of our results.



5     Results

5.1     Health clinic visits

At baseline, the average 0–5 year old visited a clinic 8.3 times per year (compared to the
program condition of six visits), and the average individual aged 60 or older visited 2.8 times
(compared to the program condition of one visit). This reveals that on average, individuals
were exceeding program conditions at baseline.15 Universal compliance with the program
could thus occur at follow-up even with a zero net increase in clinic visits if more frequent
visits by those not previously in compliance were oﬀset by less frequent visits by those
already complying at baseline. In Table 2, we examine the impact of the CCT program on
the number of health clinic visits in the last year. We focus on overall impacts, impacts on
children aged 0–5, and impacts on those age 60 and over. (At endline, we have clinic visit
  15
     At baseline, 59 percent of children aged 0–5 and 65 percent of those aged 60 and over met or exceeded
required health clinic visits, making program conditions non-binding for them.




                                                   12
data for all individuals, while at midline, we only have it for these two groups.)
       At midline (1.5 years after treatment began), treatment led to 2.3 more visits (preventive
or curative) per year for children aged 0–5 (column 2) and 1.1 more visits for those aged
60 and over (column 3). Relative to the baseline mean number of visits for each age group,
these represent increases of 28 and 39 percent, respectively, which are comparable to ﬁndings
in the literature. For example, Levy and Ohls (2007) ﬁnd that a CCT program in Jamaica
increased preventive health center visits by children aged 0–6 by 0.28 visits every six months
(a 38 percent increase relative to the baseline mean), while Akresh et al. (2014) ﬁnd that a
CCT program in Burkina Faso increased annual preventive care visits by children aged 0–5
by 0.43 visits (a 49 percent increase relative to the control group mean). These statistically
signiﬁcant eﬀects, however, disappear at endline (2.5 years after treatment began) for both
age groups.16 The results are robust to instead estimating a Poisson model that accounts
for health clinic visits being a count data outcome (Appendix Table A9)17 and to instead
estimating the impact of treatment on the treated (Appendix Table A3).
       In Table 3, we examine the impact of the CCT program on the rate of compliance with
annual clinic visits conditions. While we lack administrative data on clinic visits, comparing
self-reported visits over the last 12 months with program conditions for total annual visits is
instructive. The conditions required six visits for those under age 2 and one visit for those
over age 60; 2–5 year olds needed six visits at midline but two visits at endline. We see
that treatment increased compliance with program conditions among both 0–5 year olds and
those over aged 60 at midline. By endline, however, treatment increase compliance with
program conditions only among those over aged 60, and not among children aged 0–5.
       Several caveats and observations are warranted. First, households in control villages that
by endline anticipated receiving the program within a few months18 may have increased
  16
     At endline, those in treatment villages were still receiving the CCT program and expected it to continue.
Those in control villages anticipated being enrolled within the next few months (by late 2012).
  17
     Results hold whether we use heteroskedasticity robust or bootstrapped standard errors.
  18
     The endline survey was carried out during August–October 2012, and control villages were told at
baseline to anticipate receiving the program in late 2012.



                                                     13
clinic visits preemptively for fear of being cut from the list of targeted households. Indeed,
when we consider compliance with clinic visit as our outcome (Table 3), we ﬁnd a positive
and highly statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcient on the endline dummy for 0–5 year olds—
consistent with an overall increase in childrens’ compliance with program conditions across
both treatment and control villages at endline. Second, it is important to interpret these
ﬁndings in light of high baseline rates of compliance that made the health visit conditions
non-binding for many.19 Program emphasis on clinic visits may have increased the salience
of health services and led households to initially increase visits despite the average household
already satisfying visit conditions. Subsequently—by endline—individuals’ understanding of
the conditions may have improved, and they may have reduced visits to only those that were
necessary, still exceeding the program conditions on average. Third, health improvements
due to the program that were realized by endline but not at midline—detailed in Section
5.4—may have reduced demand for clinic visits by endline. Finally, while we lack data
on clinic service quality, it may have improved by endline, requiring fewer visits to receive
similar care (e.g., receiving more and better services at a ﬁrst visit could preclude the need
for a follow-up visit). We present further evidence and discussion of why clinic visits may
have increased at midline, but were subsequently unaﬀected at endline, in Section 6.


5.2     Protective footwear

While health clinic visits are an important aspect of individual investment in health, invest-
ments that individuals make to prevent health problems from occurring are also important.
We examine the impacts of treatment on ownership of two types of protective footwear:
shoes and "slippers" (i.e., open-toed footwear). Table 4 shows that the CCT program led to
a signiﬁcant, 18 percentage point increase in shoe ownership among 0–18 year old children by
midline that persisted at endline (column 1).20 A null impact on slipper ownership at midline
  19
     While non-binding conditions make a CCT similar to a UCT or LCT, Section 1 discusses how UCTs are
prevalent, and many CCTs have soft conditions. Thus, our study context is not atypical.
  20
     Estimates of the eﬀect of treatment on the treated are similar (Appendix Table A4).


                                                 14
changed to a signiﬁcant, 8 percentage point increase by endline (column 2). This suggests
that the program did not lead to a substitution between shoes and slippers, but rather in-
creased take-up of both products by endline. Further, impacts were largest for ownership of
shoes—which provide better protection. These impacts are remarkable considering baseline
ownership rates of shoes and slippers were only 42 percent and 63 percent, respectively.


5.3       Health insurance

We also examined program impacts on take-up of health insurance. As we discuss in Section
2, participation in Tanzania’s government-run health insurance program, the CHF, should
not only help households cope with the risk of health shocks, but also reduce out-of-pocket
expenditures on health given cross-subsidies built into the scheme, favoring the rural poor.
Table 4 shows that treatment increased household expenditures on insurance sixfold by
midline and eightfold by endline (column 3). It also increased participation in the CHF; while
we lack baseline data on participation rates, by endline, households in treatment villages
were 36 percentage points more likely to participate than were households in control villages
(column 4). This is strikingly large given that at baseline, only 3 percent of individuals who
sought treatment for illness in the last month reported using health insurance to fund it.
       Table 5 examines the health care ﬁnancing methods of individuals who reported being
ill in the last month and treated the illness.21 We ﬁnd that at midline, the program reduced
payment for health care using cash or an asset by 18 percentage points, which is a 27 percent
decrease from the baseline mean of 65 percent. This same eﬀect size was sustained at endline.
Those no longer ﬁnancing treatment with cash and assets began using health insurance; we
see a 16 percentage point increase in use of health insurance at midline to ﬁnance treatment,
which swelled to 28 percentage points by endline (from a baseline mean of only 2.7 percent).
  21
    In Appendix Table A5, we examine whether treatment aﬀects selection into who reports being ill or
injured in the last month. We ﬁnd that few interactions of individual and household characteristics with
treatment are statistically signiﬁcant predictors of illness or injury. Further, when we conduct a test of the
joint signiﬁcance of these interaction terms for individuals for whom health conditions applied (those aged
0–5 and aged 60 and over), we ﬁnd insigniﬁcance at both midline (p = 0.369) and endline (p = 0.612).


                                                     15
       Our ﬁndings on health insurance may be driven by several factors. First, if liquidity has
been a binding constraint, a CCT program may increase take-up of insurance.22 Second,
the CCT program may have improved access to information about the CHF and lowered
barriers to enrollment. In qualitative data, health clinic staﬀ in treatment villages reported
going to the place where beneﬁciaries collected transfers to tell them about the CHF and
encourage sign-up while they still felt rich (Evans et al., 2014). Finally, other research on
the same CCT ﬁnds that it increased familiarity with and trust in local leaders and health
care providers (Evans et al., 2016). Combined with evidence that trust increases take-up of
insurance (Dercon et al., 2015), this too may explain increased participation in the CHF.


5.4       Health

Table 6 reports the eﬀects of treatment on two key health outcomes: whether or not an
individual was ill or injured in the last month, and the number of days that the individual
was unable to perform their normal daily activities in the last month due to illness (sick
days) (Panel A). These capture, respectively, the extensive and intensive margins of illness.
We see that at midline, treatment had no signiﬁcant impact on either health outcome.
However, at endline, treatment signiﬁcantly reduced both the extensive and intensive margins
of illness. In particular, for the sample as a whole, treatment resulted in a 4.3 percentage
point reduction in the incidence of illness or injury in the last month (p-value = 0.101);
while of borderline statistical signiﬁcance, this is a sizeable 17 percent decrease relative to
the baseline mean incidence of 27.6 percent. When we instead compute the eﬀect of treatment
on the treated (Appendix Table A6), we observe a statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.10), 4.6
percentage point reduction in incidence of illness or injury in the last month. For the sample
as a whole, treatment also resulted in a statistically signiﬁcant, nearly half-day decrease in
sick days in the last month (a 27 percent decrease relative to the baseline mean of 1.64 sick
  22
    A desire to insure against health shocks can be understood in light of the frequency of such shocks in
our study context; at baseline, 55 percent of households reported experiencing a health shock in the last ﬁve
years (speciﬁcally, a chronic or severe illness or accident of a household member, or a death in the family).


                                                     16
days). These treatment eﬀects seem to be strongly driven by health improvements for young
children (ages 0–5), for whom the reduction in incidence of illness in the last month is 10.7
percentage points (signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level) and the reduction in sick days is 0.76
(signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level). We ﬁnd no signiﬁcant overall program impacts for those
aged 60 and over, either on the extensive or the intensive margins.23 Similar results hold
when we instead estimate a Poisson model (Appendix Table A9). While the program has
health beneﬁts, these take time to materialize, are most prominently on the intensive rather
than extensive margin of illness, and accrue predominately to young children.
       Despite overall health improvements, the CCT program did not change the ordinary ac-
tivities that elderly individuals could perform, as shown in Appendix Table A10. Speciﬁcally,
it did not have signiﬁcant impacts on individuals’ reported ability to do vigorous activities,
walk uphill, bend over or stoop, walk more than 1 km, or use a bath or toilet, nor did it aﬀect
a simple 0–6 index of these activities (the “ordinary activities index”). One exception is the
ability to walk more than 100 meters (a dummy that had a very high baseline mean of 0.96);
there, we ﬁnd a very small negative impact of the program at endline. Overall, however, the
program did not have systematic impacts on the types of activities that individuals could
perform; rather, it changed the number of days that they could perform their activities.
       There are several reasons that health may have improved. First, given that the CCT
program increased health clinic visits at midline, this increased health-seeking behavior may
have itself improved health by endline. Second, additional income, insurance, and the added
familiarity with health clinics generated by the program may have spurred individuals to
visit clinics promptly whenever ill, thus reducing the duration of illness. We explore this
possibility in Section 5.6; if clinic visits were better timed (even if their aggregate numbers
did not increase), this might explain why our results on the intensive margin of illness
are the most robust. Third, the program may have generally stimulated health-promoting
investments by households. Existing research on the CCT program shows that it did not
  23
   Treatment did not aﬀect rates of mortality or the number of household members in diﬀerent age groups
(Appendix Tables A7, A8, and Panel C of Appendix Table A9).


                                                  17
increase food consumption during the last week at either midline or endline, but that it
did increase expenditures on non-food items in the last 12 months—including on women’s
and children’s clothing—and increased the number of goats and chickens households owned
(Evans et al., 2014). Further, the program increased children’s shoe ownership (Section 5.2).
       The ﬁndings on improved health demonstrate the importance of taking care to eval-
uate health outcomes after an appropriate period of time, as advocated in general by
King and Behrman (2009). At least in this study, positive health impacts do not appear
after 1.5 years of transfers, though do appear after 2.5 years. In Section 6, we present fur-
ther evidence and discussion on why health may have improved by endline but not midline,
and what role program health conditions may have played in delivering health beneﬁts.


5.5       Anthropometrics

Appendix Table A11 reports the eﬀects of treatment on a number of anthropometric out-
comes for children aged 0–5: height-for-age, weight-for-age, weight-for-height, body mass in-
dex (BMI)-for-age, height, weight, and middle upper-arm circumference (MUAC) (columns
1–7, respectively). These regressions use village × 6-month age cohort ﬁxed eﬀects since
very few children were in the 0–5 age range for multiple observations during 2009–2012. We
ﬁnd no evidence that treatment inﬂuences these outcomes.24 The lack of anthropometric
eﬀects is striking; it contributes to a mixed literature on the impacts of CCTs on child an-
thropometrics (Fiszbein and Schady, 2009). The result is less surprising when considering
the null impacts of the program on food consumption (Evans et al., 2014).


5.6       Health care provider type

Table 7 examines the impacts of the CCT program on health care provider decisions of
individuals who reported being ill in the last month.25 Individuals either fail to treat their
  24
    We also ﬁnd null results when only considering children under age 2.
  25
    At baseline, 28 percent of individuals reported being ill or injured in the last month; 85 percent sought
treatment for their illness—49 percent in the public sector and 36 percent in the private sector.


                                                     18
main health problem (15 percent did so at baseline) or visit one of several diﬀerent types of
public and private providers. As the health conditions of the program required visits to be at
public facilities, we anticipated ﬁnding larger impacts of treatment on public than on private
facility visits. We ﬁnd that at midline, the program reduced failure to seek treatment by 12
percentage points (column 1). That illness was more likely to be treated may explain why
health impacts were most robust on the intensive margin, with the CCT program generally
contributing to shorter spells of illness. At both midline and endline, the program increased
use of public dispensaries; by 17 percentage points at midline, and 15 percentage points
at endline (column 2). However, it did not impact use of private providers (columns 5–8).
This is consistent with the health clinic visit conditions of the program, which counted only
visits to public facilities and not private facilities. Rather than drawing individuals from the
private to the public sector, we see a shift from a failure to treat illness to treatment at a
public dispensary. Further, the program did not lead individuals to treat illness at a public
hospital or a health center (columns 3–4). These are larger facilities that would typically
oﬀer more services (and potentially more qualiﬁed staﬀ), but which are usually further away.


5.7    Robustness: Corrections for multiple hypothesis testing

A growing literature recognizes the risk of ﬁnding false positives when testing multiple hy-
potheses and advances correction methods. Two popular methods are the Benjamini and
Hochberg (BH) and the Benjamini–Krieger–Yekutieli (BKY) methods, which control for
the false discovery rate (FDR) (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995; Benjamini et al., 2006). We
compute the q-values (i.e., p-values corrected for multiple testing) of each. As a third test, we
apply a Bonferroni correction—a method of controlling the family-wise error rate (FWER)
that involves multiplying each p-value by the number of tests performed. While simple to
compute, it suﬀers from poor power (Anderson, 2008) and is often used as an upper bound
on the FWER (Hochberg, 1988). We thus rely primarily on the BH and BKY results, but
take the Bonferroni as a useful guide to the lower bound of the signiﬁcance of our results.


                                               19
       Appendix Table A12 reports the resulting q-values from the three correction methods
for all originally statistically signiﬁcant impacts. For each method, a group of hypotheses is
deﬁned by the follow-up survey round (midline or endline) and broad type of outcome being
considered (e.g., child anthropometrics or ordinary activities). This is usually equivalent
to grouping together all of the hypotheses within a table for a given survey round.26 Hy-
potheses associated with heterogeneous treatment eﬀects are grouped with the hypotheses
of overall treatment eﬀects, despite being displayed in separate tables. In total, we observe
61 statistically signiﬁcant impacts of the CCT program in the paper’s main tables. When we
correct for multiple testing using the BKY (BH) method, 45 (43) remain signiﬁcant. With
the more conservative Bonferroni method, 35 remain signiﬁcant.
       Our main conclusions still hold. Under all three correction methods, the program sig-
niﬁcantly increased health clinic visits at midline but not endline. Furthermore, it boosted
children’s shoe ownership and household expenditure on insurance at both midline and end-
line. Reductions in the intensive margin of illness by endline are still signiﬁcant with both
BKY and BH, though reductions in the extensive margin of illness do not survive these cor-
rections. This may indicate that the CCT program’s ability to reduce illness is principally
concentrated in its reduction of the severity of illness—and how debilitating it becomes—
rather its incidence. Notably, under all three corrections, our ﬁnding that the program
increases participation in the CHF remains statistically signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level.
Similarly, ﬁndings that the CCT program reduced the likelihood of failing to treat illness at
midline, and increased visits to public dispensaries (but not private ones) at both midline
and endline remain robustly signiﬁcant under all three corrections. Finally, at both midline
and endline, the ﬁnding that the program reduced use of cash or assets to ﬁnance health
care and boosted usage of health insurance are again signiﬁcant under all three corrections.
  26
    There are three exceptions. In Table 4, protective footwear outcomes are grouped separately from
insurance-related outcomes—just as they are separately considered in Section 5. In Table 6, hypotheses
related to the extension and intensive margins of health are grouped separately. And in Appendix Table
A10, we omit the ordinary activities index from our grouping; estimation of impacts of treatment on an
index simply serves as an additional check on the robustness of these null ﬁndings.



                                                 20
6     Mechanisms

We gain additional insight into the mechanisms likely driving the impacts of treatment by
separately examining sub-groups of beneﬁciaries. We already considered impacts by age
group. However, as we discuss in Section 4.2, we also consider two additional types of
heterogeneous treatment eﬀects. For two central outcomes likely to be heavily inﬂuenced by
the quality of available health care—health clinic visits and health during the last month—we
examine heterogeneous impacts on villages with above-median versus below-median health
clinic staﬀ per capita at baseline. This helps us assess if improvements are sensitive to
capacity constraints. For outcomes likely to be inﬂuenced by how credit constrained a
household is—shoes and slipper ownership, expenditure on insurance, participation in the
CHF, whether one treats illness and where (public or private facilities), and how one ﬁnances
treatment—we examine heterogeneous impacts in moderately poor households (top half of
beneﬁciaries in terms of asset wealth) versus extremely poor households (bottom half).


6.1    Impacts by health clinic staﬃng levels

When we examine heterogeneous treatment eﬀects by baseline health clinic staﬀ per capita
(Table 8), several interesting ﬁndings emerge. First, Panel A reveals that we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that the CCT program had the same eﬀect on health clinic visits in
villages with few baseline health staﬀ per capita (the bottom half of the distribution) as in
villages with many (the top half). This is true overall and for both age groups (0–5 year
olds and those age 60+). This provides suggestive evidence that the impacts of treatment
on clinic visits would not be enhanced by increasing clinic staﬀ per capita. Second, Panel
B shows heterogeneous impacts on health by baseline clinic staﬀ per capita. Here, we ﬁnd
that reductions in sick days are concentrated in villages with more health staﬀ per capita,
with no signiﬁcant impacts in villages with few staﬀ per capita. For individuals in villages
that were highly-staﬀed at baseline, the average reduction in sick days in the last month is



                                             21
0.96 (compared to an insigniﬁcant 0.07 days in more poorly-staﬀed villages). The diﬀerence
between these two eﬀects is statistically signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. This suggests that
reductions in the intensive margin of illness may in fact be conditional on a village having
suﬃcient staﬀ to attend patients and treat illness. It is important to note, however, there
there are no diﬀerential impacts of the program by baseline staﬃng levels on sick days for
children aged 0–5. Clinic staﬃng may matter more for older individuals—possibly as they
are less integrated into the health system. Additionally, there are no diﬀerential impacts of
treatment on the incidence (extensive margin) of illness by clinic staﬃng levels.
   Appendix Figure A1 helps illustrate these impacts. Sub-ﬁgure (a) presents two village-
level scatterplots—one for midline, one for endline—each with 80 data points: 40 show
treatment village averages (in black circles), and 40 show control village averages (in gray
squares). We plot on the y-axis the average change in the number of sick days in the last
month between baseline and follow-up (positive numbers indicate an increase, negative a
decrease) and on the x-axis village health clinic staﬀ per capita at baseline. We include
separate linear ﬁts for treatment and control. At midline, we see that there are essentially
no health improvements in either treatment or control villages, across the full distribution
of clinic staﬀ per capita. By endline, however, treatment villages on average have greater
reductions in sick days than do control villages across the full range of values of staﬀ per
capita. However, the diﬀerence is greatest in villages with especially high staﬀ per capita.
   Sub-ﬁgure (b) of Appendix Figure A1 presents a similar analysis where the outcome is
now the average change in the number of clinic visits in the last year between baseline and
follow-up. At midline, treatment villages on average experience larger increases in clinic visits
than do control villages across the full range of values of clinic staﬀ per capita. While the
diﬀerence is greater in villages with higher staﬀ per capita, this diﬀerence was not statistically
signiﬁcant in regressions. At endline, we see similar reductions in clinic visits in treatment
and control villages across the full distribution of staﬀ per capita—possibly reﬂecting better
average health at endline (as seen in sub-ﬁgure (a)) that alleviated capacity constraints.


                                               22
6.2     Impacts by household wealth

Examining heterogeneous treatment eﬀects by baseline household asset wealth (Table 9)
reveals several interesting results. First, as shown in Panel A, we do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in the impacts of the program on whether one treats illness (column 1), and
whether or not they treat it in a public dispensary (column 2), according to baseline house-
hold wealth.27 However, Panel B shows that the impacts of the CCT program on shoe
ownership (column 1), slipper ownership (column 2), and insurance expenditures (column 3)
are responsive to baseline household wealth. For each of the three, the impacts of treatment
are larger for the extremely poor (those in the bottom half of asset wealth at baseline) than
for the moderately poor for both follow-up survey rounds. These diﬀerences are in several
cases statistically signiﬁcant. At midline, the extremely poor saw a signiﬁcantly greater
increase in shoe ownership and insurance expenditure than did the moderately poor, while
at endline, the extremely poor had a signiﬁcantly greater increase in slipper ownership than
did the moderately poor. The eﬀect on CHF participation at endline is slightly larger (but
not statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent) for extremely poor households (column 4). However,
Panel C reveals that while the increase in use of health insurance at endline was larger for
the extremely poor than for the moderately poor, the diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁ-
cant. Overall, these results suggest that not only can a CCT program increase take-up of
products that tend to prevent health problems from occurring and help households cope
with health-related risks, but also that in some cases, the poorest of the poor beneﬁt most.


6.3     Exploratory analysis: Timing and drivers of health impacts

Our ﬁndings raise two important and related questions that have not been fully answered:
First, why do health improvements show up at endline but not at midline? Second, did clinic
  27
     While we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant impacts of treatment on other types of providers (columns 3–8), there are
two statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences worth noting. First, at midline, treatment led the moderately poor
to increase use of public health centers—though had no signiﬁcant impact on their use by the extremely
poor. Second, at midline, treatment led the extremely poor to decrease use of private dispensaries, hospitals,
clinics, and stores—though had no signiﬁcant impact on their use by the moderately poor.


                                                     23
conditions contribute to the health improvements realized from the program, or were they
unnecessary? We carry out exploratory analyses to shed further light on both questions.
       Appendix Figure A2 presents four village-level scatterplots, each containing 80 data
points: 40 showing treatment village averages (in black circles), and 40 showing control
village averages (in grey squares), with separate linear ﬁts for each set of 40. We plot on the
y-axis the average change in the number of sick days in the last month between baseline and
follow-up (positive numbers indicate an increase in sick days, negative numbers a decrease).
On the x-axis, sub-ﬁgure (a) has the village average number of clinic visits per person at
baseline, while sub-ﬁgure (b) has the share of the village already complying with the health
conditions at baseline. Each sub-ﬁgure features a plot for each of the two follow-up surveys.
       Sub-ﬁgures (a) and (b) tell a similar story; reductions in the intensive margin of illness
(sick days) show up at midline for a subset of the population (even if there are no signiﬁcant
reductions in the aggregate, as shown in our regressions): those already complying with
or exceeding program health conditions at baseline and those with more clinic visits at
baseline (call these “the compliers”). This suggests that it was not the conditions driving
initial (midline) health improvements; it was the income eﬀect of the transfer on individuals
already visiting clinics frequently. However, by endline, the story reverses. It was those
who were not complying with the conditions at baseline and those with fewer clinic visits at
baseline (call these “the non-compliers”) who saw the greatest reductions in sick days.
       Our regressions showed that treatment boosted health clinic visits at midline. Appendix
Figure A3 further reveals that this midline increase in clinic visits was larger among non-
compliers than among compliers.28 This suggests that the CCT program helped individuals
in two waves. First, compliers experienced a mild reduction in sick days at midline, likely
due to income eﬀects of the CCT. Second, non-compliers experienced health beneﬁts, but
with a lag. By midline they were induced to increase their health clinic visits—likely due
to both the conditions of the program and the income from the transfer permitting them
  28
    This is also the case at endline, where despite no aggregate increase in clinic visits at endline due to
treatment, we see increases for those with low rates of compliance with health conditions at baseline.


                                                    24
to go to the clinic when sick rather than allowing illness to go untreated. But it was not
until endline that this paid dividends in terms of better health. Indeed, by endline, these
non-compliers likely beneﬁted from at least two factors: their increased exposure to clinics at
midline as well as the fact that treatment had already reduced illness in a number of children
in the village (i.e., the compliers), spurring an overall reduction in infectious disease rates
that shows up in our regressions as statistically signiﬁcant overall impacts of treatment on
sick days at endline. Appendix Figure A2 also reveals that we see larger reductions in sick
days at endline among those with fewer clinic visits at baseline (sub-ﬁgure (a)) and among
those with lower rates of compliance with conditions at baseline (sub-ﬁgure (b)), consistent
with conditions helping to explain overall health improvements.



7     Conclusion

This paper provides evidence that, after 2.5 years, a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program
in Tanzania made children aged 0–5 experience fewer monthly sick days. We ﬁnd no evidence
of health improvements for those aged 60 and over despite their having also been required
to visit a health clinic as a condition of the transfer, suggesting greater promise of such
programs for the young.
    The statistically signiﬁcant improvements in health outcomes after 2.5 years are partic-
ularly striking given that the program’s initial eﬀect of increasing annual clinic visits had
disappeared after 2.5 years of transfers. If health improvements were not driven by increased
clinic visits, then what was the cause? Previous analysis suggests that these study house-
holds did not signiﬁcantly increase consumption (Evans et al., 2014). Instead, we show that
households used their transfers to reduce the risk of high heath care costs. Households in-
vested in footwear for their children, which reduces exposure to health risks. Households
were substantially more likely to invest in a government-run health insurance program. They
went on to utilize that health insurance to ﬁnance clinic visits when ill. Although the total



                                              25
number of clinic visits was not higher among beneﬁciary households, participation in the
insurance program meant that those households could attend the clinic when they most
needed it, rather than letting immediate ﬁnancial liquidity determine when, in the course of
an illness, to visit the clinic. This is consistent with ﬁndings from Adhvaryu and Nyshadham
(2015), who demonstrate that households that access formal sector malaria treatment in a
more timely way have better health outcomes. The number of visits matters only in part; the
timing of visits is also crucial, and the insurance program makes that timing more ﬂexible.
Furthermore, the initial increase in visits associated with the program may have increased
household familiarity and comfort with clinic services. The availability of such health ﬁnanc-
ing instruments and—potentially—explicitly making them available at the point of transfer
distribution may be important considerations if countries desire to fully reap health gains
from cash transfers.
   Our analysis of the health impacts of Tanzania’s CCT program is not without caveats;
while self-reported health measures improved, we do not ﬁnd enduring impacts on children’s
anthropometrics. The cash transfers may make children feel better and be more able to
carry out daily activities (e.g., attending school and fetching water), but these may not
immediately translate into growth—at least not within 2.5 years. However, they suggest a
clear increase in reported child well-being.
   We ﬁnd some evidence that overall, health improvements—at least on the intensive
margin—are greater in villages with more health workers per capita. In other words, cash
transfers can most eﬀectively reduce the number of days individuals are sick when clinics
are suﬃciently staﬀed to provide high-quality services. Clear evidence demonstrates that
healthier households are likely to have higher incomes, which then drive better health in a
virtuous cycle (Strauss and Thomas, 1998). The evidence from this study demonstrates that
supply-side investments (in health care providers) combined with cash transfers (to permit
households to insure against health shocks) may be critical catalysts to that virtuous cycle.




                                               26
References
Adhvaryu, A. and A. Nyshadham (2015). Returns to treatment in the formal health care
  sector: Evidence from Tanzania. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (3),
  29–57.
Akresh, R., D. de Walque, and H. Kazianga (2014). Alternative Cash Transfer Delivery
  Mechanisms: Impacts on Routine Preventative Health Clinic Visits in Burkina Faso. Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c13377.
Anderson, M. L. (2008). Multiple inference and gender diﬀerences in the eﬀects of early in-
  tervention: A reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training projects.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 (484).
Andrews, C., A. Lopez, and J. Baez (2014). What are we learning on safety net impacts?
  reviewing evidence from 2010-2013. World Bank Social Protection Discussion Paper Series .
Attanasio, O., E. Battistin, E. Fitzsimons, and M. Vera-Hernandez (2005). How eﬀective
  are conditional cash transfers? evidence from colombia.
Babbel, B. (2012). Evaluating equity in the provision of primary health care in Tanzania.
  https://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/handle/1957/32933.
Baird, S., J. De Hoop, and B. Özler (2013). Income shocks and adolescent mental health.
  Journal of Human Resources 48 (2), 370–403.
Baird, S., C. McIntosh, and B. Özler (2011). Cash or condition? evidence from a cash
  transfer experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , qjr032.
Bank of Tanzania (2015). Interbank foreign exchange market summaries. https://www.bot-
  tz.org/FinancialMarkets/IFEMsummaries/IFEMsummaries.asp.
Benhassine, N., F. Devoto, E. Duﬂo, P. Dupas, and V. Pouliquen (2015). Turning a shove
  into a nudge? a âĂĲlabeled cash transferâĂİ for education. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 7 (3), 86–125.
Benjamini, Y. and Y. Hochberg (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
  powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
  (Methodological), 289–300.
Benjamini, Y., A. M. Krieger, and D. Yekutieli (2006). Adaptive linear step-up procedures
  that control the false discovery rate. Biometrika 93 (3), 491–507.
Biosca, O. and H. Brown (2014). Boosting health insurance coverage in developing countries:
  do conditional cash transfer programmes matter in Mexico? Health policy and planning ,
  czt109.
Birn, A.-E. and A. Solórzano (1999). Public health policy paradoxes: science and politics in
  the Rockefeller Foundation’s hookworm campaign in Mexico in the 1920s. Social Science
  & Medicine 49 (9), 1197–1213.
Bjorkman Nyqvist, M., L. Corno, D. De Walque, and J. Svensson (2015). Using lotteries
  to incentivize safer sexual behavior: evidence from a randomized controlled trial on HIV
  prevention. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper (7215).
De Walque, D., W. Dow, and R. Nathan (2014). Rewarding safer sex: conditional cash
  transfers for HIV/STI prevention. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper (7099).
Dercon, S., J. W. Gunning, and A. Zeitlin (2015). The demand for insurance under limited
  trust: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment in kenya.
Duﬂo, E. (2000). Child health and household resources in South Africa: Evidence from the
  old age pension program. American Economic Review , 393–398.



                                             27
Duﬂo, E. (2003). Grandmothers and granddaughters: Old-age pensions and intrahousehold
  allocation in South Africa. The World Bank Economic Review 17 (1), 1–25.
Ekman, B. (2004). Community-based health insurance in low-income countries: a systematic
  review of the evidence. Health policy and planning 19 (5), 249–270.
Evans, D., S. Hausladen, K. Kosec, and N. Reese (2014). Community-Based Conditional
  Cash Transfers in Tanzania: Results from a Randomized Trial. World Bank Publications.
Evans, D., B. Holtemeyer, and K. Kosec (2016). If you give it, trust will come: The impacts
  of community-managed cash transfers. Working Paper .
Fiszbein, A. and N. Schady (2009). Conditional cash transfers: reducing present and future
  poverty. World Bank Publications.
Garcia, M. and C. M. Moore (2012). The cash dividend: The rise of cash transfer programs
  in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank Publications.
Handa, S., A. Peterman, D. Seidenfeld, and G. Tembo (2015). Income transfers and maternal
  health: Evidence from a national randomized social cash transfer program in Zambia.
  Health Economics . http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hec.3136.
Haushofer, J. and J. Shapiro (2016). The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers
  to the poor: Evidence from Kenya. Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Hochberg, Y. (1988). A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of signiﬁcance.
  Biometrika 75 (4), 800–802.
Hoddinott, J. (2010). Nutrition and conditional cash transfer programs. In M. Adato and
  J. Hoddinott (Eds.), Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America. Baltimore: Johns
  Hopkins University Press.
Independent Evaluation Group (2011). Social safety nets: An evaluation of world bank
  support, 2000–2010. Washington, DC: Independent Evaluation Group, the World Bank
  Group.
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2013).             The global burden of dis-
  ease: Generating evidence, guiding policy — Sub–Saharan Africa regional edi-
  tion.      http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/08/18187588/global-burden-
  disease-generating-evidence-guiding-policy-sub-saharan-africa-regional-edition.
Kamuzora, P. and L. Gilson (2007). Factors inﬂuencing implementation of the community
  health fund in Tanzania. Health Policy and Planning 22 (2), 95–102.
King, E. M. and J. R. Behrman (2009). Timing and duration of exposure in evaluations of
  social programs. The World Bank Research Observer 24 (1), 55–82.
Leroy, J. L., M. Ruel, and E. Verhofstadt (2009). The impact of conditional cash transfer
  programmes on child nutrition: a review of evidence using a programme theory framework.
  Journal of Development Eﬀectiveness 1 (2), 103–129.
Levy, D. and J. Ohls (2007). Evaluation of jamaica’s path program: ﬁnal report. Report
  prepared .
Macours, K., N. Schady, and R. Vakis (2012). Cash transfers, behavioral changes, and
  the cognitive development of young children: Evidence from a randomized experiment.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2), 247–273.
Maluccio, J. and R. Flores (2005). Impact evaluation of a conditional cash transfer program:
  The Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social. International Food Policy Research Institute.
Marriott,      A.    (2011).           Does  health      insurance   work    in    Tanzania?
  http://www.globalhealthcheck.org/?p=388.
Mascarini-Serra, L. et al. (2011). Prevention of soil-transmitted helminth infection. Journal
  of global infectious diseases 3 (2), 175.

                                             28
Morris, S. S., P. Olinto, R. Flores, E. A. Nilson, and A. C. Figueiro (2004). Conditional
  cash transfers are associated with a small reduction in the rate of weight gain of preschool
  children in northeast brazil. The Journal of nutrition 134 (9), 2336–2341.
Mtei, G., J. Mulligan, et al. (2007). Community health funds in tanzania: A literature
  review. Ifakara Health Research and Development Centre, Ifakara .
Paxson, C. and N. Schady (2010). Does money matter? the eﬀects of cash transfers on
  child development in rural Ecuador. Economic development and cultural change 59 (1),
  187–229.
Powell-Jackson, T. and K. Hanson (2012). Financial incentives for maternal health: impact
  of a national programme in Nepal. Journal of health economics 31 (1), 271–284.
Powell-Jackson, T., S. Mazumdar, and A. Mills (2015). Financial incentives in health: New
  evidence from india’s janani suraksha yojana. Journal of health economics 43, 154–169.
Robertson, L., P. Mushati, J. W. Eaton, L. Dumba, G. Mavise, J. Makoni, C. Schumacher,
  T. Crea, R. Monasch, L. Sherr, et al. (2013). Eﬀects of unconditional and conditional cash
  transfers on child health and development in Zimbabwe: a cluster-randomised trial. The
  Lancet 381 (9874), 1283–1292.
Schaﬀer, M. (2010).           xtivreg2:   Stata module to perform extended iv/2sls,
  gmm and ac/hac, liml and k-class regression for panel data models.
  http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456501.html.
Strauss, J. and D. Thomas (1998). Health, nutrition, and economic development. Journal
  of economic literature , 766–817.
World Bank (2013). Africa’s Pulse 8.
  http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Africa/Report/Africas-
  Pulse-brochure_Vol8.pdf.
World Health Organization (2014). United Republic of Tanzania: Health Proﬁle. Africa’s
  Pulse . http://www.who.int/gho/countries/tza.pdf?ua=1.




                                             29
                 Table 1: Timeline of CCT program and impact evaluation
Timing                                       Activity
November 2007 - September 2008               Program design
September - November 2008                    Sensitization at regional, district, ward, and community levels
January - May 2009                           Baseline survey
September - October 2009                     Enrollment of beneﬁciaries
January 2010                                 First payments made to beneﬁciary households
July - September 2011                        Midline survey and ﬁrst round of qualitative data collection
August - October 2012                        Endline survey
July - August 2013                           Second round of qualitative data collection




       Table 2: Eﬀects of treatment on health clinic visits in the last 12 months

                                              Full sample            0-5 years old          60 and over
                                                   (1)                    (2)                   (3)

      Treatment × 2011 (midline)                                        2.296∗∗               1.083∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.872)                (0.349)
      Treatment × 2012 (endline)                  -0.067                 -1.042                 0.161
                                                 (0.253)                (0.875)                (0.344)
      2011 (midline)                                                   -3.817∗∗∗              -1.214∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.584)                (0.216)
      2012 (endline)                            -1.436∗∗∗              -5.762∗∗∗              -0.670∗∗∗
                                                 (0.182)                (0.635)                (0.237)
      R2                                           0.061                 0.375                  0.018
      Baseline mean                               2.802                  8.272                  2.783
      Observations                                13713                   1243                  5692
      Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
      Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to
      treat). Midline data are excluded from the full sample because health facility visit data were not
      collected in the midline survey for those 5-60 years old. Ages refer to age at the time of baseline
      survey. Fewer refers to those residing in villages in the bottom half of the distribution of baseline
      health clinic staﬀ per capita, while more refers to those in the top half. All speciﬁcations include
      individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. ***
      indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                                                       30
Table 3: Eﬀects of treatment on compliance with health clinic visits in the last 12 months

                                                 Full sample     0-5 years old   60 and over
                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)
               Treatment × 2011 (midline)                          0.288***       0.259***
                                                                    (0.085)        (0.031)
               Treatment × 2012 (endline)           0.039**          0.019         0.086**
                                                    (0.016)         (0.058)        (0.035)
               2011 (midline)                                        -0.086       -0.120***
                                                                    (0.067)        (0.026)
               2011 (endline)                        0.020         0.186***         -0.010
                                                    (0.012)         (0.044)        (0.027)
               R2                                    0.010            0.074          0.027
               Observations                         13,713           1,243          5,692
               Baseline mean                         0.831           0.591          0.653
Sources: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat). To be
in health compliance, those aged 0-5 years must have 6 clinic visits in last 12 months; those 60+ must have
1 clinic visit in the last 12 months. At endline (2012), the condition was loosened from 6 to 2 visits for those
aged 2-5 years. Midline data are excluded from the full sample because health facility visit data were not
collected in the midline survey for those 5-60 years old. Ages refer to age at the time of baseline survey. All
speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village
level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.


             Table 4: Eﬀects of treatment on take-up of health-related products

                                           Dummy -          Dummy -      Insurance      Dummy -
                                          owns shoes           owns     expenditures   participates
                                                             slippers                  in the CHF
                                               (1)              (2)          (3)            (4)
         Treatment × 2011 (midline)         0.180∗∗∗          0.054       1.176∗∗∗
                                             (0.043)         (0.035)       (0.252)
         Treatment × 2012 (endline)         0.179∗∗∗         0.084∗∗      1.516∗∗∗      0.357∗∗∗
                                             (0.047)         (0.038)       (0.284)       (0.039)
         2011 (midline)                     0.129∗∗∗        0.188∗∗∗      0.177∗∗∗
                                             (0.028)         (0.023)       (0.051)
         2012 (endline)                     0.126∗∗∗        0.196∗∗∗      0.438∗∗∗
                                             (0.031)         (0.028)       (0.099)
         R2                                   0.105           0.107         0.118         0.317
         Baseline mean                        0.423           0.632         0.181
         Observations                         6847             6847         5036          1555
Sources: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat). Shoe
and slipper ownership are individual-level outcomes for those under 18 years old at the time of the baseline
survey. Insurance expenditures and CHF participation are household level outcomes. Insurance expenditures
refer of total annual medical, car, and life insurance expenditures (thousands TSH). Data on participation in
the CHF are only available from the endline survey. Households that report having never heard of the CHF are
assumed to not be participating in the CHF. Columns (1) and (2) include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Column (3)
includes household ﬁxed eﬀects. Column (4) includes baseline controls of age, age2 , sex, and education level of
the household head. Also included are dummies for district, household size, having an improved roof, having an
improved toilet, having an improved ﬂoor, having piped water, village population, the number of years since the
CHF began operating in respondent’s village, and the ﬁrst principal component from a PCA using information
on ownership of 13 household assets. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. ***
indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.


                                                       31
Table 5: Eﬀects of treatment on method used to ﬁnance healthcare when addressing main
health problem of the last month

                                         Free           Loan or          Cash or         Health
                                      treatment        assistance         asset        insurance
                                          (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)

 Treatment × 2011 (midline)                0.038            -0.017       -0.176∗∗∗        0.155∗∗∗
                                         (0.052)           (0.034)        (0.062)          (0.049)
 Treatment × 2012 (endline)              -0.083∗            -0.013       -0.182∗∗∗        0.278∗∗∗
                                         (0.048)           (0.032)        (0.065)          (0.052)
 2011 (midline)                           -0.007          -0.071∗∗         0.054            0.024
                                         (0.035)           (0.027)        (0.037)          (0.015)
 2012 (endline)                            0.027         -0.074∗∗∗         0.007          0.040∗∗∗
                                         (0.037)           (0.023)        (0.039)          (0.013)
 R2                                        0.009             0.035         0.022            0.142
 Baseline mean                            0.216             0.103          0.654            0.027
 Observations                              5365              5365          5365             5365
 Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
 Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat).
 Health problem of the last month refers to the last four weeks. Over the 3 rounds of the survey, respon-
 dents reported being sick or injured a total of 5,922 times. For 5,409 of these reports, the main treatment
 ﬁnancing method was reported. 44 people were excluded from this analysis for reporting ﬁnancing with
 either “other” or “diﬀered by provider” since it was not possible to understand how these individuals
 ﬁnanced treatment. All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are in parentheses
 and clustered at the village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.


            Table 6: Eﬀects of treatment on illness and injury in the last month

                                      Dummy - ill or injured in last         Days in last month unable to
                                                month                       perform normal daily activities
                                                                                due to illness or injury
                                        Full      0-5 years     60 and         Full      0-5 years     60 and
                                      sample         old         over        sample         old         over
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

 Treatment × 2011 (midline)             0.004        -0.011      0.044        -0.210      -0.122       -0.204
                                       (0.026)      (0.055)     (0.040)      (0.225)     (0.285)      (0.489)
 Treatment × 2012 (endline)             -0.043      -0.107∗      -0.002     -0.435∗     -0.758∗∗       -0.353
                                       (0.026)      (0.063)     (0.035)      (0.220)     (0.358)      (0.414)
 2011 (midline)                         0.002       -0.054∗      0.032         0.198      -0.206      0.675∗∗
                                       (0.018)      (0.032)     (0.028)      (0.165)     (0.170)      (0.323)
 2012 (endline)                       0.078∗∗∗        0.031    0.147∗∗∗     1.076∗∗∗       0.298     2.389∗∗∗
                                       (0.016)      (0.047)     (0.023)      (0.147)     (0.297)      (0.269)
 R2                                      0.006        0.010      0.024        0.012        0.011        0.033
 Baseline mean                          0.276        0.282       0.388         1.636      1.052        2.786
 Observations                           20741         1537        5694        20740        1537         5693
 Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
 Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat).
 Illness in the last month refers to the last four weeks. Ages refer to age at the time of baseline survey.
 All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the
 village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.


                                                    32
Table 7: Eﬀects of treatment on type of health provider visited to address main health
problem of the last month
                                                       Public                                 Private
                               None       Dispensary District,    Health    Pharmacy    Healer,     Dispensary, Mission
                                                     region, or   center        or     herbalist,   hospital,   dispen-
                                                       referal               chemist    or faith    clinic, or  sary or
                                                      hospital                           healer       store     hospital
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)

 Treatment × 2011 (midline)   -0.119∗∗∗   0.174∗∗∗      -0.036      0.001     -0.035     0.024        -0.007      -0.002
                               (0.041)     (0.048)     (0.024)    (0.025)    (0.040)    (0.016)      (0.017)     (0.008)
 Treatment × 2012 (endline)     -0.054    0.148∗∗∗      -0.003     -0.021     -0.055     -0.010       -0.001      -0.004
                               (0.037)     (0.050)     (0.029)    (0.026)    (0.047)    (0.022)      (0.019)     (0.014)
 2011 (midline)               0.100∗∗∗      -0.033      0.010       0.030   -0.066∗∗    -0.027∗       -0.011      -0.003
                               (0.032)     (0.035)     (0.019)    (0.020)    (0.034)    (0.014)      (0.012)     (0.004)
 2012 (endline)                  0.005      0.053       0.017      0.029    -0.088∗∗     -0.012       -0.004      0.001
                               (0.027)     (0.041)     (0.025)    (0.020)    (0.041)    (0.017)      (0.015)     (0.013)
 R2                              0.016      0.029       0.005      0.006       0.024      0.005        0.002       0.001
 Baseline mean                   0.154       0.395      0.059      0.035      0.274      0.047        0.023       0.013
 Observations                    5889        5889        5889       5889       5889       5889         5889        5889
 Sources: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data. (2012).
 Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat). Health
 problem of the last month refers to the last four weeks. Over the 3 rounds of the survey, respondents reported
 being sick or injured a total of 5,922 times. In all of those reports, the most important health provider was
 reported. 33 people were excluded from this analysis for reporting that the most important health provider was
 other. All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the
 village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                                                        33
                  Table 8: Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects by staﬀ/capita


                                  (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)          (5)            (6)

Panel A: Eﬀects of treatment on health clinic visits in the last 12 months
                                  Full      0-5 years        60 and
                                sample          old            over
T × 2011 × fewer                            2.975∗∗∗         0.875∗
                                             (1.036)         (0.477)
T × 2011 × more                                1.426         1.279∗∗
                                             (1.509)         (0.511)
T × 2012 × fewer                 -0.001       -1.483          0.199
                                (0.373)      (1.114)         (0.511)
T × 2012 × more                  -0.144       -0.234          0.126
                                (0.331)      (1.223)         (0.466)
Observations                     13713         1243           5692
2011 p-value of diﬀerence                     0.400           0.565
2012 p-value of diﬀerence        0.775        0.453           0.916
Baseline mean (fewer)            2.598        7.553           2.501
Baseline mean (more)             3.004        9.104           3.051

Panel B: Eﬀects of treatment on illness and injury in the last month
                               Dummy - ill or injured in last           Days in last month unable to
                                         month                         perform normal daily activities
                                                                           due to illness or injury
                                    Full    0-5 years      60 and         Full      0-5 years      60 and
                                 sample         old          over       sample          old          over
T × 2011 × fewer                   0.016      -0.011         0.014       0.083        -0.117         0.219
                                 (0.039)     (0.064)       (0.060)      (0.317)      (0.332)       (0.749)
T × 2011 × more                   -0.006      -0.021        0.072        -0.493       -0.186        -0.580
                                 (0.032)     (0.084)       (0.055)      (0.309)      (0.443)       (0.621)
T × 2012 × fewer                  -0.029      -0.110        0.008        0.071        -0.486        0.772
                                 (0.040)     (0.084)       (0.047)      (0.307)      (0.387)       (0.527)
T × 2012 × more                  -0.056∗      -0.112        -0.019     -0.959∗∗∗     -1.135∗      -1.505∗∗∗
                                 (0.031)     (0.093)       (0.048)      (0.281)      (0.655)       (0.553)
Observations                      20741        1537          5694        20740         1537          5693
2011 p-value of diﬀerence         0.668       0.926         0.474        0.197        0.901          0.414
2012 p-value of diﬀerence         0.581       0.990         0.687        0.016        0.397          0.004
Baseline mean (fewer)             0.284        0.297        0.380        1.662        1.081         2.763
Baseline mean (more)              0.267        0.264        0.396        1.610        1.017         2.809
Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat).
Midline and endline treatment eﬀects are abbreviated T × 2011 and T × 2012, respectively. Fewer refers
to those residing in villages in the bottom half of the distribution of baseline health clinic staﬀ per capita,
while more refers to those in the top half. Ages refer to age at the time of baseline survey. In panel A
midline data are excluded from the full sample because health facility visit data were not collected in the
midline survey for those 5-60 years old. In panel B illness in the last month refers to the last four weeks.
All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the
village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                                                        34
                                                       Table 9: Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects by degree of poverty
                                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)                   (7)                   (8)

                                               Panel A: Eﬀects of treatment on type of health provider visited to address main health problem of the last month

                                                                                                Public                                                                      Private
                                                     None              Dispensary              District,         Health center          Pharmacy or              Healer,           Dispensary,              Mission
                                                                                              region, or                                  chemist             herbalist, or       hospital, clinic,      dispensary or
                                                                                           referal hospital                                                   faith healer           or store               hospital
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                      -0.100∗              0.213∗∗∗               -0.046                -0.054                 0.026                0.001              -0.044∗∗                0.005
                                                    (0.058)               (0.072)              (0.031)               (0.034)               (0.066)               (0.024)              (0.022)               (0.014)
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                    -0.136∗∗∗              0.135∗                -0.031               0.062∗                -0.103∗              0.051∗∗                0.031                 -0.010
                                                    (0.050)               (0.073)              (0.035)               (0.036)               (0.058)               (0.025)              (0.025)               (0.015)
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                       -0.017              0.166∗∗∗               -0.043                -0.031                -0.024                -0.022               -0.034                 0.006
                                                    (0.050)               (0.061)              (0.038)               (0.032)               (0.063)               (0.031)              (0.022)               (0.022)
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                     -0.091∗               0.128∗                 0.035                -0.007                -0.090                0.005                0.035                 -0.014
                                                    (0.051)               (0.070)              (0.037)               (0.033)               (0.069)               (0.035)              (0.030)               (0.015)
     Observations                                     5889                 5889                  5889                  5889                  5889                  5889                 5889                  5889
     2011 p-value of diﬀerence                        0.604                0.475                 0.744                0.020                  0.185                 0.163               0.018                 0.546
     2012 p-value of diﬀerence                        0.294                0.661                 0.117                0.541                  0.487                 0.575               0.058                 0.404
     Baseline mean (extremely poor)                   0.190                0.381                 0.029                 0.044                 0.268                0.060                0.016                 0.012
     Baseline mean (moderately poor)                  0.120                0.409                 0.087                 0.028                 0.279                0.036                0.029                 0.013
35




                                               Panel B: Eﬀects of treatment on take-up of health-related products                     Panel C: Eﬀects of treatment on method used to ﬁnance healthcare

                                               Dummy - owns          Dummy - owns            Insurance          Dummy - CHF                Free                Loan or                Cash or              Health
                                                   shoes               slippers             expenditures         participation          treatment             assistance               asset             insurance
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                   0.300∗∗∗               0.095∗                1.398∗∗∗                                      0.055                 -0.070                -0.146              0.161∗∗
                                                  (0.065)               (0.051)                (0.291)                                     (0.081)               (0.046)               (0.097)              (0.068)
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                   0.079∗                 0.015                0.871∗∗∗                                      0.023                 0.032               -0.206∗∗∗            0.150∗∗∗
                                                  (0.044)               (0.035)                (0.254)                                     (0.053)               (0.045)               (0.071)              (0.050)
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                   0.246∗∗∗              0.159∗∗∗               1.753∗∗∗              0.380∗∗∗                -0.116               -0.071∗                -0.148             0.335∗∗∗
                                                  (0.067)               (0.049)                (0.308)               (0.050)               (0.073)               (0.041)               (0.096)              (0.072)
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                  0.120∗∗                 0.009                1.219∗∗∗              0.328∗∗∗                -0.054                 0.042              -0.215∗∗∗            0.227∗∗∗
                                                  (0.055)               (0.046)                (0.378)               (0.040)               (0.057)               (0.044)               (0.070)              (0.047)
     Observations                                  6847                  6847                   5036                  1555                   5365                  5365                  5365                5365
     2011 p-value of diﬀerence                     0.002                 0.138                  0.059                                       0.717                 0.095                  0.612               0.883
     2012 p-value of diﬀerence                     0.106                 0.011                  0.174                 0.295                 0.489                 0.051                  0.534               0.124
     Baseline mean (extremely poor)                0.292                 0.571                  0.093                                       0.247                 0.128                  0.610               0.015
     Baseline mean (moderately poor)               0.525                 0.680                  0.289                                       0.188                 0.081                  0.693               0.038
     Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
     Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat). Midline and endline treatment eﬀects are abbreviated T × 2011 and T × 2012, respectively. Degree of poverty
     refers to the value at the time of the baseline survey on an index of asset ownership. The index is the ﬁrst principal component from a PCA using information on ownership of 13 household assets. Extremely
     poor refers to those in the bottom half, while moderately poor refers to those in the top half. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and *
     indicates p<0.10.
     Panel A: Health problem of the last month refers to the last four weeks. Over the 3 rounds of the survey, respondents reported being sick or injured a total of 5,922 times. In all of those reports, the most important
     health provider was reported. 33 people were excluded from this analysis for reporting that the most important health provider was other. All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects.
     Panel B : Shoe and slipper ownership are individual-level outcomes for those at least 18 years old at the time of the baseline survey. Insurance expenditures and CHF participation are household level outcomes.
     Insurance expenditures refer to total annual medical, car, and life insurance expenditures (thousands TSH). Data on participation in the CHF are only available from the endline survey. Households that report
     having never heard of the CHF are assumed to not be participating in the CHF. Degree of poverty refers to the value at the time of the baseline survey on an index of asset ownership. The index is the ﬁrst
     principal component from a PCA using information on ownership of 13 household assets. Columns (1) and (2) include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Column (3) includes household ﬁxed eﬀects. Column (4) includes
     baseline controls of age, age2 , sex, and education level of the household head. Also included are dummies for district, household size, having an improved roof, having an improved toilet, having an improved ﬂoor,
     having piped water, village population, the number of years since the CHF began operating in respondent’s village, and the asset index used to separate moderately and extreme poverty.
     Panel C : Method used to ﬁnance healthcare for the main health problem of the last four weeks. Over the 3 rounds of the survey, respondents reported being sick or injured a total of 5,922 times. In 5,409 of
     those 5,922 reports, the main treatment ﬁnancing method was reported. 44 people were excluded from this analysis for reporting ﬁnancing with either “other” or “diﬀered by provider” since it was not possible to
     understand how these individuals ﬁnanced treatment. All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects.
Table A1: Baseline (2009) means of outcomes and key characteristics by treatment assign-
ment

                                                    Treatment (T)    Control (C)     Diﬀerence (T-C)
                                                    Mean      N     Mean      N     Mean      S.E.
   Panel A: Outcome variables
   Clinic Visits and Health, Full Sample
    # health clinic visits in last 12 months         2.83    3462    2.77    3456    0.06     (0.26)
    Dummy - ill or injured in last month             0.29    3462    0.26    3456    0.02     (0.02)
    # of days unable to do normal activities         1.68    3462    1.59    3455    0.08     (0.14)
   Clinic Visits and Health, 60 and over
    # health clinic visits in last 12 months         2.91    1049    2.67    1160    0.24     (0.35)
    Dummy - ill or injured in last month             0.39    1049    0.38    1160    0.01     (0.03)
    # of days unable to do normal activities         2.78    1049    2.79    1159    -0.02    (0.31)
   Clinic Visits and Health, 0-5 years old
    # health clinic visits in last 12 months         8.21    309     8.33    312     -0.12    (0.70)
    Dummy - ill or injured in last month             0.31    309     0.25    312    0.06*     (0.04)
    # of days unable to do normal activities         1.31    309     0.80    312    0.51**    (0.21)
   Health-related products
    Dummy - owns shoes                               0.38    1515    0.47    1441   -0.10**   (0.05)
    Dummy - owns slippers                            0.62    1515    0.65    1441    -0.03    (0.03)
    Insurance expenditures, thousands Tsh            0.26    881     0.11    879     0.15*    (0.08)
   Speciﬁc activities of daily living, 60 and over
    Dummy - can do vigorous activity                  0.35   1049    0.36    1160    -0.02    (0.04)
    Dummy - can walk uphill                          0.77    1049    0.75    1160    0.01     (0.03)
    Dummy - can bend over or stoop                   0.97    1049    0.96    1160    0.01     (0.01)
    Dummy - can walk over 1km                        0.86    1049    0.85    1160     0.01    (0.02)
    Dummy - can walk over 100m                       0.97    1049    0.96    1160     0.01    (0.01)
    Dummy - can use bath or toilet                   0.98    1049    0.97    1160    0.00     (0.01)
    Ordinary activities index                         4.89   1049    4.86    1160    0.03     (0.09)
   Anthropometrics
    Height-for-age z-score                           -1.46   231     -1.25   240     -0.21    (0.14)
    Weight-for-age z-score                           -0.90   208     -0.72   189    -0.18*    (0.10)
    Weight-for-height z-score                        0.06    187     0.04    176     0.02     (0.11)
    BMI-for-age z-score                               0.23   187      0.16   177     0.07     (0.12)
    Height (cm)                                      87.38   234    87.10    241      0.28    (1.14)
    Weight (kg)                                     12.22    253    12.07    253      0.14    (0.26)
    MUAC (mm)                                       155.68   230    155.83   232     -0.15    (1.42)
   Healthcare location
    None                                             0.17    993     0.13    907      0.04    (0.03)
    Public: dispensary                               0.38    993     0.41    907     -0.02    (0.04)
    Public: district, region, or referal hospital    0.05    993     0.07    907     -0.02    (0.02)
    Public: health center                            0.03    993     0.04    907      0.00    (0.02)
    Private: Pharmacy or chemist                     0.28    993     0.27    907      0.01    (0.03)
    Private: Healer, herbalist, or faith healer      0.05    993     0.05    907      0.00    (0.01)
    Private: dispensary, hospital, clinic, or store  0.02    993     0.02    907     0.00     (0.01)
    Private: Mission dispensary or hospital          0.01    993     0.01    907     0.00     (0.01)
   Household size
    Total                                            3.94    879     3.94    878      0.00    (0.21)
    0-5 years                                         0.35   879     0.36    878      0.00    (0.04)
    60 and over                                      1.19    879     1.32    878    -0.13**   (0.05)
   Healthcare ﬁnancing method
    Free treatment                                    0.20   885     0.23    826     -0.03    (0.03)
    Loan or assistance                               0.11    885     0.10    826     0.01     (0.02)
    Cash or asset                                    0.65    885     0.66    826     0.00     (0.03)
    Health insurance                                 0.04    885     0.02    826     0.02     (0.02)
    table continued on next page...




                                                     36
                                                      Treatment (T)        Control (C)       Diﬀerence (T-C)
                                                      Mean       N       Mean       N        Mean        S.E.
Panel B: Individual and household characteristics
Individual characteristics
 Age                                                  35.54     3462     37.04     3456        -1.49     (1.20)
 Dummy - male                                          0.47     3462      0.45     3456         0.02     (0.01)
 Dummy - has less than Standard 1 education           0.53      3459      0.54     3451         0.00     (0.02)
 Dummy - has Standard 1-4 education                   0.22      3459      0.22     3451         0.00     (0.01)
 Dummy - has at least Standard 5 education            0.24      3459      0.24     3451         0.00     (0.02)
 Dummy - literate                                     0.41      3462      0.42     3456        -0.01     (0.03)
Household characteristics
 Dummy - household has improved roof                  0.33       880      0.37      878        -0.04     (0.06)
 Dummy - household has improved ﬂoor                  0.03       880      0.09      878      -0.06**     (0.02)
 Dummy - household has toilet facilities              0.69       880      0.76      879        -0.07     (0.04)
 Dummy - household has piped water                    0.30       880      0.32      879        -0.01     (0.08)
 Dummy - head of household is male                    0.63       879      0.59      878         0.04     (0.03)
Village characteristics
 Health staﬀ per 1000 villagers (2009)                3.09        40      2.84       40         0.24     (0.94)
 Source: Authors’ calculations based on baseline (2009) household survey data.
 Notes: Treatment indicates assignment to treatment. Illness in the last month refers to the last four weeks. The
 universe of individuals used to summarize the healthcare location and healthcare ﬁnancing method outcomes
 is individuals who reported being ill or injured in the last month (four weeks). Ordinary activities index is
 the sum of the six activity dummies; its range is 0 to 6. Speciﬁc activities of daily living are summarized for
 those at least 60 years old because data were unavailable for individuals under 60 years old at the time of the
 midline and endline surveys. Shoe and slipper ownership are summarized for those 18 years old or younger in
 the baseline survey. Insurance expenditures is a household level outcome, and it refers to total annual medical,
 car, and life insurance expenditures. BMI is body mass index and MUAC is middle upper-arm circumference.
 Ages refer to age at time of baseline survey. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village
 level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                                                       37
                                                                  Table A2: Attrition after baseline survey
                                                        Household is in ... survey                   Individual is in ... survey               Individual 0-5 or 60+ is in ... survey
                                                        midline               endline                midline                 endline                midline                     endline
                                                    (1)          (2)       (3)           (4)      (5)         (6)        (7)            (8)      (9)          (10)      (11)            (12)
     Treatment village                             0.002       -0.147     0.023         0.132    0.001      -0.096      0.031         -0.145    0.000       -0.163     0.021         -0.347
                                                  (0.016)     (0.178)    (0.020)      (0.247)   (0.017)    (0.176)     (0.021)       (0.244)   (0.018)     (0.234)    (0.023)       (0.341)
     Dummy - household head male                                0.029                 0.040*                0.045*                   0.042*                  0.019                   0.041
                                                              (0.020)                 (0.022)              (0.024)                   (0.024)               (0.027)                  (0.034)
     Dummy - household head male × Treatment                    0.009                   0.018               -0.026                     0.038                 0.011                   0.036
                                                              (0.028)                 (0.034)              (0.034)                   (0.036)               (0.045)                  (0.053)
     Household head age                                         0.002                0.012**                 0.005                    0.005                 -0.003                   -0.007
                                                              (0.003)                 (0.006)              (0.003)                   (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.008)
     Household head age × Treatment                             0.004                  -0.003               0.004                      0.007                 0.009                   0.016
                                                              (0.006)                 (0.008)              (0.005)                   (0.008)               (0.008)                  (0.010)
     Household head age2                                       -0.000                -0.000**              -0.000*                    -0.000                 0.000                   0.000
                                                              (0.000)                 (0.000)              (0.000)                   (0.000)               (0.000)                  (0.000)
     Household head age2 × Treatment                           -0.000                   0.000               -0.000                    -0.000                -0.000                  -0.000*
                                                              (0.000)                 (0.000)              (0.000)                   (0.000)               (0.000)                  (0.000)
     Head has some education                                   -0.013                  -0.026                0.043                     0.034                 0.022                   -0.033
                                                              (0.021)                 (0.028)              (0.027)                   (0.032)               (0.030)                  (0.040)
     Head has some education × Treatment                        0.032                   0.003                0.003                    0.028                 -0.011                    0.077
38




                                                              (0.030)                 (0.038)              (0.035)                   (0.042)               (0.050)                  (0.062)
     Asset index                                             0.011***                   0.002             -0.009**                  -0.014**               -0.008*                 -0.016**
                                                              (0.004)                 (0.008)              (0.004)                   (0.006)               (0.004)                  (0.007)
     Asset index × Treatment                                   -0.012                  -0.001                0.002                    -0.004                -0.001                   -0.001
                                                              (0.007)                 (0.012)              (0.006)                   (0.010)               (0.007)                  (0.011)
     Dummy - male                                                                                           -0.018                     0.007                 0.003                    0.021
                                                                                                           (0.014)                   (0.016)               (0.018)                  (0.023)
     Dummy - male × Treatment                                                                                0.006                    -0.017                -0.025                  -0.067*
                                                                                                           (0.020)                   (0.023)               (0.034)                  (0.037)
     Age                                                                                                     0.002                 0.004***               0.013***                 0.015***
                                                                                                           (0.002)                   (0.001)               (0.002)                  (0.002)
     Age × Treatment                                                                                        -0.000                    -0.001                -0.005                 -0.007**
                                                                                                           (0.002)                   (0.002)               (0.003)                  (0.003)
     Age2                                                                                                   -0.000                  -0.000**             -0.000***                -0.000***
                                                                                                           (0.000)                   (0.000)               (0.000)                  (0.000)
     Age2 × Treatment                                                                                        0.000                     0.000                 0.000                 0.000**
                                                                                                           (0.000)                   (0.000)               (0.000)                  (0.000)
     Some education                                                                                       -0.042**                 -0.062***                -0.013                    0.030
                                                                                                           (0.018)                   (0.021)               (0.029)                  (0.036)
     Some education × Treatment                                                                             -0.027                    -0.038                 0.034                   -0.034
                                                                                                           (0.025)                   (0.029)               (0.054)                  (0.065)
     Constant                                     0.913***     0.890*** 0.857*** 0.546*** 0.780***        0.636***       0.686***   0.506***    0.818***  0.757***     0.732***    0.785***
                                                   (0.013)      (0.106)    (0.015)    (0.181)      (0.013) (0.120)        (0.017)    (0.185)     (0.014)   (0.183)      (0.017)     (0.257)
     Observations                                   1,764        1,757      1,764       1,757       6,918    6,910         6,918       6,910      3,016      3,010       3,016        3,010
     R-squared                                      0.000        0.014      0.001       0.016       0.000    0.019         0.001      0.030       0.000      0.040       0.001        0.047
     Test of joint signif. of interactions (p-value)             0.677                  0.889                0.921                     0.601                 0.902                    0.119
     Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
     Notes: Those aged 0-5 years and 60+ are those for whom program health conditions applied. The asset index is the ﬁrst principal component from a PCA using information on ownership
     of 13 household assets. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.
Table A3: Eﬀects of treatment (on the treated) on health clinic visits in the last 12 months

                                                            Full sample:    0-5 years old    60 and over
                                                            baseline and
                                                              endline
                                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)
   Panel A: Eﬀect of treatment on the treated
   Treatment × 2011 (midline)                                                  2.637∗∗∗        1.138∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.966)         (0.361)
   Treatment × 2012 (endline)                                  -0.072            -1.153          0.170
                                                              (0.268)           (0.954)         (0.359)
   2011 (midline)                                                             -3.812∗∗∗       -1.217∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.580)         (0.215)
   2012 (endline)                                            -1.436∗∗∗        -5.751∗∗∗       -0.671∗∗∗
                                                              (0.181)           (0.632)         (0.236)
   R2                                                          0.061              0.374          0.018
   Baseline mean                                               2.802             8.272           2.783
   Observations                                                9622               1092           5339
   Panel B: Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects by staﬀ/capita
   Treatment eﬀect for those with fewer (endline)              -0.001           -1.637           0.207
                                                              (0.389)          (1.212)          (0.527)
   Treatment eﬀect for those with more (endline)               -0.157           -0.259           0.135
                                                              (0.359)          (1.348)          (0.493)
   Treatment eﬀect for those with fewer (midline)                             3.388∗∗∗          0.908∗
                                                                               (1.126)          (0.488)
   Treatment eﬀect for those with more (midline)                                 1.650         1.366∗∗
                                                                               (1.706)          (0.536)
   p-value of diﬀerence (midline)                                                0.395           0.527
   p-value of diﬀerence (endline)                               0.768            0.447           0.920
   Baseline mean for those with fewer                           2.598            7.553           2.501
   Baseline mean for those with more                            3.004            9.104           3.051
   Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
   Notes: Midline data are excluded from the full sample because health facility visit data were not
   collected in the midline survey for those 5-60 years old. Ages refer to age at the time of baseline
   survey. Fewer refers to those residing in villages in the bottom half of the distribution of baseline
   health clinic staﬀ per capita, while more refers to those in the top half. All speciﬁcations include
   individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. ***
   indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                                                    39
 Table A4: Eﬀects of treatment (on the treated) on take-up of health-related products

                                                          Dummy -         Dummy -         Insurance       Dummy -
                                                         owns shoes          owns       expenditures     participates
                                                                           slippers      (thousands      in the CHF
                                                                                            Tsh)
                                                              (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
Panel A: Eﬀect of treatment on the treated
Treatment × 2011 (midline)                                0.194∗∗∗          0.058         1.262∗∗∗
                                                           (0.047)         (0.037)         (0.267)
Treatment × 2012 (endline)                                0.192∗∗∗        0.089∗∗         1.623∗∗∗         0.379∗∗∗
                                                           (0.050)         (0.041)         (0.302)          (0.040)
2011 (midline)                                            0.128∗∗∗        0.188∗∗∗        0.172∗∗∗
                                                           (0.028)         (0.023)         (0.051)
2012 (endline)                                            0.125∗∗∗        0.195∗∗∗        0.433∗∗∗
                                                           (0.031)         (0.028)         (0.099)
R2                                                          0.106           0.106           0.124           0.313
Baseline mean                                               0.423           0.632           0.181
Observations                                                6138            6138            4920            1555
Panel B: Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects by degree of poverty
Treatment eﬀect for extremely poor (midline)                0.318∗∗∗        0.101∗          1.469∗∗∗
                                                             (0.069)        (0.054)          (0.302)
Treatment eﬀect for moderately poor (midline)                0.086∗          0.016          0.962∗∗∗
                                                             (0.048)        (0.038)          (0.281)
Treatment eﬀect for extremely poor (endline)                0.262∗∗∗       0.170∗∗∗         1.842∗∗∗       0.399∗∗∗
                                                             (0.070)        (0.052)          (0.319)        (0.051)
Treatment eﬀect for moderately poor (endline)               0.129∗∗          0.009          1.337∗∗∗       0.355∗∗∗
                                                             (0.058)        (0.049)          (0.412)        (0.043)
p-value of diﬀerence (midline)                                0.002          0.137            0.084
p-value of diﬀerence (endline)                                0.099          0.009            0.226          0.409
Baseline mean for extremely poor                              0.292          0.571            0.093
Baseline mean for moderately poor                             0.525          0.680            0.289
Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Shoe and slipper ownership are individual-level outcomes for those at least 18 years old at the time of the
baseline survey. Insurance expenditures and CHF participation are household level outcomes. Insurance expenditures
refer to total annual medical, car, and life insurance expenditures. Data on participation in the CHF are only available
from the endline survey. Households that report having never heard of the CHF are assumed to not be participating in
the CHF. Degree of poverty refers to the value at the time of the baseline survey on an index of asset ownership. The
index is the ﬁrst principal component from a PCA using information on ownership of 13 household assets. Extremely
poor refers to those in the bottom half, while moderately poor refers to those in the top half. Columns (1) and (2)
include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Column (3) includes household ﬁxed eﬀects. Column (4) includes baseline controls
of age, age2 , sex, and education level of the household head. Also included are dummies for district, household size,
having an improved roof, having an improved toilet, having an improved ﬂoor, having piped water, village population,
the number of years since the CHF began operating in respondent’s village, and the asset index used to separate
moderately and extreme poverty. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. *** indicates
p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                                                         40
Table A5: Attributes predicting whether an individual was ill or injured in the last month
                                                                Full sample                                0-5 or 60+ years
                                                      midline                 endline               midline                 endline
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)
Treatment village                                0.033        0.179      -0.013       0.101    0.062**        0.253     -0.006      0.054
                                                (0.020)     (0.152)     (0.022)     (0.196)    (0.031)      (0.369)    (0.034)    (0.457)
Dummy - household head male                                  -0.020                   0.028                -0.101**                 0.018
                                                            (0.022)                 (0.019)                 (0.039)               (0.040)
Dummy - household head male × Treatment                      -0.025                  -0.002                   0.030                 0.056
                                                            (0.029)                 (0.031)                 (0.055)               (0.061)
Household head age                                            0.003                  -0.000                  -0.002                -0.003
                                                            (0.003)                 (0.005)                 (0.009)               (0.012)
Household head age × Treatment                               -0.005                  -0.003                  -0.003                 0.001
                                                            (0.005)                 (0.006)                 (0.012)               (0.014)
Household head age2                                          -0.000                  -0.000                   0.000                 0.000
                                                            (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)
Household head age2 × Treatment                               0.000                  0.000                    0.000                -0.000
                                                            (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)
Head has some education                                       0.002                  -0.034                   0.009                -0.011
                                                            (0.022)                 (0.028)                 (0.045)               (0.052)
Head has some education × Treatment                           0.024                  0.033                   -0.015                 0.013
                                                            (0.032)                 (0.038)                 (0.060)               (0.066)
Asset index                                                   0.002                  -0.007                   0.006                -0.010
                                                            (0.004)                 (0.005)                 (0.009)               (0.011)
Asset index × Treatment                                    -0.013**                 0.019**                 -0.024*                 0.010
                                                            (0.006)                 (0.008)                 (0.014)               (0.016)
Dummy - male                                                 -0.002                -0.045***                  0.043                -0.024
                                                            (0.014)                 (0.016)                 (0.033)               (0.038)
Dummy - male × Treatment                                    -0.035*                   0.000                  -0.068                -0.064
                                                            (0.020)                 (0.021)                 (0.047)               (0.054)
Age                                                         -0.003*                  -0.002                   0.003                 0.003
                                                            (0.001)                 (0.002)                 (0.003)               (0.004)
Age × Treatment                                               0.002                  0.000                   -0.003                -0.001
                                                            (0.002)                 (0.002)                 (0.004)               (0.005)
Age2                                                      0.000***                 0.000***                  -0.000                 0.000
                                                            (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)
Age2 × Treatment                                             -0.000                   0.000                   0.000                 0.000
                                                            (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)
Some education                                               -0.014                  -0.000                  0.013                  0.023
                                                            (0.018)                 (0.023)                 (0.042)               (0.047)
Some education × Treatment                                   -0.033                  -0.035                  -0.033                -0.008
                                                            (0.024)                 (0.030)                 (0.060)               (0.065)
Constant                                        0.247***      0.161    0.325*** 0.322** 0.361***             0.251    0.473***      0.311
                                                 (0.016)    (0.110)     (0.015)     (0.141)    (0.023)      (0.270)    (0.023)    (0.384)
Observations                                      6,985       6,983      6,838        6,836     2,300        2,300      2,101       2,101
R-squared                                         0.001       0.073      0.000        0.085     0.004         0.051     0.000       0.059
Test of joint signif. of interactions (p-value)               0.060                   0.241                   0.369                 0.612
Source: Authors’ calculations based on baseline 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Treatment indicates assignment to treatment. The asset index is the ﬁrst principal component from a PCA using information
on ownership of 13 household assets. P-values reported are the result of testing for the joint signiﬁcance of all of the interaction
terms. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates
p<0.10.




                                                                    41
Table A6: Eﬀects of treatment (on the treated) on illness and injury in the last month
                                                          Dummy - ill or injured in last         Days in last month unable to
                                                                    month                       perform normal daily activities
                                                                                                    due to illness or injury
                                                            Full      0-5 years     60 and         Full      0-5 years     60 and
                                                          sample         old         over        sample         old         over
                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
Panel A: Eﬀect of treatment on the treated
Treatment × 2011 (midline)                                  0.004       -0.012        0.046        -0.225       -0.135       -0.215
                                                           (0.027)     (0.060)       (0.042)      (0.240)      (0.311)      (0.511)
Treatment × 2012 (endline)                                -0.046∗      -0.118∗        -0.002     -0.465∗∗     -0.835∗∗       -0.371
                                                           (0.027)     (0.068)       (0.036)      (0.234)      (0.390)      (0.433)
2011 (midline)                                              0.002      -0.054∗         0.032       0.199        -0.205     0.675∗∗
                                                           (0.018)     (0.032)       (0.028)      (0.165)      (0.171)      (0.322)
2012 (endline)                                            0.078∗∗∗       0.032      0.147∗∗∗     1.077∗∗∗       0.306      2.390∗∗∗
                                                           (0.015)     (0.047)       (0.023)      (0.147)      (0.297)      (0.268)
R2                                                          0.007       0.013         0.024        0.012         0.010        0.033
Baseline mean                                               0.276       0.282         0.388        1.636        1.052         2.786
Observations                                                18180        1431          5341        18180         1431         5341
Panel B: Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects by staﬀ/capita
Treatment eﬀect for those with fewer (midline)               0.016       -0.012       0.014        0.087        -0.129       0.227
                                                           (0.040)      (0.069)      (0.062)      (0.331)      (0.355)      (0.771)
Treatment eﬀect for those with more (midline)               -0.007       -0.023       0.077        -0.539       -0.204       -0.619
                                                           (0.035)      (0.094)      (0.058)      (0.337)      (0.494)      (0.659)
Treatment eﬀect for those with fewer (endline)              -0.030       -0.120       0.009         0.075       -0.532       0.800
                                                           (0.041)      (0.090)      (0.049)      (0.321)      (0.418)      (0.543)
Treatment eﬀect for those with more (endline)              -0.061∗       -0.124       -0.020     -1.045∗∗∗     -1.262∗     -1.604∗∗∗
                                                           (0.033)      (0.102)      (0.051)      (0.306)      (0.721)      (0.590)
p-value of diﬀerence (midline)                               0.667        0.928       0.458        0.185         0.901        0.404
p-value of diﬀerence (endline)                               0.553        0.979       0.683        0.012        0.381         0.003
Baseline mean for those with fewer                           0.284        0.297       0.380         1.662        1.081       2.763
Baseline mean for those with more                            0.267        0.264       0.396         1.610        1.017        2.809
Source:Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Illness in the last month refers to the last four weeks.Ages refer to age at the time of baseline survey. Fewer refers to
those residing in villages in the bottom half of the distribution of baseline health clinic staﬀ per capita, while more refers to
those in the top half. All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at
the village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                                                                42
                    Table A7: Eﬀects of treatment on mortality

                                       Full sample       0-5 years old         60 and over
                                            (1)                 (2)                  (3)
Treatment                                 0.005               -0.003               0.010
                                         (0.003)             (0.006)              (0.009)
2012 (endline)                          -0.025∗∗∗           -0.010∗∗             -0.066∗∗∗
                                         (0.003)             (0.005)              (0.007)
R2                                        0.065               0.032                0.066
Observations                              13042                1192                3993
Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: The analysis includes (up to) two observations per individual: a midline observation
(which examines deaths between baseline and midline) and an endline observation (which
examines deaths between midline and endline). At midline, the outcome is a dummy for
the individual being dead at midline (individuals not in sample at baseline take on a miss-
ing value). At endline, the outcome is a dummy for the individual being dead at endline
(individuals not in sample at midline take on a missing value). Baseline controls not shown,
include the age, age2 , sex, and education level of both the respondent and the household
head. Also included are district ﬁxed eﬀects and dummies for gender, household size, having
an improved roof, having an improved toilet, having an improved ﬂoor, having piped water,
village population, and the ﬁrst principal components from a PCA using information on
ownership of 13 household assets at baseline. Ages refer to age at the time of baseline sur-
vey. Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent
to treat). Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. *** indicates
p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                 Table A8: Eﬀects of treatment on household size

                                      Full sample        0-5 years old       60 and over
                                            (1)                (2)                  (3)
Treatment × 2011 (midline)                0.038               0.021              0.028
                                         (0.103)             (0.035)            (0.029)
Treatment × 2012 (endline)                -0.017              0.017              0.013
                                         (0.123)             (0.044)            (0.035)
2011 (midline)                            0.035            -0.073∗∗∗           -0.074∗∗∗
                                         (0.079)             (0.024)            (0.021)
2012 (endline)                            0.134             -0.065∗∗             -0.040
                                         (0.104)             (0.031)            (0.025)
R2                                        0.002               0.005               0.005
Baseline mean                             3.937               0.353               1.257
Observations                               5028               5028                5028
Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Ages refer to age at the time of baseline survey. All speciﬁcations include household
ﬁxed eﬀects. Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village
(intent to treat). Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the village level. ***
indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.




                                             43
                   Table A9: Robustness of results to Poisson estimation for count data outcomes

     estimate               universe        column             OLS                                  Poisson
                                                         S.E. clustered at           Robust S.E.              Bootstrap S.E.
                                                           village level
                                                          Estimate       S.E.       Estimate       S.E.     Estimate        S.E.
                                                              (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
     Panel A: Eﬀects of treatment on health clinic visits of the treated in the last 12 months (table 2)
     Treatment × 2011      Total                1              .          (.)            .          (.)          .           (.)
     Treatment × 2012      Total                1           -0.067      (0.253)        0.003      (0.072)      0.003       (0.072)
     Treatment × 2011      0-5 years            2         2.296***      (0.872)     0.340***      (0.122)   0.340***       (0.126)
     Treatment × 2012      0-5 years            2           -1.042      (0.875)      -0.348*      (0.188)   -0.348**       (0.174)
     Treatment × 2011      60 and over          3         1.083***      (0.349)     0.551***      (0.096)   0.551***       (0.097)
     Treatment × 2012      60 and over          3           0.161       (0.344)        0.092      (0.106)      0.092       (0.109)
     Panel B: Eﬀects of treatment on number of days unable to perform normal daily activities (table 6)
     Treatment × 2011      Total                1           -0.210      (0.225)       -0.132      (0.094)     -0.132       (0.097)
     Treatment × 2012      Total                1          -0.435*      (0.220)     -0.222**      (0.092)   -0.222**       (0.109)
44




     Treatment × 2011      0-5 years            2           -0.122      (0.285)       -0.006      (0.311)     -0.006       (0.294)
     Treatment × 2012      0-5 years            2         -0.758**      (0.358)     -0.747**      (0.314)   -0.747**       (0.346)
     Treatment × 2011      60 and over          3           -0.204      (0.489)       -0.087      (0.131)     -0.087       (0.145)
     Treatment × 2012      60 and over          3           -0.353      (0.414)       -0.114      (0.127)     -0.114       (0.134)
     Panel C: Eﬀects of treatment on household size (table A8)
     Treatment × 2011      Total                1            0.038      (0.103)        0.009      (0.023)      0.009       (0.023)
     Treatment × 2012      Total                1           -0.017      (0.123)       -0.004      (0.028)     -0.004       (0.032)
     Treatment × 2011      0-5 years            2            0.021      (0.035)        0.058      (0.096)      0.058       (0.101)
     Treatment × 2012      0-5 years            2            0.017      (0.044)        0.048      (0.108)      0.048       (0.123)
     Treatment × 2011      60 and over          3           0.028       (0.029)        0.018      (0.021)      0.018       (0.020)
     Treatment × 2012      60 and over          3           0.013       (0.035)        0.008      (0.025)      0.008       (0.023)
     Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
     Notes: Standard errors in column 6 are bootstrapped over 100 samples with replacement. The ﬁrst row of Panel A has
     missing data since health clinic visit data for those aged 5 - 60 were not collected at midline. Column refers to the column
     in which the estimate appears in the original table. All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects. *** indicates
     p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.
        Table A10: Eﬀects of treatment on ability to perform ordinary activities

                                                                dummy - can ...
                                    do         walk          bend       walk         walk    use bath Ordinary
                                 vigorous      uphill       over or     more         more     or toilet activities
                                 activity                    stoop      than         than                  index
                                                                        1km         100m
                                    (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)
Treatment × 2011 (midline)         0.026        -0.012      -0.004     -0.007       -0.017     0.002       0.003
                                  (0.049)      (0.039)     (0.009)    (0.023)      (0.010)    (0.007)     (0.101)
Treatment × 2012 (endline)         0.013        -0.022      0.012      -0.026     -0.015∗∗     0.013       -0.048
                                  (0.059)      (0.035)     (0.014)    (0.023)      (0.006)    (0.011)     (0.099)
2011 (midline)                   0.188∗∗∗     0.078∗∗∗      -0.005     0.028∗        0.003     -0.001    0.289∗∗∗
                                  (0.036)      (0.025)     (0.006)    (0.015)      (0.008)    (0.004)     (0.066)
2012 (endline)                  -0.177∗∗∗       -0.027    -0.046∗∗∗ -0.049∗∗∗      0.011∗∗   -0.027∗∗∗     -0.050
                                  (0.042)      (0.026)     (0.010)    (0.018)      (0.005)    (0.009)     (0.070)
R2                                 0.156         0.027      0.018       0.025        0.004      0.009      0.059
Baseline mean                      0.356         0.760      0.968       0.855       0.962      0.974       4.875
Observations                       5685          5685        5685       5685         5403       5685        5403
Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat). Activity
index is the sum of the six activity dummies. Only those at least 60 years old at the time of the baseline
are included, due to data availability. All speciﬁcations include individual ﬁxed eﬀects.Standard errors are in
parentheses and clustered at the village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.

        Table A11: Eﬀects of treatment on anthropometrics for children aged 0-5

                                                     z-scores
                                Height-     Weight-        Weight-     BMI-for-   Height      Weight      MUAC
                                for-age     for-age          for-         age      (cm)        (kg)       (mm)
                                z-score     z-score        height       z-score
                                                           z-score
                                   (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)          (7)

Treatment × 2011 (midline)         0.105      -0.022       -0.281      -0.351      -0.724       -0.179      -1.422
                                 (0.241)     (0.208)      (0.303)     (0.315)     (1.191)      (0.228)     (2.370)
Treatment × 2012 (endline)         0.222      -0.113       -0.425      -0.488      -0.671       0.008        0.112
                                 (0.363)     (0.216)      (0.332)     (0.371)     (1.287)      (0.262)     (2.650)
2011 (midline)                     0.001       0.228     0.501∗∗∗     0.497∗∗      -0.115     0.553∗∗∗      -0.615
                                 (0.183)     (0.139)      (0.191)     (0.212)     (0.492)      (0.156)     (1.503)
2012 (endline)                  0.610∗∗     0.805∗∗∗     0.552∗∗∗     0.474∗∗       0.259     0.717∗∗∗       0.092
                                 (0.262)     (0.142)      (0.207)     (0.240)     (0.834)      (0.180)     (1.624)
R2                                 0.081       0.087        0.075       0.073       0.065        0.074       0.037
Baseline mean                     -1.354      -0.812        0.052      0.197      87.240       12.146      155.753
Observations                       1184        1204         1079        1073        1240         1403        1234
Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Treatment estimates are estimates of the eﬀect of living in a treatment village (intent to treat). Regressions
include village × cohort ﬁxed eﬀects rather than individual ﬁxed eﬀects. Cohorts included are the following,
deﬁned in terms of current age at the time of each survey round: 0-6 months, 7-12 months, 13-18 months, 19-24
months, 25-30 months, 31-36 months, 37-42 months, 43-48 months, 49-54 months, and 55-60 months. Baseline
controls not shown include the age, age2 , sex, and education level of the household head. Also included are
dummies for gender, household size, having an improved roof, having an improved toilet, having an improved
ﬂoor, having piped water, village population, and the ﬁrst principal components from a PCA using information
on ownership of 13 household assets at baseline. BMI is body mass index and MUAC is middle upper-arm
circumference. Children with z-scores less than -6.0 or greater than 6.0 were excluded from the analysis; 59 of
1,246 height-for-age z-scores were excluded; 53 of 1,260 weight-for-age z-scores were excluded; 11 of 1,093 weight-
for-height z-scores were excluded; and 14 of 1,090 BMI-for-age z-scores were excluded. Standard errors are in
parentheses and clustered at the village level. *** indicates p<0.01; ** indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10.


                                                          45
                                                  Table A12: Robustness: multiple hypothesis testing

     Treatment estimate                        Outcome                                           Table   Column Estimate   P-value   BKY*** BH**    Bon.*
     Panel A: Eﬀects of treatment on health clinic visits of the treated in the last 12 months
     Treatment (T) × 2011                      0-5 years                                          2        2      2.30      0.01     0.02    0.02   0.06
     T × 2011                                  60 and over                                        2        3      1.08      0.00     0.02    0.02   0.02
     T × 2011 × fewer staﬀ/capita              0-5 years                                          8        2      2.98      0.01     0.02    0.02   0.03
     T × 2011 × fewer staﬀ/capita              60 and over                                        8        3      0.88      0.07     0.03    0.08   0.42
     T × 2011 × more staﬀ/capita               60 and over                                        8        3      1.28      0.01     0.02    0.02   0.09
     Panel B: Eﬀects of treatment on health clinic visits compliance in the last 12 months
     T × 2011                                  0-5 years                                          3        2      0.31      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2011                                  60 and over                                        3        3      0.26      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012                                  Full sample                                        3        1      0.04      0.03     0.04    0.04   0.08
     T × 2012                                  60 and over                                        3        3      0.09      0.01     0.04    0.04   0.04
     Panel C: Eﬀects of treatment on take-up of health-related products
     T × 2011                                  Dummy - owns shoes                                 4        1      0.18      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012                                  Dummy - owns shoes                                 4        1      0.18      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012                                  Dummy - owns slippers                              4        2      0.08      0.03     0.02    0.04   0.19
     T × 2011                                  Insurance expenditures (thousands Tsh)             4        3      1.18      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012                                  Insurance expenditures (thousands Tsh)             4        3      1.52      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
46




     T × 2012                                  Dummy - participates in the CHF                    4        4      0.36      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                Dummy - owns shoes                                 9        1      0.08      0.08     0.09    0.12   0.47
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                 Dummy - owns shoes                                 9        1      0.30      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                 Dummy - owns shoes                                 9        1      0.25      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                Dummy - owns shoes                                 9        1      0.12      0.03     0.02    0.04   0.19
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                 Dummy - owns slippers                              9        2      0.10      0.07     0.09    0.12   0.41
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                 Dummy - owns slippers                              9        2      0.16      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.01
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                 Insurance expenditures (thousands Tsh)             9        3      1.40      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                Insurance expenditures (thousands Tsh)             9        3      0.87      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                 Insurance expenditures (thousands Tsh)             9        3      1.75      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                Insurance expenditures (thousands Tsh)             9        3      1.22      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.01
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                Dummy - participates in the CHF                    9        4      0.33      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                 Dummy - participates in the CHF                    9        4      0.38      0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00
     Panel D: Eﬀects of treatment on illness and injury in the last month
     T × 2012                                  Dummy - ill or injured                             6        2      -0.11     0.09      0.44   0.30   0.83
     T × 2012                                  # of days unable to do normal activities           6        4      -0.43     0.05     0.10−   0.12   0.46
     T × 2012                                  # of days unable to do normal activities           6        5      -0.76     0.04     0.10−   0.11   0.34
     T × 2012 × more staﬀ/capita               Dummy - ill or injured                             8        1      -0.06     0.07      0.44   0.30   0.64
     T × 2012 × more staﬀ/capita               # of days unable to do normal activities           8        4      -0.96     0.00      0.01   0.01   0.01
     T × 2012 × more staﬀ/capita               # of days unable to do normal activities           8        5      -1.13     0.09      0.13   0.16   0.79
     T × 2012 × more staﬀ/capita               # of days unable to do normal activities           8        6      -1.50     0.01      0.03   0.04   0.07
     Panel E: Eﬀects of treatment on ability to perform ordinary activities
     T × 2012                                  walk more than 100m                               A10       5      -0.01     0.02     0.14    0.12   0.12
     table continued on next page...
     Treatment estimate                        Outcome                                             Table Column Estimate P-value BKY*** BH**                  Bon.*
     Panel F: Eﬀects of treatment on type of health provider visited to address main health problem of the last month
     T × 2011                                  None                                                  7         1       -0.12       0.00     0.04     0.04      0.12
     T × 2011                                  Public: Dispensary                                    7         2       0.17        0.00     0.01     0.01      0.01
     T × 2012                                  Public: Dispensary                                    7         2       0.15        0.00     0.11    0.10−     0.10−
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                 None                                                  9         1       -0.10       0.09     0.22     0.21      2.08
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                None                                                  9         1       -0.14       0.01     0.04     0.05      0.19
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                None                                                  9         1       -0.09       0.08     0.74     0.47      1.86
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                Public: Dispensary                                    9         2        0.14       0.07     0.22     0.21      1.63
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                 Public: Dispensary                                    9         2        0.21       0.00     0.04     0.04     0.10+
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                Public: Dispensary                                    9         2        0.13       0.07     0.74     0.47      1.72
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                 Public: Dispensary                                    9         2        0.17       0.01     0.11    0.10−      0.20
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                Public: Health center                                 9         4        0.06       0.09     0.22     0.21      2.14
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                Private: Pharmacy or chemist                          9         5       -0.10       0.08     0.22     0.21      1.97
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                Private: Healer, herbalist, or faith healer           9         6        0.05       0.04     0.18     0.18      1.06
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                 Private: Dispensary, hospital, clinic, or store       9         7       -0.04       0.05     0.18     0.18      1.10
     Panel G: Eﬀects of treatment on method used to ﬁnance healthcare when addressing main health problem of the last month
     T × 2012                                  Free treatment                                        5         1       -0.08       0.09    0.10+     0.16      1.09
47




     T × 2011                                  Cash or asset                                         5         3       -0.18       0.01     0.02     0.02      0.07
     T × 2012                                  Cash or asset                                         5         3       -0.18       0.01     0.01     0.01      0.07
     T × 2011                                  Health insurance                                      5         4        0.16       0.00     0.02     0.02      0.03
     T × 2012                                  Health insurance                                      5         4        0.28       0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                 Loan or assistance                                    9         6       -0.07       0.09    0.10+     0.16      1.06
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                Cash or asset                                         9         7       -0.21       0.00     0.02     0.02      0.06
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                Cash or asset                                         9         7       -0.21       0.00     0.01     0.01      0.03
     T × 2011 × extremely poor                 Health insurance                                      9         8        0.16       0.02     0.03     0.05      0.24
     T × 2011 × moderately poor                Health insurance                                      9         8        0.15       0.00     0.02     0.02      0.04
     T × 2012 × moderately poor                Health insurance                                      9         8        0.23       0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00
     T × 2012 × extremely poor                 Health insurance                                      9         8        0.34       0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00
     Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
     Notes: Last month refers to last four weeks. Treatment eﬀect estimates with p-values<0.10 displayed. Midline and endline treatment eﬀects are abbreviated T
     × 2011 and T × 2012, respectively. Column refers to the column in which the estimate appears in the original table. ***BKY stands for Benjamini, Krieger, and
     Yekutieli q-values. **BH stands for Benjamini and Hochberg q-values. Q-values represent the smallest level at which the hypothesis is rejected. *Bon. stands
     for Bonerferroni p-values (p-value × number of hypotheses). Of the 61 estimates with p-values<0.10, 45, 43, and 35 estimates are signiﬁcant using BKY, BH,
     and Bon., respectively. For q-values that round to 0.10, a plus/minus sign is provided to indicate whether the value is above/below (respectively) 0.10. BKY,
     BH, and Bon. are estimated separately for each period and table. The three exceptions to this rule are Table 4, Table 6, and Appendix Table A10. In Table 4,
     the two individual-level outcomes (owning shoes and slippers) are grouped separately from the two household-level outcomes (insurance expenditures and CHF
     participation). In Table 6, the two outcomes were grouped separately (one group for columns 1-3 and another group for columns 4-6; one measures the extensive
     margin of illness, while the other measures the intensive margin). In Appendix Table A10, the 6 speciﬁc activities of daily living are considered separately
     from the ordinary activities index; estimation of an index serves as an additional check on our corrections for multiple inference. Hypotheses associated with
     heterogeneous treatment eﬀects, if estimated, are grouped with the hypotheses of overall treatment eﬀects, despite being displayed in separate tables. We did
     not estimate q-values for the appendix tables.
 Figure A1: Heterogeneous treatment impacts by health clinic staﬀ per capita at baseline

(a) Change in the number of sick days in the last month




(b) Change in the number of clinic visits in the last year




Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Each scatterplot contains 80 data points: 40 showing treatment village averages, and 40 showing
control village averages, with separate linear ﬁts for each set of 40. The y-axis presents the average change
in the number of sick days in the last month between baseline and follow-up (positive numbers indicate
increases). Since we lack midline clinic visit data for those 5-59 years, those individuals are excluded from
both midline and endline plots in sub-ﬁgure (b) so that midline and endline plots are comparable.


                                                     48
Figure A2: Heterogeneous treatment impacts on the number of days sick in the last month

(a) By average number of clinic visits at baseline




(b) By baseline rate of compliance with health clinic conditions




Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Each scatterplot contains 80 data points: 40 showing treatment village averages, and 40 showing
control village averages, with separate linear ﬁts for each set of 40. The y-axis presents the average change
in the number of sick days in the last month between baseline and follow-up (positive numbers indicate
increases).



                                                     49
Figure A3: Heterogeneous impacts on number of health clinic visits by share of village in
compliance with health clinic visit conditions at baseline




Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2009, 2011, and 2012 household survey data.
Notes: Each scatterplot contains 80 data points: 40 showing treatment village averages, and 40 showing
control village averages, with separate linear ﬁts for each set of 40. The y-axis represents the average change
in the number of clinic visits in the last month between baseline and follow-up (positive numbers indicate
increases).




                                                      50
