                                                 WPS7901


Policy Research Working Paper                   7901




               When the Money Runs Out
            Do Cash Transfers Have Sustained Effects
               on Human Capital Accumulation?

                               Sarah Baird
                              Craig McIntosh
                                Berk √ñzler




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7901


  Abstract
 This study examines the medium-term effects of a two-                              the other hand, conditional cash transfers (CCTs) offered to
 year cash transfer program targeted to adolescent girls and                        out-of-school females at baseline produced a large increase
 young women. Significant declines in HIV prevalence, teen                          in educational attainment and a sustained reduction in the
 pregnancy, and early marriage among recipients of uncondi-                         total number of births, but caused no gains in health, labor
 tional cash transfers (UCTs) during the program evaporated                         market outcomes, or empowerment. The findings point to
 quickly two years after the cessation of transfers. However,                       both the promise and the limitations of cash transfer pro-
 children born to UCT beneficiaries during the program had                          grams for sustained gains in welfare among young women.
 significantly higher height-for-age z-scores at follow-up. On




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at bozler@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                       When the Money Runs out:

        Do Cash Transfers Have Sustained Effects on Human Capital Accumulation?*

                              Sarah Baird, Craig McIntosh, and Berk √ñzler




Keywords: Cash Transfers, Long-term Impacts, Human capital
JEL Codes: C93, I15, I21, I38, J12, J13




* Berk √ñzler (corresponding author), email: bozler@worldbank.org, The World Bank; Sarah Baird, email:
sbaird@gwu.edu, George Washington University; Craig McIntosh, email: ctmcintosh@ucsd.edu, University of
California, San Diego. We thank seminar and conference participants at the Center for the Study of African
Economies, Columbia University, IFPRI, Middlebury College, Monash Development Workshop, Oregon State
University, Otago Development Workshop, Otago International Health Research Network, Labor Econometrics
Workshop, PopPov Annual Research Conference, University of Maryland, University of Oklahoma, University of
Oregon, University of Southern California, University of California, Berkeley, Washington Area Development
Economics Symposium, Yale University, and the World Bank. We thank everyone who provided this project with
great fieldwork and research assistance and are too numerous to list individually. We acknowledge funding from the
Global Development Network, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 3ie, NBER Africa Project, as well as the
Research Support Budget and several trust funds from the World Bank ‚Äì including the Knowledge for Change
Program. Ethical review committees at the National Health Sciences Research Council (Malawi, Protocol #569) the
University of California at San Diego (USA, Protocol #090378), and George Washington University (USA, Protocol
#061037) approved the study design. The trial is registered at AEA RCT Registry (#AEARCTR-0000036).
1. INTRODUCTION
         The past decade has witnessed an impressive growth in the number, volume, and types of

cash transfer programs in developing countries. A rigorous evidence base has shown that cash

transfers can have significant effects on household consumption and educational attainment,

even if the poor receive these transfers with few strings attached (Baird et al. 2013; Fiszbein,

Schady and Ferreira 2009 ; Haushofer and Shapiro 2016; Saavedra and Garcia 2013). However,

with some recent exceptions discussed below, most of the evidence relies on short-term follow-

ups, which leaves open the question of whether such programs can improve the wellbeing of

their beneficiaries well after the cessation of support.1 This question is particularly pertinent for

Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programs, which are built on the premise that they not only

fight current poverty, but they also promote human capital accumulation for the next generation.

As cash transfer programs continue to grow as major vehicles for social protection, it is

increasingly important to understand if these programs break the cycle of intergenerational

poverty, or whether the benefits simply evaporate when the money runs out?2

         Few papers have empirically really tested this core premise because only a few programs

were set up for rigorous long-term evaluation of their overall impacts (Molina-Millan et al.

2016). Even when researchers have examined longer-term effects of cash transfers for the

transition from adolescence to adulthood, these studies have generally been limited to

1
  Evaluations of government cash transfer programs that provide small, monthly, and often conditional transfers
typically report 12- to 24-month impacts. One reason for the lack of evidence on longer-term impacts is the fact that
most of the evaluations have a delayed treatment design, where all eligible households become part of the program
within 1-2 years. This has caused researchers interested in longer-term effects to compare the outcomes of early vs.
late treatment groups (see, e.g., Gertler, Martinez and Rubio-Codina 2012 and Behrman, Parker and Todd 2011). In
sub-Saharan Africa, cash transfer programs tend to be unconditional, targeting vulnerable households with children,
although schooling conditions exist in some (see, e.g., The Transfer Project: https://transfer.cpc.unc.edu/).
Evaluations of these programs have similar durations to CCT programs (see, e.g., Handa et al. 2016).
2
  There is a recent wave of transfer programs, generally conducted by NGOs, which aim to lift households out of
poverty using larger lump-sum transfers during a limited period of support (Banerjee et al. 2015; Haushofer and
Shapiro 2016). Evaluations of these programs are generally concerned with current poverty reduction rather than
human capital accumulation among children. As such, while the question of sustained effects is also pertinent for
these studies, they‚Äôre less relevant for our examination of longer-term impacts on adolescent beneficiaries.


                                                                                                                   2
educational attainment and labor market participation. We build on the existing literature in two

important ways: First, we are able to cleanly estimate the causal impact of a two-year CCT

program targeted at adolescent females in Malawi more than two years after the program ended

using both a pure experimental control group that never received treatment and another treatment

group that was offered equal-sized unconditional cash transfers (UCT).3 Second, we not only

collected data on a rich set of outcomes (education, childbearing and marriage, health, labor

market outcomes, empowerment, and subjective wellbeing) for the target population of young

females, but also on their own children and husbands as they started bearing children and getting

married. The resulting analysis is a comprehensive assessment of the relative effects of CCT and

UCT programs targeted to adolescents for two years during an important period of transition into

adulthood.

        Cash transfers during adolescence may be particularly effective as this is a critical period

to expand one‚Äôs capabilities by investing in human capital. In fact, adolescent girls are viewed as

a key demographic target group to successfully break the intergenerational transmission of

poverty in developing countries (Levine et al. 2008). Unfortunately, for many boys and girls in

developing countries, adolescence entails a fleeting transition from childhood to adulthood, when

they are suddenly expected to ‚Äúbehave as adults even though they are not biologically,

cognitively, or emotionally ready to assume adult responsibilities‚Äù (Naudeau, Hasan and

Bakilana 2015). Adolescent females in particular face a multitude of hazards ‚Äì ranging from

school dropout, to child marriage and teen pregnancy, to physical and mental health problems, to

gender based violence (Baird and √ñzler 2016). Young people‚Äôs capabilities and functionings

during this period not only have immediate consequences to their own lives, but also longer-term

3
  To our knowledge, the only other CCT evaluation that examines longer-term effects in comparison to an
experimental control group that was never treated is by Barrera-Osorio, Linden and Saavedra (2015), which
examines education outcomes eight years after treatment.


                                                                                                       3
benefits to their offspring and communities at large (Lloyd and Young 2009; Duflo 2012).4

Interventions that help adolescent girls reach their full potential by increasing their education,

improving their skills, and delaying childbearing have the potential to create a virtuous cycle that

improves health, especially child health, and women‚Äôs empowerment ‚Äì ultimately leading to

higher economic growth (Canning, Raja and Yazbeck 2015).

         For any intervention during adolescence to have a sustained effect, it needs to lead to an

increase in the stock of some asset that produces a stream of returns in the future, i.e. some

accumulation of capital ‚Äì whether it takes the form of human, physical, or social capital.

However, the causal pathway from program implementation to final outcomes can be circuitous.

Even when young women attain higher schooling and delay childbearing and marriage, low

quality education, credit constraints, and low demand for skilled labor can stunt income gains.

Without economic independence, women cannot attain higher agency, intra-household

bargaining power, and empowerment. For today‚Äôs adolescent girls to turn into productive and

happier young women with healthier families, programs that improve endowments or aspirations

must work in a social and institutional context whereby these newfound forms of capital can

generate sustained returns (Gender Equality and Development 2011).

         There are now several longer-term evaluations of cash transfers programs (mostly of

CCTs) that indicate that while cash transfer programs might improve school attainment among

adolescent beneficiaries, gains in terms of learning, employment, and income are limited or non-

existent as they become young women (Araujo, Bosch and Schady 2016; Baez and Camacho

2011; Barham, Macours and Maluccio 2013; Behrman, Parker and Todd 2011; Filmer and

4
  We use capabilities and functionings as described in Heckman and Corbin (2016), page 10: ‚ÄúAt a point in time,
agents have endowments, including cognitive skills, personality and character skills, and health, as well as access to
information, financial resources, and peers. They combine to produce the space of potential actions (‚Äúcapabilities‚Äù).
Which actions (functionings) are selected depend on preferences (personal and social), norms, and the efforts of
individuals which are shaped in part by both preferences and sociocultural norms.‚Äù


                                                                                                                    4
Schady 2014).5 There are also programs that target adolescent females directly by providing

them a safe space to meet on a regular basis and develop life skills. For example, the

Empowerment and Livelihood for Adolescents (ELA) program in Uganda, which provided

vocational and life skills training to 14-20 year old girls in development clubs held outside of

school, showed significant declines in childbearing, marriage, and having had sex unwillingly

within two years, as well as increases in self-employment activities and expenditures on private

consumption goods (Bandiera et al. 2015). However, a similar intervention in Tanzania found no

effect (Buehren et al. 2015). Early findings from a program that combined training and

mentoring with financial incentives to delay marriage until the age of 18 in Bangladesh

(Kishoree Konta) indicate that only in the incentive arms did girls have lower marriage rates and

improved educational outcomes in the short-run (Glennerster 2013).

         Programs targeted to adolescent girls may not only delay marriage and childbearing, but

may also benefit the development of their own children. A distinct and mostly U.S.-based

literature, largely using quasi-experimental methods, has examined the very long-term effects of

being exposed to cash, ‚Äònear cash,‚Äô or other safety net programs during childhood (e.g. Aizer et

al. 2016; Currie and Almond 2011; Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond 2016) and has

demonstrated beneficial effects on a host of outcomes as adults. Chetty, Hendren and Katz

(2016) show that exposure to lower poverty neighborhoods has long-term benefits but only for

children who were young at the time of random assignment and had higher exposure as a result.

         In summary, the extant evidence is mixed as to what we can expect from programs that



5
  The evaluation of a school-based intervention in Kenya testing the effects of education subsidies found significant
reductions in school dropout, pregnancy, and marriage among girls in the short- and medium-run, and school
attainment, marriage, and childbearing by age 16 in the longer-run (Duflo, Dupas and Kremer 2015). Molina-Millan
et al. (2016) provides a review of longer-term effects of CCTs in Latin America and finds that the evidence is
mixed. Molyneux, Jones and Samuels (2016) strike a similarly cautious tone about the transformative effects of
social protection programs.


                                                                                                                   5
target adolescent females in developing countries with respect to longer-term benefits: the

evidence from cash transfer programs do not look particularly promising for income and

employment gains, while most other programs do not yet have long-term evaluations.

Furthermore, we know little about impacts of such programs on other important outcomes, such

as health, economic empowerment, marriage market outcomes, or early childhood development.6

        In this paper, we report the effects of a cash-transfer experiment more than two years

after it ended, tracking a broad range of outcomes for females aged 18-27.7 Our earlier work has

demonstrated the short-term effectiveness of cash transfers in improving school participation and

test scores as well as reducing the incidence of pregnancy, marriage, psychological distress, and

sexually transmitted infections during adolescence, indicating the possibility of finding longer-

term improvements in well-being as young adults (Baird, McIntosh and √ñzler 2011; Baird et al.

2012; Baird, De Hoop and √ñzler 2013). Rigorously following a pre-analysis plan, we first look at

human capital accumulation, marriage and fertility, labor market outcomes, and empowerment

among the beneficiaries to assess the persistence of the short-term effects. Then, as the majority

of the study participants were married and/or had children at the latest follow-up, we examine

their marriage market outcomes and their children‚Äôs physical development using data we

collected on their husbands and anthropometric measurements of their children.

        We find that the short-term improvements in the UCT arm observed during and at the end

of the program failed to translate into increased welfare in the longer-run. Substantial reductions

in teen marriages, total live births, and HIV infections, as well as improvements in psychological

wellbeing and nutritional intake observed at the end of the program, were no longer apparent two


6
  There is a vast literature on the effects of programs for pregnant women and mothers on child outcomes. Manley,
Gitter and Slavchevska (2013) provide a review of the effects of cash transfers on children‚Äôs nutritional status in
low- and middle-income countries (LMIC).
7
  At baseline, our target population was never-married females, aged 13-22.


                                                                                                                 6
years after the end of the intervention. In this group, the end of the cash transfer program was

immediately followed by a marriage and baby boom among the beneficiaries, who reported

lower levels of empowerment and had husbands with lower cognitive ability compared with both

the CCT and the control groups. However, consistent with improved physical and mental health

during the program, we find evidence of improved height-for-age z-scores (HAZ) among

children born to the beneficiaries during the program.

       CCTs, on the other hand, caused sustained effects on school attainment, incidence of

marriage and pregnancy, age at first birth, total number of births, and desired fertility ‚Äì but only

among the pre-specified stratum of adolescent females who had already dropped out of school at

baseline: CCTs were highly effective in allowing a very large share of this group to return to

school. In contrast with the marital outcomes in the UCT group, the increased educational

attainment in this group was accompanied by assortative matching: their husbands were

significantly more likely to have completed secondary school. However, even in this group, we

find no gains in other important outcomes, such as individual earnings, per capita household

consumption, subjective wellbeing, health, or empowerment. Among those who were in school

at baseline, CCTs did not have any lasting effects, positive or negative, mainly because the

transfers were mostly inframarginal with respect to school attainment: 88% of the control group

in this stratum completed primary school two years after the end of the program.

       Our paper speaks to a number of distinct literatures. First, it adds to a growing literature

on the medium- to long-term effects of cash transfer programs in developing countries: our

finding that CCT programs can substantially increase school attainment among vulnerable

populations without substantive effects on test scores, cognitive skills, employment, or earnings

is consistent with recent evaluations of CCT or bursary programs discussed above. Second, we




                                                                                                  7
add to the literature on the effects of human capital accumulation and increased age at marriage

on marriage market outcomes (Anderson and Bidner 2015; Ashraf et al. 2015; Field and Ambrus

2008). Theory suggests that these two factors affect spousal quality in opposite directions with,

ceteris paribus, increased education improving marital outcomes while delaying marriage

worsening them. Our findings provide empirical support for these predictions. Third, our study

contributes to a large literature on the effects of programs that support pregnant women and

young children. Policies for child development often target the first 1,000 days from conception

to the second birthday (Barham, Macours and Maluccio 2013). What is novel in our study is that

we examine the effects of targeting cash transfers to adolescent females of childbearing age and

provide evidence on the important policy question of how to time interventions to protect early

childhood development.8 Our findings suggest that unconditional income support for adolescent

girls and young women of childbearing age might cause significant increases in height-for-age z-

scores of their children.

        The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the study setting,

study design, and data collection instruments. Section 3 presents our estimation strategy.

Sections 4 presents program impacts on the core respondents, followed by an examination of

some key characteristics of their husbands and children. Section 5 concludes.

2. STUDY SETTING, DESIGN, AND DATA SOURCES

2.1 Study Setting

        The ‚ÄúSchooling, Income, and Health Risks‚Äù study (SIHR) tracks the lives of a sample of

young women who were enrolled as never-married 13-22 year olds in Zomba, Malawi in 2007.

We interviewed them for the fourth time in 2012 ‚Äì approximately five years after baseline and


8
 Currie and Almond (2011) state ‚Äú‚Ä¶one of the more effective ways to improve children's long term outcomes
might be to target women of child bearing age in addition to focusing on children after birth‚Äù.


                                                                                                       8
more than two years after the cessation of the cash transfer experiment in December 2009,

tracking the adolescents as many of them moved on to establish their own families. These

longitudinal data paint a very rich picture of the transition from adolescence into adulthood in

this context. By 2012, the study stratum that had dropped out of school at baseline had

effectively completed their schooling with an average of a seventh-grade education; 81% were

married, 92% had been pregnant, and only about a third had done any wage work in the past

three months. More than one in eight (13.5%) had been infected with HIV. The stratum of

baseline schoolgirls are better-off and younger, and therefore had not proceeded as far in their

transition to adulthood: in 2012, their average years of schooling was 10.4 and increasing, with

only 40% ever married, 50% ever pregnant, and 5.5% HIV-positive.

       In the latest follow-up survey of the study sample, which was more than two years after

the cessation of cash transfers, we attempted to trace the pathways through which experimentally

induced changes in human capital may translate into longer-term outcomes. Zomba is an almost

exclusively agricultural economy characterized by low educational attainment and few

opportunities for formal employment. As of 2009, this district was the third poorest in Malawi

(in our sample, real monthly per-capita exchange rate comparable consumption in 2008 was

USD 20.6).    Secondary school completion rates are low ‚Äì in our sample, among baseline

schoolgirls, half of whom had completed primary school at baseline, only 17.0% had completed

secondary school as of 2012. Although most adults 15 and over participate in some form of

employment, the majority do not receive a formal income. In 2008, only 6% of the adult

population received a formal income (Zomba City Assembly 2009), a number that is reflected in

our data with 6% of baseline dropouts and 3% of baseline schoolgirls participating in any formal

work. This context is typical for many parts of rural Africa, and, hence, is an important




                                                                                              9
environment in which to understand the constraints adolescents face as they transition to

adulthood.

2.2 Study Design

         Our study began by listing all eligible households within 176 Enumeration Areas (EAs)

of the 550 EAs in Zomba District. This never-married, 13-22 year-old target population was

then divided into two main strata: those who were already out of school at baseline (baseline

dropouts) and those who were still in school at baseline (baseline schoolgirls). Baseline dropouts

comprised only 15% of target population, so were all recruited into the study. Baseline

schoolgirls were sampled into the study at probabilities increasing in age and rural status.

         Treatment was assigned first at the enumeration area (EA) level; 88 to treatment and 88

to control. All baseline dropouts in treatment EAs received conditional cash transfers (CCTs),

while a further experiment was performed within the larger cohort of baseline schoolgirls. For

them, 46 EAs were assigned to CCTs, 27 were assigned to unconditional cash transfers (UCTs),

and 15 were assigned to receive no transfers in order to study spillovers (from baseline dropouts

in those EAs). The amount of money received by the household head was randomized between

$4 and $10 at the EA level, and the core respondents were assigned their own individual transfer

amounts ‚Äì ranging from $1 and $5 ‚Äì in a public lottery.9 The share of eligible girls offered cash

transfers was randomly varied across clusters to estimate spillover effects. Offer letters were

distributed in December 2007, payments began in February 2008 and continued through the end

of 2009.10 Four rounds of data took place: Round 1-Baseline (2007), Round 2 (2008), Round 3


9
   The average total transfer to the household of $10/month for 10 months a year is nearly 10% of the average
household consumption expenditure of $965 in Malawi in 2009 (WDI, 2010). This falls in the range of cash
transfers as a share of household consumption (or income) in other countries with similar CCT programs. The
transfers were offered to all eligible girls in our target demographic and were not targeted by poverty status.
10
   In experiments like SIHR, it is important to try to understand what the beneficiaries expected as to the program‚Äôs
timing and duration (Bazzi, Sumarto and Suryahadi 2015). When the initial offers were made, the beneficiaries were
told that the program only had funding for one year, but that efforts were being made to extend it into a two-year


                                                                                                                 10
(2010), and Round 4 (2012). Figure I presents an illustration of the study design, and a more

detailed description of the experiment can be found in (Baird, McIntosh and √ñzler 2011).11

         Girls receiving UCTs simply had to show up at a local distribution point each month to

pick up their transfers. Monthly school attendance for all girls in the CCT arm was checked and

payment for the following month was withheld for any student whose attendance was below 80%

of the number of days school was in session for the previous month. However, participants were

never removed from the program for failing to meet the monthly 80% attendance rate, meaning

that if they subsequently had satisfactory attendance, their payments would resume. Other design

aspects of the program were kept identical so as to be able to isolate the marginal effect of

imposing a schooling conditionality on outcomes of interest among baseline schoolgirls.12

2.3 Data Sources and Outcomes

     The focus of this paper is data collected in Round 4, which took place in 2012, more than

two years after the end of the intervention. However, to provide context to these results, we also

present impacts on the same outcomes, when available, for data collected during Rounds 2 and 3.

Focusing on the core respondent, the data sources include household surveys (all rounds),

biomarker data collection on HIV (Round 2-4) and Anemia (Round 4), and competencies (Round

4). In Round 4, data collection also included anthropometric data (children under 60 months of




program. Towards the end of the first year, upon successfully obtaining additional funding, we circulated new offer
letters informing the beneficiaries that the program would be continued for one more year, but not more. This
message was repeated regularly at the cash distribution points by the program staff during the second and final year
of the intervention.
11
   The size of the transfers, the identity of the recipients, or the intensity of treatment within the cluster did not prove
to be influential on the primary outcomes of interest. Because these were randomized across the control, CCT, and
UCT arms, estimates of average treatment effects remain highly robust to these controls.
12
   For households with girls eligible to attend secondary schools at baseline, the total transfer amount was adjusted
upwards by an amount equal to the average annual secondary school fees in the conditional treatment arm. This
additional amount ensured that the average transfer amounts offered in the CCT and UCT arms were identical and
the only difference between the two groups was the ‚Äúconditionality‚Äù of the transfers on school attendance.


                                                                                                                        11
age) and early child development tests (children 36-59 months old) among the children of study

participants, as well as a survey and biomarker data collection among their husbands.

    The household surveys at each round consisted of a multi-topic questionnaire administered

to the households in which the core respondents resided during the data collection period. They

consisted of two parts: one that was administered to the head of the household and the other

administered to the core respondent. The former collected information on the household roster,

dwelling characteristics, household assets and durables, shocks, and consumption. The survey

administered to the core respondent collected detailed information about her family background,

schooling status, health, dating patterns, sexual behavior, fertility, marriage, labor market

outcomes, and empowerment. In addition to the household survey administered to the core

respondent (and to her parents/guardian if she still lived with them), the Round 4 survey included

a similar module administered to the husbands of married study participants.

    The Round 4 household survey also consisted of a test to measure basic labor market skills

of the core respondent, which we termed ‚Äúcompetencies.‚Äù It included reading and following

instructions to apply fertilizer; making correct change during a hypothetical market transaction;

sending a text message and using a calculator on a mobile phone, and calculating profits for a

hypothetical business scenario. As Round 4 was focused more on the transition into adulthood

and labor markets, as opposed to the school attainment and learning focus in Round 3, this test

was designed to replace the reading comprehension, math, and cognitive skills tests utilized in

Round 3, and serve as a measure of a more practical set of skills that might be influenced by

increased schooling and needed in the labor market.

    Home-based voluntary counseling and testing for HIV (for core respondents during Rounds

2-4, and their husbands in Round 4) was conducted by Malawian nurses and counselors certified




                                                                                               12
in conducting rapid HIV tests through the Ministry of Health HIV Unit HCT Counselor

Certification Program. In addition they tested for hemoglobin and measured the height and

weight of all children aged 59 months or younger.

     Early childhood development (ECD) tests were administered to all 36-59 month-old children

of the study participants. These tests consisted of the Malawi Development Assessment Tool

(MDAT) for fine motor skills, language, and hearing, which were administered directly to the

child (Gladstone et al. 2008) and the Strengths and Difficulties Test (SDQ), administered to the

mother or the guardian responsible for the child (Goodman 2001; Woerner et al. 2004).

     Prior to the analysis of data from Round 4, a pre-analysis plan was registered at the AEA

RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0000036; https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/36; please see

Appendix A). Our outcomes cover six domains for the core respondent ‚Äì education and

competencies, marriage and fertility, health and sexual behavior, empowerment and aspirations,

employment and wages, and consumption ‚Äì and outcomes in relevant domains for their husbands

and children.13 A detailed description of all outcomes in this paper is provided in Appendix B.

3. ESTIMATION STRATEGY

        In this section, we discuss the experimental estimation strategy used to examine program

impacts on core respondents. The causal identification of program impacts on husband

characteristics and children‚Äôs outcomes is more challenging and the estimation strategies used to

analyze those outcomes are discussed in Sections 4.6, 4.7, and Appendix C.




13
  Many of our outcomes are in the form of indexes that are constructed using the following rubric: First, we ensured
that all sub-questions are aligned so that higher scores always have a consistent meaning (good or bad). We then
calculated the mean and standard deviation of the responses to each sub-question in the control group ‚Äì separately
for baseline schoolgirls and baseline dropouts. We then normalized each sub-question by subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation. Finally we constructed (and then normalized) the raw mean of the normalized
variables for all sub-questions within a family of variables to create the final index.


                                                                                                                 13
    The evaluation of the impact of the Zomba Cash Transfer Program utilizes the experimental

design of the intervention for causal identification. To estimate intention-to-treat effects of the

program in each treatment arm on our primary outcomes by stratum, we employ a simple

reduced-form linear model:

                          Ì†µÌ±åÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±ê = Ì†µÌªº + Ì†µÌªæ Ì†µÌ±ê Ì†µÌ±áÌ†µÌ±êÌ†µÌ±ê + Ì†µÌªæ Ì†µÌ±¢ Ì†µÌ±áÌ†µÌ±êÌ†µÌ±¢ + Ì†µÌªΩÌ†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±ê + Ì†µÌºÄÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±ê   (1)

where Ì†µÌ±åÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±ê is an outcome variable for core-respondent i in cluster c, Ì†µÌ±áÌ†µÌ±êÌ†µÌ∞∂ and Ì†µÌ±áÌ†µÌ±êÌ†µÌ±à are binary

indicators for offers in the CCT and the UCT clusters, respectively, and Xic is a vector of

baseline characteristics. Note that for baseline dropouts we only have the CCT binary indicator.

The standard errors Ì†µÌºÄÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±ê are clustered at the EA level, which account for both the design effect of

our EA-level treatment and the heteroskedasticity inherent in the linear probability model.

    In all regressions, we include baseline values of the following pre-specified variables as

controls: a household asset index, highest grade attended, a dummy variable for having started

sexual activity, and dummy variables for age in years. These variables were chosen because they

are strongly predictive of schooling outcomes, hence improving the precision of the impact

estimates. We also include indicators for the strata used to perform block randomization ‚Äì

Zomba Town, within 16 kilometers of the town, and beyond 16 kilometers (Bruhn and

McKenzie 2009). Age- and stratum-specific sampling weights are used to make the results

representative of the target population in the study area.

    Appendix Table S1 presents means and standard deviations for nine individual or household

characteristics for the study sample at baseline by strata and treatment assignment. As this paper

is mainly about program effects more than two years after the end of cash transfers, we conduct

all analysis among those who were successfully interviewed in Round 4, which maximizes




                                                                                                  14
sample size for the estimation of longer-term impacts.14 Columns 1 and 2 show descriptive

statistics for baseline dropouts, who are older than baseline schoolgirls and come from more

disadvantaged backgrounds: for example, 44.5% of the control group had started childbearing at

baseline compared to only 2.1% of baseline schoolgirls. In addition to the fact that all baseline

dropouts are out of school at baseline and never married, there are no statistically significant

differences between the CCT and the control groups for the variables presented in Appendix

Table S1. Nor are there any differences between the two treatment groups and the control group

among baseline schoolgirls, but the UCT group is, on average, older and has attended higher

grades than the CCT group at baseline. Note that this imbalance existed at baseline and is not a

result of differential attrition (Baird, McIntosh and √ñzler 2011). Pre-specified baseline controls

used in all impact regressions described above include these two variables. Joint tests of

orthogonality presented at the bottom of Appendix Table S1 confirm these findings.

     Appendix Table S2 examines attrition for the same sample of core respondents who were

successfully interviewed in Round 4 ‚Äì first for baseline dropouts, then baseline schoolgirls.

Attrition two years after the end of the cash transfer program is 15.7% in the control group

among baseline dropouts and this level of attrition is not differential in the CCT arm (column 1).

However, interacting attrition with the same pre-specified baseline adjustments used throughout

the paper, we find that these interactions are jointly significant (column 2) ‚Äì primarily due to the

fact that CCT beneficiaries in urban areas, which constitutes less than 20% of our sample, were

more likely to be lost to follow-up. Attrition in the control group among baseline schoolgirls is



14
   Conducting the analysis among the Round 4 sample implies that the Round 2 and Round 3 samples are smaller
than the Round 4 sample in the analysis. For example, to be included in the Round 3 analysis of impacts, a subject
had to be successfully interviewed in both Rounds 3 and 4. In addition to maximizing the sample for Round 4
analysis, which is the focus of this paper, this allows us to demonstrate that the Round 2 and Round 3 impacts,
which were reported in earlier publications, hold in this sub-sample and provides some reassurance that differential
attrition is not substantially affecting our findings at Round 4.


                                                                                                                 15
slightly lower at 12.5%, which is significantly higher than both the CCT and UCT arms (column

3). However, attrition in this stratum is not differential by baseline characteristics between

treatment and control, although the F-test for joint significance of UCT interactions is 0.101

(column 4). Furthermore, there is no differential attrition between the CCT and UCT arms ‚Äì

either in levels or by characteristics.

     To address any potential bias in impact estimates due to differential attrition by treatment

arm ‚Äì either in levels (CCT and UCT among baseline schoolgirls) or in baseline characteristics

(CCT among baseline dropouts), we include a thorough analysis of the robustness of our impact

estimates in Section 4.5 below. There, we present upper and lower bounds on impact estimates

for all primary outcomes (Lee 2009), as well as adjusted estimates using inverse propensity

weighting. We also note that impact estimates from earlier follow-up rounds, which did not

suffer from differential attrition, replicate in the Round 4 sample used in this paper.

4. RESULTS

        We start by presenting the trajectory of program effects on outcomes in four domains,

separately for baseline dropouts and baseline schoolgirls: education and competencies, marriage

and fertility, health, and, finally, labor market participation and empowerment.15

4.1 Education and Competencies

        Table I presents program impacts on highest grade completed and competencies. Among

baseline dropouts, CCTs led to an increase in highest grade completed of approximately 0.6

years, which represents a 0.22 standard deviation (SD) increase by Round 4 (Panel A). As a

result, the share of beneficiaries with a Primary School Leaving Certificate (PSLC) increased by


15
   The reader should note that most of the one- and two-year impacts during and at the end of the program were
reported in previous publications, which are clearly cited throughout the paper. What are new here are the findings
from two years after the end of the program. Presenting program impacts over time within each domain allows the
reader to examine the trajectory of program effects and assess whether earlier impacts were sustained.


                                                                                                                16
5.8 and 8.1 percentage points in Rounds 3 and 4, respectively (Appendix Table S3, Panel A).

However, earlier gains in test scores of English reading comprehension, mathematics, and

cognitive skills (Table I, columns 4-7) did not translate into increased scores in tests of basic

labor market skills, or ‚Äúcompetencies,‚Äù such as following instructions to apply fertilizer or

calculating change in a market transaction (column 8).

       The results for baseline schoolgirls suggest little, if any, effect on school attainment or

competencies in either treatment group (Table I, Panel B). Any significant effect in the CCT

group at the end of the program was no longer detectable two years later. The reader should note

that the mean number of years completed in the control group is 10.4 in Round 4, at which point

88% of the control group had obtained a PSLC (Appendix Table S3, Panel B). Hence, while

most of the transfers to baseline schoolgirls were inframarginal with respect to primary school

completion, the cash transfer program did not cause any significant gains in secondary school

completion either. Similarly, earlier gains in test scores in the CCT group did not translate into

improved competencies in the longer-run, with the only significant improvement seen in the

UCT group being the ability to send a simple text message using a mobile phone.

       The consistent pattern in the CCT arm (for both baselines schoolgirls and dropouts) of

short-term improvements in test scores combined with no improvement in long-run

competencies has two potential explanations. One of these is that the competencies simply failed

to measure variation in skills in a useful way. However, we find this explanation unlikely as the

variation in schooling and test scores at the end of the intervention are strongly predictive of

competencies two years later: for example, a one year increase in highest grade completed is

associated with a 0.21 SD increase in the overall competency score. Mechanically, this would

imply an improvement of only 0.13 SD in the overall competency score among baseline dropouts




                                                                                               17
(0.621 x 0.21 = 0.13), which is twice as large as our point estimate of 0.064 SD but within the

95% confidence interval. The more likely explanation is that even though CCTs caused large

effects on school attainment and modest ones in test scores by the end of the intervention among

baseline dropouts, these learning gains were too small and dissipated within two years.

4.2 Marriage and Fertility

       As with the education outcomes, CCTs had large effects on marriage and fertility for

baseline dropouts that were sustained at Round 4 (Table II, Panel A). They were 14.0, 15.7, and

10.7 percentage points (pp) less likely to have been ever married during, at Rounds 2-4,

respectively (all significant at 99% confidence). The corresponding reductions were 5.7, 8.1, and

4.0 pp for being ever pregnant (all significant the 90% confidence or higher). Furthermore, there

is a negative fertility gradient among CCT beneficiaries, leading to a reduction of 0.147 total live

births at Round 4 (p-value < 0.001), which corresponds to a reduction of more than 10% and is

consistent with the reduction in stated desired fertility. Age at first marriage and first birth were

similarly higher by 0.43 and 0.27 years, respectively.

       Among baseline schoolgirls, CCTs had no effects on marriage and fertility at any point

during our study period (Table II, Panel B). On the other hand, UCTs were very effective in

substantially reducing marriage and pregnancy rates among baseline schoolgirls during and at the

end of the program (Baird, McIntosh and √ñzler 2011). Two years later, there are no longer any

differences in ever married, ever pregnant, total number of live births, or even age at first birth

between the UCT group and either the control group or the CCT arm. We find that the age at first

marriage increased by half a year by Round 4, which is consistent with the fact that girls in the

UCT arm who delayed marriage got quickly married following the end of the intervention.

Striking spikes in pregnancies and marriages in the UCT group immediately following the end of




                                                                                                  18
the transfers are shown in Figure II. The temporary nature of the fertility changes in this group is

also reinforced by the fact that desired fertility remains unchanged (Table II, Panel B, column

12).16 In analysis not shown in the tables, we find that teen pregnancy (defined as starting

childbearing at age 18 or younger) was significantly lower in the UCT arm at round 3 (3.8 pp, p-

value =0.027) but that this effect had also shrunk by two thirds and was no longer significant by

round 4. Beneficiaries of all ages experienced spikes in marriage and pregnancy following the

program, meaning that UCTs reduced the prevalence of neither teen pregnancies nor child

marriages by Round 4 ‚Äì despite large reductions in these quantities at Round 3.

         Cash transfers can have effects on marriage and fertility via two channels. The first

pathway, apparent in the UCT arm, is through an income effect. In our study, this effect is strong

but disappears immediately when the transfers stop ‚Äì as the transfers have not led to any

accumulation of physical or human capital. The other pathway, apparent in the CCT arm among

baseline dropouts, is through increased schooling. Increased schooling is strongly associated

with delays in marriage and childbearing and reductions in desired and total fertility, but the

impacts of transfer programs on schooling have to be substantial to translate into meaningful and

statistically significant knock-on effects on marriage and fertility.

4.3 Health

         Table III presents program impacts on biomarkers for HIV and anemia ‚Äì the primary

health outcomes specified in our pre-analysis plan. Program effects on HIV prevalence during

the program, i.e. at Round 2, were reported in Baird et al. (2012). Despite the improvements in


16
   The finding of null effects in Round 4 in the UCT arm is not simply a function of lack of power. While the
standard errors of binary indicators for marriage and pregnancy are higher in Round 4 than in Round 3 due to the
fact that the control means for these variables are increasing towards 0.5 over the course of our study, minimum
detectable effects as a percentage of the mean in the control group are actually lower. Furthermore, these minimum
detectable effects are comparable to or lower than those presented in similar papers, such as Bandiera et al. (2015).
Finally, many of the significant effects among baseline dropouts that we present in Table II are larger than the
minimum detectable effects among baseline schoolgirls.


                                                                                                                 19
education, delays in marriage and fertility, and the high prevalence of HIV among baseline

dropouts (13.5% by Round 4), CCTs did not reduce HIV prevalence in this stratum at any point

during the study period (Panel A). Appendix Tables S4 and S5 examine self-reported sexual

behavior on the extensive and intensive margin. Both the onset of sexual activity and the

likelihood of being sexually active during the past year were lower among program beneficiaries

during and immediately after the program, but not two years later. There were no effects on risky

sexual behavior, such as having older partners or use of condoms, among those who reported

being sexually active. Nor did CCTs have significant effects on psychological wellbeing or

nutritional intake (Appendix Table S6).

       Among baseline schoolgirls, program impacts on HIV mirror those on marriage and

fertility over time: there is no effect of CCTs on HIV at Rounds 3 or 4, but a more than 50%

reduction in HIV prevalence in the UCT group at the end of the intervention is no longer there

two years later (Table III, Panel B). During the two-year post-intervention period, which saw a

spike in pregnancies and marriage in the UCT group, the incidence of HIV was 3.5 percentage

points (pp) ‚Äì compared with 2.0 pp in the control group, but this difference in HIV incidence is

not statistically significant. Appendix Table S6 shows that effects of cash transfers were equally

transient on mental health and nutritional intake ‚Äì strongly evident during the program and

disappearing afterwards. There is weak evidence of lower anemia prevalence in the UCT arm in

Round 4, but the UCT effect on a continuous measure of hemoglobin levels does not corroborate

this finding. Nor does it hold up to multiple hypothesis testing discussed in Section 4.5.

4.4 Labor Market Participation and Empowerment

       Hardly anyone in our sample spent a significant amount of time in self-employment or

paid work during the past week (Table IV, column 3), consistent with labor market conditions in




                                                                                               20
Zomba. Only a third of baseline dropouts and a quarter of baseline schoolgirls report having

done any wage work in the past three months (Appendix Table S7). The main activities

performed by the young females in our sample are household chores ‚Äì such as cooking and

cleaning, fetching water and firewood, and looking after children ‚Äì (69.6%) and subsistence

agriculture (19.4%) among baseline dropouts; among baseline schoolgirls, 55.2% report

household chores as their main activity, 11.1% report subsistence agriculture, while 27.5% are

still in school. There are no significant effects on primary outcomes in either stratum, except a

negative effect on typical wage among baseline dropouts, which may reflect the fact that

individuals in the treatment group were in school longer, and thus might have less work

experience. Program impacts on secondary labor market outcomes, such as the effective daily

wage, labor income in the past five seasons, and any wage work in the past three months, are

similarly null (Appendix Table S7).17

        For baseline dropouts, program impacts on empowerment echo those on competencies,

health, and labor market participation: despite significant gains in educational attainment, delays

in marriage and pregnancy, and reductions in total live births, there are no effects on the overall

index of empowerment or subjective welfare (Table IV, Panel A, columns 4 & 5). This finding

holds when we examine empowerment by marital status at Round 4 (columns 6 & 7). Appendix

Table S8 shows results by the components of the female empowerment index (self-esteem, social

participation, preferences for child education, and aspirations).

        For baseline schoolgirls in the CCT group, we also see no significant impacts on

empowerment or subjective wellbeing, although the coefficient estimates are generally positive.

However, in the UCT arm, the empowerment index is significantly lower than both the control


17
  We also examined accumulation of savings, household assets, and productive assets (such as livestock). We find
no treatment effects on any of these outcomes in either stratum.


                                                                                                               21
and the CCT groups (Table IV, Panel B). The -0.159 SD effect (p-value=0.05) on the super-

index of overall empowerment among the UCT beneficiaries is reflected in the negative (but

insignificant) effects in all sub-indices except aspirations (Appendix Table S8, Panel B), and is

driven mainly by a large (-0.342 SD; p-value<0.01) and significant negative effect on

empowerment among those who are married (Table IV, Panel B, column 7). The findings

indicate a statistically significant divergence in female empowerment between CCT and UCT

recipients among baseline schoolgirls two years after the end of the cash transfer program ‚Äì

particularly for those married by Round 4. We further explore these negative impacts on marital

empowerment by directly studying husband characteristics below in Section 4.6.

4.5 Robustness of Findings to Attrition and Multiple Hypothesis Testing

       Before we move on to analyzing husband and child outcomes, we examine the robustness

of program impacts for the young women targeted by our cash transfer program. There are two

issues that raise doubt about the findings we presented so far. First, in Section 3, we have shown

that while the share of our study sample lost to follow-up more than four years after baseline data

collection is not high (between 12.5% and 15.7% in the control groups of the two strata), there is

evidence of differential attrition in levels (but not characteristics) among baseline schoolgirls,

and vice versa among baseline dropouts. As differential attrition has the potential to bias impact

estimates and, as such, is a threat to causal inference, we conduct additional analysis to test the

robustness of our findings. Second, although we follow a pre-analysis plan, we nonetheless

present 14 primary outcomes in Round 4. To allay concerns that some of the statistically

significant impacts estimates might have occurred due to chance, we present p-values for impact

estimates that are adjusted for the false discovery rate (FDR).




                                                                                                22
       In Appendix Tables S9-11, we report the original impact estimates for 14 primary

outcomes presented in Tables I-IV (column 1), along with estimates adjusted for inverse

probability weighting (IPW, column 2), as well as lower and upper bound estimates (columns 3

and 4) following Lee (2009). The IPW adjustment is implemented by regressing an indicator

variable for being successfully interviewed in Round 4 on treatment indicators, baseline

characteristics (the same pre-specified ones used for regression adjustment throughout the

paper), and their full interactions. Each individual‚Äôs propensity to be part of the Round 4 sample

is predicted and impact regressions described in equation (1) are weighted by the inverse of this

probability. Lower and upper bound impact estimates are obtained by trimming the sample (from

above and below) such that the share of individuals lost to follow-up is equal in study arms.

       For baseline dropouts, we note that the Lee bounds are tight around the original estimate

because the difference in the level of attrition between the control and the CCT groups is very

small (Appendix Table S9). Furthermore, IPW-adjusted impact estimates are very close to our

original estimates. Nothing in the table suggests that we should significantly revise our

interpretation of the key findings of program impacts among baseline dropouts. Similarly, for

baseline schoolgirls, IPW-adjusted estimates are nearly indistinguishable from the original

estimates, while the Lee bounds are wider because of the larger difference in attrition levels

between the control group and either treatment group (Appendix Table S10). These wider

bounds mean that while our original and IPW-adjusted estimates generally indicate a lack of

impact of CCTs or UCTs among baseline schoolgirls in Round 4, we cannot rule out sizeable

impacts for some of the outcomes. Finally, Appendix Table S11 shows that pairwise

comparisons of CCT and UCT impacts are completely robust to the adjustments we implement,

which confirm that (a) most of the statistically significant differences in schooling, marriage, and




                                                                                                 23
fertility that existed between these two treatment arms immediately after the program

disappeared two years later, and (b) UCT beneficiaries, on average, have a higher age at

marriage and a lower level of overall empowerment than CCT beneficiaries by Round 4.

         In Appendix Table S12, we present q-values controlling for FDR, as described in

Anderson (2008). We use Anderson‚Äôs Stata code to calculate FDR-adjusted q-values, which uses

a simple method proposed by Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) to calculate the smallest q at

which each hypothesis would be rejected.18 The q-values for the 14 primary outcomes in this

study, presented alongside the original p-values of the impact estimates for each treatment arm,

confirm the robustness of our findings to multiple hypothesis testing adjustments: every

statistically significant impact for the CCT arm among baseline dropouts has a q-value below

0.099, while every q-value is greater than 0.289 among baseline schoolgirls.

         Our analysis so far point to two main findings: first, among the more vulnerable group of

baseline dropouts, CCTs improved school attainment and decreased marriage and fertility rates,

which were sustained over time. Second, the large effects of UCTs among baseline schoolgirls

during the program have all but disappeared within two years. In this sub-section, we find that

these two main findings are robust to attrition and multiple hypothesis testing.19

4.6 Husband Characteristics

         The program impacts on empowerment presented above, particularly the negative effects

apparent in the UCT group,20 motivate the examination of marriage market outcomes. As

described earlier, two years after the end of the transfer program, CCT beneficiaries among



18
   The Stata code and the paper that describes the method can be found here:
https://are.berkeley.edu/~mlanderson/ARE_Website/Research.html.
19
   Reinforcing the idea that our findings are robust to attrition in Round 4, findings of baseline balance and impact
estimates from earlier publications, such as Baird, McIntosh and √ñzler (2011), replicate in the Round 4 sample.
20
   Note that the negative empowerment result among married women remains robust to adjustments for IPW, Lee
bounds, and multiple-hypothesis testing.


                                                                                                                 24
baseline dropouts were less likely to be ever married or pregnant, had a smaller number of

children, and were older at first marriage and pregnancy. While these gains did not translate into

increased empowerment or subjective wellbeing in this group, the program might have

nonetheless caused study participants to select spouses with different characteristics.

        Table V presents the treatment-control comparison of husband characteristics. For

baseline dropouts, the evidence is consistent with assortative matching (Panel A): husbands of

CCT beneficiaries have completed 0.56 years more of schooling (p-value=0.11) and are 7.4 pp

more likely to have successfully completed secondary school (p-value=0.05). By inducing large

numbers of dropouts to return to school, CCTs might have driven them to marry more educated

husbands than they would have otherwise. This finding does not appear to be driven by

differential selection into marriage.21 These spouses, however, are not different in terms of labor

market outcomes, cognitive ability, marital fidelity, mental health, HIV (Table V), or attitudes

towards women‚Äôs empowerment (Appendix Table S13).

        In contrast, the delays in marriage and pregnancy among baseline schoolgirls in the UCT

group were transitory, leading to an increase in age at first marriage with no gains in education or

reductions in actual or desired fertility. The divergence in empowerment between CCT and UCT

recipients among baseline schoolgirls, presented above, is also apparent in the characteristics of

their husbands. The coefficient estimates for the overall husband quality index are -0.186 and

0.141 for the UCT and CCT groups, respectively (Table V, Panel B). In particular, the husbands

of UCT beneficiaries are 8.8 pp less likely to hold secondary school certificates (MSCE) than the

control group (p-value=0.11) and scored approximately 0.36 SD lower in the Raven‚Äôs colored

progressive matrices test (p-value=0.03). The differences between the CCT and UCT groups for


21
  A joint F-test of interactions between treatment (CCT) and baseline attributes predicting selection into the
husband sample among baseline dropouts is insignificant.


                                                                                                           25
the overall husband quality index, as well as MSCE and cognitive ability, are all statistically

significant.22

        The divergence in these marriage market outcomes between CCT and UCT recipients can

be explained by program impacts on education and the timing of childbearing and marriage.

Environments in which adolescent marriage is common may feature a preference for young

brides (Foster and Khan 2000), meaning that delaying marriage may worsen marriage prospects,

resulting in either lower husband quality (or bride price) or higher dowry payments (Field and

Ambrus 2008). However, potentially counteracting this effect of increased age at marriage is

human capital accumulation: for example, Ashraf et al. (2015) show that higher female education

is associated with a higher bride price in Indonesia and Zambia. While bride price is uncommon

in Zomba, Malawi (the setting for our study), it is likely that higher education is rewarded in the

marriage market in other ways, such as husband quality. These factors lead to a tradeoff between

increased age at marriage and higher education, which jointly determine husband quality in the

absence of bride prices as a market clearing mechanism (Anderson and Bidner 2015).23

        Among baseline dropouts, CCT recipients faced exactly this tradeoff and the evidence

suggests that, by and large, they improved their marriage outcomes as a result of staying in

school and delaying marriage. However, there was no such tradeoff for UCT beneficiaries: the

temporary delays in marriage and pregnancy in this group were due to income effects and not

accompanied by gains in educational attainment. An examination of Figure II, which shows the

relative timings of births and marriages in Panels A and B, respectively, suggests that a large



22
   In contrast to the baseline dropouts, selection regressions indicate that UCTs induced positive selection into
marriage (e.g. women who were more educated at baseline and more urban, i.e. those with a higher expected quality
of husbands). Correcting for this selection through IPW (not shown here) makes the negative relationship between
UCT and husband quality stronger, suggesting that the negative effects estimates presented here are conservative.
23
   Field and Ambrus (2008) report that parents in Bangladesh increase dowry payments for daughters who are late
bloomers so that they do not end up worse off in terms of spousal quality.


                                                                                                              26
share of these unions may have been shotgun marriages ‚Äì forced by pregnancies: the large ‚Äúbaby

boom‚Äù apparent in the UCT group 10-12 months after the end of the cash transfer program,

indicating a spike in pregnancies immediately after the cessation of financial support, is preceded

by a similarly-sized ‚Äúmarriage boom‚Äù only a few months earlier. Thus, consistent with the

broader literature, it appears that the UCT beneficiaries ended up with worse marriage market

outcomes and lower levels of empowerment as a result of delaying childbearing and marriage

without accumulating additional schooling.

4.7 Child Outcomes

        We conclude this section with a discussion of program impacts on children born to study

participants. Policies for child development often target the first 1,000 days ‚Äì from conception to

the second birthday (Barham, Macours and Maluccio 2013), a period during which

improvements in family income may be particularly important for children‚Äôs development. 24 In

our experiment, more than 2,000 babies were born to study participants by Round 4 ‚Äì with

endogenous variation in their duration of exposure to the cash transfer program. We have already

demonstrated that well-known channels for growth, such as maternal nutrition and stress (Black,

Devereux and Salvanes 2016), improved during the two-year program.

        In terms of the timing and structure of the cash transfers, we would expect substantial

heterogeneity of program impacts on child outcomes both by when the birth took place and

whether the transfers to the mother were conditional on school attendance. As in other countries


24
  Ag√ºero, Carter and Woolard (2006) study the effect of Child Support Grants in South Africa for children who
were exposed to the program up to three years after birth and find sizeable effects of increased exposure to these
unconditional cash transfers on child height. Milligan and Stabile (2009), studying child benefits in Canada, find
effects on cognitive and socio-emotional skills of children aged 4-6. Dahl and Lochner (2012) using the variation in
Earned Income Tax Credit in the U.S., find that increased income improves children‚Äôs test scores. Currie and
Almond (2011) review the effects of ‚Äúnear cash‚Äù programs, such as food stamps, in the U.S. and find credible
evidence of effects on birth weight. Finally, Aizer et al. (2016) and Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond (2016) find
that children whose parents received cash transfers and food stamps in the U.S. had improved education, health, and
income as adults.


                                                                                                                 27
in the region, fertility and schooling are mutually exclusive in Malawi (Baird, McIntosh and

√ñzler 2011; Ozier 2015), meaning that the condition to regularly attend school effectively

screens out most expecting and new mothers in the CCT arm: only in the UCT arm would

mothers with newborn children continue receiving transfers. Secondly, even in the UCT arm, a

child conceived after the end of the program would have had no direct exposure to the program

and, as we have shown earlier, the average mother would have acquired no additional education

that could provide subsequent human capital-driven benefits. On the other hand, increased

mother‚Äôs education can, for example, increase child height (Thomas, Strauss and Henriques

1991), so we might expect to see benefits among children born after the program in the CCT

groups ‚Äì particularly among baseline dropouts, who experienced large gains in school attainment

themselves. These causal chains suggest that UCT benefits should be concentrated among

children born or in utero during the program, while CCTs might be most beneficial to children

born after the mother‚Äôs additional human capital accumulation took place.25

         As with the husband characteristics, we begin by presenting simple treatment-control

comparisons for primary child outcomes. These comparisons, presented in Table VI, appear to

show few significant differences; none among CCT children among baseline dropouts and only

one (out of eight outcomes) among baseline schoolgirls. In the UCT group, we observe a

significantly higher prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding and better parenting practices, with no

significant differences between the UCT and CCT treatment arms.

         However, we need to be cautious in interpreting these differences between the treatment

and control groups, because we know that the program caused significant changes in fertility

patterns (Table II): in other words, the raw treatment-control differences are not interpretable as

25
   Increased age at first birth can also have positive effects on child height through improved gynecological maturity
and decreased competition for nutrition between the mother and the child in utero, which could operate in both
treatment groups that delayed pregnancies.


                                                                                                                  28
causal impacts of the program on a specific child, because childbearing is endogenous to

treatment. However, as the causal effects of cash transfers targeted to females of childbearing

age (rather than to pregnant women or mothers) is an important policy question, we attempt to

disentangle the selection-driven components of fertility and parentage from the direct treatment

effects on the actual sample of children born. The technical details of the assumptions required

and the sequence of adjustments ‚Äì to move from the overall reduced-form difference between

children born to mothers in the treatment and control groups towards a more standard causal

effect on the children actually born ‚Äì are outlined in Appendix C.

         To investigate how differential exposure to CCTs and UCTs drives treatment effects, we

consider the sample of children born during three epochs. The first epoch captures those directly

exposed to the program, meaning those born during the program.26 This cohort is exposed for a

maximum of two years, with some combination of in utero and child exposure depending on the

exact birth date of the child. The second epoch covers those born within nine months of the end

of the program, who were exposed in utero for a maximum of nine months. Finally, the third

epoch covers those born more than nine months after the end of the program, who were not

exposed to cash transfers either as children or in utero and could only benefit from the program

due to improved outcomes of their mothers. We concentrate our analysis on height-for-age z-

scores (HAZ), which is an objectively measured indicator of stunting that affects almost 50% of

children under the age of five in Malawi, and is a strong predictor of productivity as an adult in

low income settings (LaFave and Thomas 2016).27


26
   The percentage of baseline schoolgirls who reported having been ever pregnant was less than 2% at baseline.
Hence, children directly exposed to the program in this stratum are almost exclusively born during the intervention.
However, approximately 45% of baseline dropouts had already started childbearing at baseline. Therefore, our
analysis includes children under two at the start of the program, who were at least partially exposed to cash transfers.
27
   Of the two anthropometric measures that we collected for children aged 0-59 months ‚Äì height and weight ‚Äì
stunting (height-for-age z-score<-2) is the key indicator of malnutrition in Malawi: almost half of the children under
the age of 5 were categorized as stunted in 2010, while wasting (weight-for-height z-score<-2) rates are low at 4%


                                                                                                                    29
        Figure III plots the ‚Äúraw‚Äù differences in HAZ for children under 60 months between the

treatment and the control groups.28 The figures are consistent with the hypothesis that differences

in children‚Äôs heights are moderated by exposure to the program. Most strikingly, we see a very

large difference in HAZ between the UCT and the control group during the program, which

steadily declines, disappears by the end of the program, and even turns negative during the final

epoch (Panel C). This pattern is consistent with the substantive but transient improvements in the

nutritional status and mental health of UCT beneficiaries. In contrast, no significant differences

in child height are apparent between the CCT and the control groups during the program ‚Äì also

consistent with the fact that most mothers of children born in this period would have dropped out

of school as a result of their pregnancies, thus forgoing any cash transfers (Panels A and B).

Column 1 in Tables VII and VIII reports the raw differences in HAZ by epoch, for baseline

dropouts and baseline schoolgirls respectively, and confirms these patterns.

        These impacts may combine extensive margin selection effects (such as the types of

women who became pregnant, the types of partners they chose, and the age at birth) with a

‚Äòdirect‚Äô casual effect of the program on the children actually observed. Unlike many such

applications in the natural experimental literature, it is entirely plausible that all of the observed

impacts on HAZ arise from the selection effect of unwanted children being delayed by the

receipt of the UCT.29 Following the methodology laid out in Appendix C, we can then



(Haddad et al. 2014). Child assessments (MDAT and SDQ) are also objectively measured outcomes of cognitive and
socio-emotional development, but the target age group for these assessments (36-59 months) makes them unsuitable
for analysis by epoch of exposure to the program because only children born during the first year of the program
(less than 200 in the baseline schoolgirl stratum with less than 30 in the UCT arm) were eligible for assessment.
28
   We construct these figures by running a locally weighted treatment effects regression across the distribution of
child age (Fan 1992) and plotting the resulting time-specific treatment effects and 95% confidence intervals.
29
   In the study of a negative shock, the most likely extensive margin impact is an increase in mortality among the
weakest fetuses and children, thereby pushing upwards the average outcome among surviving cohorts exposed to the
shock. The large set of papers studying negative shocks such as pollution (Chay and Greenstone 2003, Black et al.
2014, Adhvaryu et al. 2016), disease (Almond 2006), and hunger (Almond and Mazumder 2011) can therefore
typically argue that any negative effects found on surviving children are actually conservative. Because we study a


                                                                                                                30
sequentially implement a set of selection controls: in Column 2 we use a set of baseline maternal

characteristics to predict fertility in each epoch, and include inverse propensity weights based on

fertility probabilities in the analysis (as well as including these covariates in the regression) to

provide estimates of impact that are doubly robust to maternal type selection. Column 3 includes

covariates controlling for paternal type, Column 4 adds flexible controls for child age, while

Column 5 adds indicator variables for the mother‚Äôs age at birth and interactions of maternal age

with all other baseline covariates. Subject to the assumptions laid out in the technical appendix,

these estimates allow us to move from the reduced-form ‚Äòraw‚Äô treatment effects to estimates of a

‚Äòdirect‚Äô effect ‚Äì i.e. suggestive ceteris paribus impacts of CCTs and UCTs on the children

actually born by epoch.

        Column 2 in Table VIII, Panel A shows that the maternal selection controls alone reduce

the effect of UCTs during the program by almost a half (from .953 to .525 SD), confirming

significant positive selection into childbearing during the program in the UCT arm. The other

pathways have a limited effect, resulting in a fully adjusted direct effect of .523 SD (column 5).

The size of this remaining direct effect is consistent with Barham, Macours and Maluccio (2013),

who report that children in Nicaragua who received three years of cash transfers were 0.2-0.4 SD

taller; and with Ag√ºero, Carter and Woolard (2006), who find that children in South Africa

receiving child support grants for most of the period between 0-3 years of age gained as much as

0.45 SD in HAZ. The bold curves in Figure III plot these ‚Äòdirect‚Äô, fully adjusted Fan regressions

across the month of birth, including the battery of controls included in Column 5 of Tables VII &

VIII. The distribution of direct treatment effects in the UCT arm shown in Panel C is remarkably



positive shock that may have delayed economically motivated pregnancies that were expected to have worse
outcomes, the selection and direct treatment effects in our case both point to superior child outcomes in the
treatment. Decomposing these effects is therefore critical.


                                                                                                          31
consistent with what we would expect: a significant and positive effect on HAZ among children

born during the program, which disappears immediately following the cessation of transfers.

         The effects on HAZ in the CCT groups are also as expected: as females who dropped out

of school due to pregnancies did not continue to receive transfers, we‚Äôd expect little effect on

their children born during the program. Conversely, if increased education or delaying

childbearing has an effect on child height, we might see effects among children of CCT

recipients after the program. Among baseline dropouts or baseline schoolgirls, we see no

significant effects on HAZ for babies born during the program. However, the corrected plots

show modest (0.10-0.25 SD) improvements in HAZ for children born after the program to

baseline schoolgirls who received CCTs (Figure III, Panel B).

         The findings here are consistent with the theory that underlies the tradeoff between CCTs

for schooling and UCTs: UCTs primarily confer an income effect on children born during the

program and no effects on children born later because they do not lead to an accumulation of

capital (human, physical, or social) for the mother.30 On the other hand, CCTs deny such benefits

to the children of non-compliers during the program, but may have modest effects on future

children through increased human capital accumulation.

5. CONCLUSION

         The most striking feature of the findings presented in this paper is the transience of the

impacts of cash transfers, particularly those given unconditionally, on adolescent females.

Particularly glaring are the fleeting decreases in child marriage and teen pregnancy in the UCT

arm, along with psychological distress and HIV ‚Äì the prevalence of all of which reverted to

30
   We do not see any positive effects of UCTs for babies born within nine month of the end of the program, i.e. those
exposed in utero. While this may be considered surprising given the extant evidence on the importance of this period
for physical development, it should be remembered that the young mothers are also dealing with the cessation of
support during this same period. Changes in lifestyle and increased stress from the loss of regular income during this
transitional period may have dampened any beneficial effects of cash transfers on the child in utero.


                                                                                                                   32
control group levels within just two years, implying significant but temporary income effects.

Within months of the end of the program, a large number of UCT beneficiaries became pregnant,

and were married soon thereafter. These delayed marriages, without any concomitant

improvements in education, were, on average, to lower quality husbands and may have resulted

in decreased empowerment in this group. This negative impact of waiting to marry in the

absence of compensating gains is consistent with evidence from South Asia (Field and Ambrus

2008).

         On the other hand, there were sustained program effects on school attainment

(accompanied by assortative matching), early marriage, and pregnancy for baseline dropouts

receiving CCTs. However, these effects did not translate into reductions in HIV or gains in labor

market outcomes or empowerment.31 Several reasons might explain the disconnect between

increased school attainment and no improvements in labor market outcomes, empowerment, or

health. First, it is possible that increased schooling does not provide one with the skills needed to

increase future welfare in this context. There are very few formal sector jobs for women in

Malawi and most households depend on subsistence farming and a variety of informal sector

activities. We administered tests of skills needed in farming and running small household

enterprises and detected no effects in these domains. If safe and well-paying jobs existed for

women in Malawi, households might invest in the necessary human capital of adolescent females

on their own ‚Äì perhaps even without the help of any outside interventions (Heath and Mobarak

2015; Jensen 2012; Munshi and Rosenzweig 2006; Oster and Steinberg 2013). Second, task

performance is dependent on not only improvements in cognitive skills, but also on character

skills and effort (Heckman and Kautz 2013). Hence, it is possible that CCTs, by providing

31
  These findings are consistent with Duflo, Dupas and Kremer (2015), who find that education subsidies in Kenya
reduce dropout, pregnancy, and marriage, but not sexually transmitted infections. They suggest a model in which
choices between committed and casual relationships, rather than unprotected sex alone, affect pregnancy and HIV.


                                                                                                             33
incentives for formal schooling, improved only cognitive skills, which may not have been

sufficient to increase productivity.32

        Our study provides some important guideposts for the design of effective adolescent-

focused cash transfer programs. First, the palliative benefits of small and frequent unconditional

cash transfers are uncontested and reinforced by our study, but the idea that they can contribute

to a sustained improvement in welfare over the longer-run is unproven and not supported here.33

Second, we shed further light on the tradeoffs between the benefits of conditional and

unconditional transfers. The lack of knock-on effects from schooling gains in this context implies

that the imperative to use conditions to generate increased investments in human capital may be

weak when few income-generating opportunities exist. Moreover, by denying adolescent girls

and young women cash transfers at precisely the moment when they are most likely to start

childbearing, a myriad of potential benefits are missed under CCT programs. A potentially

promising way of resolving this tradeoff is to view CCT and UCT programs as complements to

each other rather than alternatives: policymakers could provide a basic unconditional cash

transfer to adolescent girls topped up by conditional cash transfers for human capital

accumulation and desired health behaviors ‚Äì providing both an incentive to invest in education

and health while still guaranteeing a basic level of protection to those who are unable or

unwilling to comply with the conditions. Third, and finally, the promising (if only suggestive)

evidence of the positive effect of UCTs on children‚Äôs height provides an additional reason to

consider providing basic UCTs to adolescent females. Indeed, Currie and Almond (2011) have

32
   Heckman and Mosso (2014) state ‚ÄúThe most effective adolescent interventions target formation of personality,
socioemotional, and character skills through mentoring and guidance, including providing information.‚Äù Bandiera et
al. (2015) provide suggestive evidence that a mentoring program in Uganda (ELA) that provided young females
with ‚Äúhard‚Äù vocational and ‚Äúsoft‚Äù life skills may have led to longer-term improvements in welfare.
33
   We do not mean to downplay or underestimate the effects of redistributive policies on current poverty and
inequality reduction, even if they do not lead to substantive increases in human capital accumulation. Welfare gains
from such effects can be as large as, if not larger than, those from human capital investments (Alderman, Behrman
and Tasneem 2015).


                                                                                                                 34
suggested that targeting transfers towards women of childbearing age may be beneficial in the

U.S. context, so as to maximize benefits to children in utero. This form of targeting would suffer

from remarkably little ‚Äòleakage‚Äô in the Malawian context; two thirds of women aged 20-24 gave

birth by age 20 and virtually all females have started childbearing by age 25 (National Statistical

Office and ICF Macro 2005).

        Given the medium-term nature of these results, it is natural to ask how much we can infer

about longer-run impacts. As our study captures outcomes a little more than two years after the

cash transfers stopped, we cannot speak to long-term effects, such as those analyzed in the U.S.

context in recent studies (Aizer et al. 2016); Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond 2016).To guide

our thinking, we return again to the role of productive assets in generating long-term rewards: to

make an impact later in life, a program must have meaningfully shifted the stock of some form of

capital that can generate returns over the long haul. For baseline dropouts, who were offered

CCTs to return to school, the improvement in schooling human capital is sizeable, and they have

formed households with more educated partners.                   For this group, it may be premature to

conclude that improvements in education have led to no long-term gains. If the education/wage

relationship becomes steeper with age, or if household-level human capital alters the economic

trajectory of these households, future follow-up studies may well reveal longer-term benefits. For

baseline schoolgirls in the UCT arm, our findings suggest that two years of financial support

during adolescence might have been too short ‚Äì rather than a two-year follow-up window being

too short to trace out subsequent impacts.34 Only two years after the end of the program, UCT

beneficiaries are, in most respects, in a position indistinguishable from where they would have

been in the absence of cash transfers. The unwinding of the program impacts on marriage and

34
   However, it should be noted that the Mothers‚Äô Pension program of the early 20th century U.S. had a median
duration of three years and was of similar generosity to many cash transfer programs today, including ours (Aizer et
al. 2016), and showed long-term effects in health, education, and income among children of program beneficiaries.


                                                                                                                 35
pregnancy is immediate and substantial, so given the lack of school attainment or learning effects

in this group it is only their children in whom we note some vehicle for durable improvements in

human capital.




                                                                                               36
REFERENCES

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Prashant Bharadwaj, James Fenske, Anant Nyshadham, and Richard
     Stanley. 2016. Dust and Death: Evidence from the West African Harmattan. CSAE
     Working Paper WPS/2016-03. Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of
     Oxford.
Ag√ºero, Jorge, Michael Carter, and Ingrid Woolard. 2006. The Impact of Unconditional Cash
     Transfers on Nutrition: The South African Child Support Grant. SALDRU Working Paper
     Series No. 06/08.
Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2016. The Long-Run Impact
      of Cash Transfers to Poor Families. Am Econ Rev 106 (4): 935-971.
Alderman, Harold, Jere Behrman, and Afia Tasneem. 2015. The contribution of increased equity
     to the estimated social benefits from a transfer program: An illustration from PROGRESA.
     IFPRI Discussion Paper 1475.
Almond, D. 2006. Is the 1918 influenza pandemic over? Long-term effects of In Utero Influenza
    Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population. Journal of Political Economy 114 (4): 672-
    712.
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar A Mazumder. 2011. Health capital and the prenatal
    environment: the effect of Ramadan observance during pregnancy. American Economic
    Journal: Applied Economics 3 (4): 56-85.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early
     intervention: A reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
     Projects. Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 (484): 1481-1495.
Anderson, Siwan and Chris Bidner. 2015. Property Rights over Marital Transfers. Q J Econ 130
     (3): 1421-1484.
Araujo, M Caridad, Mariano Bosch, and Norbert Schady. 2016. Can Cash Transfers Help
     Households Escape an Inter-Generational Poverty Trap?. NBER Working Paper 22670.
     National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ashraf, Nava, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena. 2015. Bride Price and Female
     Education. Unpublished manuscript:
      http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/nbau/files/paper_draft_indonesia_zambia_20140821.pdf.
Baez, Javier Eduardo and Adriana Camacho. 2011. Assessing the long-term effects of
     conditional cash transfers on human capital: evidence from Colombia. IZA Discussion
     Paper No. 5751.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk √ñzler. 2011. Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash
      Transfer Experiment. Q J Econ 126 (4): 1709-1753.
Baird, Sarah, Francisco HG Ferreira, Berk √ñzler, and Michael Woolcock. 2013. Relative
      effectiveness of conditional and unconditional cash transfers for schooling outcomes in
      developing countries: a systematic review. Campbell Systematic Reviews 9 (8).
Baird, Sarah, Jacobus De Hoop, and Berk √ñzler. 2013. Income shocks and adolescent mental



                                                                                           37
      health. Journal of Human Resources 48 (2): 370-403.
Baird, Sarah and Berk √ñzler. 2016. Sustained Effects on Economic Empowerment of
      Interventions for Adolescent Girls: Existing Evidence and Knowledge Gaps. CGD
      Background Paper: http://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/sustained-effects-economic-
      empowerment.pdf.
Baird, Sarah J, Richard S Garfein, Craig T McIntosh, and Berk √ñzler. 2012. Effect of a cash
      transfer programme for schooling on prevalence of HIV and herpes simplex type 2 in
      Malawi: a cluster randomised trial. The Lancet 379 (9823): 1320-1329.
Bandiera, Oriana, Niklas Buehren, Robin Burgess, Markus Goldstein, Selim Gulesci, Imran
     Rasul, and Munshi Sulaiman. 2015. Women's empowerment in action: evidence from a
     randomized          control     trial    in   Africa. Unpublished      manuscript:
     http://sticerd.lse.ac.uk/dps/eopp/eopp50.pdf.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William
     Parient√©, Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2015. A multifaceted
     program causes lasting progress for the very poor: Evidence from six countries. Science
     348 (6236): 1260799.
Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A Maluccio. 2013. Boys' Cognitive Skill Formation
     and Physical Growth: Long-Term Experimental Evidence on Critical Ages for Early
     Childhood Interventions. Am Econ Rev 103 (3): 467-471.
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Leigh L Linden, and Juan E Saavedra. 2015. Medium Term Educational
      Consequences of Alternative Conditional Cash Transfer Designs: Experimental Evidence
      from Colombia. CESR-Schaeffer Working Paper, no. 2015-026.
Bazzi, Samuel, Sudarno Sumarto, and Asep Suryahadi. 2015. It's all in the timing: Cash transfers
      and consumption smoothing in a developing country. Journal of Economic Behavior &
      Organization 119:267-288.
Behrman, Jere R, Susan W Parker, and Petra E Todd. 2011. Do Conditional Cash Transfers for
     Schooling Generate Lasting Benefits? Journal of Human Resources 46 (1): 93-122.
Benjamini, Yoav and Yosef Hochberg. 1995. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
     powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
     (Methodological) 289-300.
Black, Sandra E, Aline B√ºtikofer, P Devereux, and K Salvanes. 2014. This Is Only a Test? Long-
      Run and Intergenerational Impacts of Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout.
      Unpublished manuscript.
Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes. 2016. Does Grief Transfer across
      Generations? Bereavements during Pregnancy and Child Outcomes. American Economic
      Journal: Applied Economics 8 (1): 193-223.
Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie. 2009. In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
     Development Field Experiments. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4):
     200-232.
Buehren, Niklas, Markus Goldstein, Selim Gulesci, Munshi Sulaiman, and Venus Yam. 2015.
     Evaluation of Layering Microfinance on an Adolescent Development Program for Girls in


                                                                                             38
      Tanzania.        Unpublished       manuscript:   https://editorialexpress.com/cgi-
      bin/conference/download.cgi?db_name=CSAE2016&paper_id=1018.
Canning, David, Sangeeta Raja, and Abdo S Yazbeck. 2015. Africa's Demographic Transition:
     Dividend Or Disaster?
Chay, Kenneth Y and Michael Greenstone. 2003. The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
     Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
     Recession. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (3): 1121-1167.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F Katz. 2016. The effects of exposure to better
      neighborhoods on children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment.
      Am Econ Rev 106 (4): 855-902.
Currie, Janet and Douglas Almond. 2011. Human capital development before age five.
      Handbook of Labor Economics 4:1315-1486.
Dahl, Gordon B and Lance Lochner. 2012. The impact of family income on child achievement:
      Evidence from the earned income tax credit. Am Econ Rev 102 (5): 1927-1956.
Duflo, Esther. 2012. Women Empowerment and Economic Development. Journal of Economic
      Literature 50 (4): 1051-1079.
Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. 2015. Education, HIV, and Early Fertility:
      Experimental Evidence from Kenya. Am Econ Rev 105 (9): 2757-97.
Fan, Jianqing. 1992. Design-adaptive nonparametric regression. Journal of the American
     Statistical Association 87 (420): 998-1004.
Field, Erica and Attila Ambrus. 2008. Early marriage, age of menarche, and female schooling
       attainment in Bangladesh. Journal of Political Economy 116 (5): 881-930.
Filmer, Deon and Norbert Schady. 2014. The Medium-Term Effects of Scholarships in a Low-
      Income Country. Journal of Human Resources 49 (3): 663-694.
Fiszbein, Ariel, Norbert R√ºdiger Schady, and Francisco H G Ferreira. 2009. Conditional Cash
      Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty.
      http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=459451.
Foster, Andrew and Nizam Khan. 2000. Equilibrating the marriage market in a rapidly growing
      population:      Evidence      from   rural  Bangladesh.    Unpublished   manuscript:
      http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.536.2227&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Gender Equality and Development. 2011. Gender Equality and Development
Gertler, Paul J, Sebastian W Martinez, and Marta Rubio-Codina. 2012. Investing Cash Transfers
      to Raise Long-Term Living Standards. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4
      (1): 164-192.
Gladstone, M J, G A Lancaster, A P Jones, K Maleta, E Mtitimila, P Ashorn, and R L Smyth.
      2008. Can Western developmental screening tools be modified for use in a rural Malawian
      setting? Archives of Disease in Childhood 93 (1): 23-29.
Glennerster, Rachel. 2013. Empowering Girls. Available at:
      http://www.3ieimpact.org/media/filer_public/2013/07/19/girls_empowerment_in_banglade


                                                                                           39
            sh_delhi.pdf.
Goodman, Robert. 2001. Psychometric properties of the strengths and difficulties questionnaire.
    Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 40 (11): 1337-1345.
Haddad, Lawrence James, Endang Achadi, Mohamed Ag Bendech, Arti Ahuja, Komal Bhatia,
     Zulfiqar Bhutta, Monika Bl√∂ssner, Elaine Borghi, Esi Colecraft, and Mercedes de Onis.
     2014. Global Nutrition Report 2014: Actions and accountability to accelerate the world s
     progress on nutrition
Handa, Sudhanshu, Luisa Natali, David Seidenfeld, and Gelson Tembo. 2016. The impact of
     Zambia‚Äôs unconditional child grant on schooling and work: results from a large-scale
     social experiment. Journal of Development Effectiveness 8 (3): 346-367.
Haushofer, Johannes and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. The Short-Term Impact Of Unconditional Cash
     Transfers To The Poor: Experimental Evidence From Kenya. Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 131 (4): 1973-2042.
Heath, Rachel and A. Mushfiq Mobarak. 2015. Manufacturing growth and the lives of
     Bangladeshi women. Journal of Development Economics 115:1-15.
Heckman, James J and Chase O Corbin. 2016. Capabilities and Skills. Journal of Human
     Development and Capabilities 17 (3): 342-359.
Heckman, James J and Stefano Mosso. 2014. The economics of human development and social
     mobility. IZA DP No. 800.
Heckman, James J and Tim Kautz. 2013. Fostering and measuring skills: Interventions that
     improve character and cognition. NBER Working Paper 19656. National Bureau of
     Economic Research.
Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. Long-Run Impacts
     of Childhood Access to the Safety Net. Am Econ Rev 106 (4): 903-934.
Jensen, Robert. 2012. Do labor market opportunities affect young women's work and family
      decisions? Experimental evidence from India. Q J Econ 127 (2): 753-792.
LaFave, Daniel and Duncan Thomas. 2016. Height and Cognition at Work: Labor Market
     Productivity in a Low Income Setting. NBER Working Paper 22290. National Bureau of
     Economic Research.
Lee, David S. 2009. Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on
     treatment effects. The Review of Economic Studies 76 (3): 1071-1102.
Levine, Ruth, Cynthia Lloyd, Margaret Greene, and Caren Grown. 2008. Girls Count: A global
     investment and action agenda. Reprint, 2009. Washington, D.C.: Center for Global
     Development.
Lloyd, Cynthia B and Juliet Young. 2009. New lessons: the power of educating adolescent girls:
     a Girls Count report on adolescent girls. The Population Council, Inc.
     http://www.popcouncil.org/uploads/pdfs/2009PGY_NewLessons.pdf.
Manley, James, Seth Gitter, and Vanya Slavchevska. 2013. How effective are cash transfers at
     improving nutritional status? World Development 48:133-155.
Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile. 2009. Do child tax benefits affect the wellbeing of children?


                                                                                            40
      Evidence from Canadian child benefit expansions. Am Econ Rev 99 (2): 128-132.
Molina-Millan, Teresa, Tania Barham, Karen Macours, John A Maluccio, and Marco Stampini.
     2016. Long-Term Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America: Review of the
     Evidence Inter-American Development Bank Technical Note No. IDB-N-923.
Molyneux, Maxine, With Nicola Jones, and Fiona Samuels. 2016. Can Cash Transfer
     Programmes Have ‚ÄòTransformative‚Äô Effects? The Journal of Development Studies 52 (8):
     1087-1098.
Munshi, Kaivan D and Mark R Rosenzweig. 2006. Traditional institutions meet the modern
    world: Caste, gender and schooling choice in a globalizing economy. American Economic
    Review 96 (4): 1225-1252.
National Statistical Office and ICF Macro. 2005. Malawi Demographic and Health Survey 2010
Naudeau, Sophie, Rifat Hasan, and Anne Bakilana. 2015. Adolescent Girls in Zambia:
     Introduction and Overview. Policy Brief: Zambia:
      http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/24597.
Oster, Emily and Bryce Millett Steinberg. 2013. Do IT service centers promote school
      enrollment? Evidence from India. Journal of Development Economics 104:123-135.
Ozier, Owen W. 2015. The impact of secondary schooling in Kenya: a regression discontinuity
      analysis. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, no. 7384.
Saavedra, Juan E and Sandra Garcia. 2013. Educational impacts and cost-effectiveness of
     conditional cash transfer programs in developing countries: A meta-analysis. CESR
     Working Paper, no. 2013-007.
Thomas, Duncan, John Strauss, and Maria-Helena Henriques. 1991. How does mother's
    education affect child height? Journal of Human Resources 26 (2): 183-211.
Woerner, Wolfgang, Bacy Fleitlich-Bilyk, Rhonda Martinussen, Janet Fletcher, Giulietta
     Cucchiaro, Paulo Dalgalarrondo, Mariko Lui, and Rosemary Tannock. 2004. The
     Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire overseas: evaluations and applications of the SDQ
     beyond Europe. European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 13 (2): ii47-ii54.
Zomba City Assembly. 2009. Zomba district socio economic profile 2009-2012.




                                                                                            41
                                           Table I: Program impacts on education and learning (beneficiaries)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                                                      English Test TIMMS Math Non-TIMMS                     Cognitive Test     Competencies
                                                 Highest Grade Completed                 Score          Score        Math Score                 Score               Score
                                                                                     (Standardized) (Standardized) (Standardized)           (Standardized)     (Standardized)
                                           During   End of  Two Years                                                                                            Two Years
                                                                                                                End of Program
                                          Program Program After Program                                                                                        After Program
                                             (1)      (2)       (3)                        (4)               (5)               (6)                (7)                (8)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl              0.579*** 0.558***  0.621***                     0.079           0.147***            0.116            0.163**              0.064
                                           (0.073)  (0.102)   (0.125)                    (0.071)           (0.056)           (0.072)           (0.070)             (0.057)
Mean in Control Group                       6.345    6.967     6.997                      0.000             0.000             0.000             0.000               0.000
Sample Size                                  697      718       744                        704               704               704               704                 742
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                0.078       0.126*          0.120           0.148***           0.136**            0.068            0.181***             0.065
                                           (0.090)      (0.069)        (0.080)           (0.056)           (0.069)           (0.063)            (0.050)            (0.058)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl              0.122        0.103          0.095            -0.068             -0.027            0.026              0.094              0.098
                                           (0.109)      (0.121)        (0.129)           (0.090)           (0.106)           (0.090)            (0.129)            (0.067)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                         0.708        0.854          0.850             0.035             0.157             0.657              0.514              0.630
p-value Treatment                           0.469        0.174          0.309             0.021             0.118             0.560              0.002              0.297
Mean in Control Group                      8.590        9.677          10.415            0.000              0.000            0.000               0.000             0.000
Sample Size                                 1,965        2,019          2,049             2,000             2,000             2,000              2,000              2,048
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them representative of the target population in
the study EAs. The cognitive test score is based on Raven‚Äôs Colored Progressive Matrices. Math and English reading comprehension tests were developed based on the
Malawian school curricula. Five questions (four from the Fourth Grade test and one from the Eighth Grade test) from Trends in Mathematics and Science Study (TIMMS)
2007, which is a cycle of internationally comparative assessments in mathematics and science carried out at the fourth and eighth grades every four years, were added to the
math test. Competencies represent a set of skills that were anticipated to be sensitive to education and relevant for non-formal employment. The skills tested included reading
and following instructions to apply fertilizer; making correct change during hypothetical market transactions; sending text messages and using the calculator on a mobile
phone, and calculating profits under hypothetical business scenarios. All test scores and the competency index were standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one in the control group. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators,
household asset index, highest grade attended, an indicator for never had sex, and whether the respondent participated in the pilot phase of the development of the testing
instruments. We restrict the sample to respondents who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Note that in
Rounds 2 and 3, highest grade completed is actually highest grade attended. Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*)
confidence.
                                                   Table II: Program impacts on marriage and fertility (beneficiaries)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                                                    Age First                                                                                   Age at First     Desired
                                                   =1 if Ever Married                                        =1 if Ever Pregnant                Number of Live Births
                                                                                    Marriage                                                                                       Birth         Fertility
                                                                   Two Years       Two Years                                                                     Two Years      Two Years      Two Years
                                           During       End of                                     During        End of  Two Years     During End of
                                                                     After           After                                                                         After          After          After
                                          Program      Program                                    Program       Program After Program Program Program
                                                                    Program         Program                                                                       Program        Program        Program
                                             (1)       (2)              (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)          (8)     (9)             (10)           (11)           (12)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl             -0.140*** -0.157***        -0.107***       0.431***      -0.057*      -0.081***      -0.040*      -0.005 -0.095**        -0.147***       0.272*         -0.172*
                                           (0.029)   (0.037)          (0.032)        (0.155)      (0.030)       (0.027)       (0.021)      (0.033) (0.044)         (0.054)        (0.164)        (0.087)
Mean in Control Group                       0.291     0.575            0.809         19.644        0.610         0.784         0.924        0.520   0.819           1.380         18.499          3.217
Sample Size                                  698       718              744            500          698           718           744          698     718             744            634            744
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                0.000    -0.010          -0.035           -0.011        0.008        0.027        -0.024       0.023*      0.003        0.020          -0.144        -0.072
                                           (0.012)   (0.024)         (0.027)         (0.148)       (0.015)      (0.027)       (0.034)      (0.014)    (0.022)      (0.036)        (0.136)        (0.064)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl           -0.033*** -0.083***         -0.010          0.486**       -0.013      -0.063**       -0.001        0.013     -0.055*       -0.024         0.001         -0.017
                                           (0.012)   (0.024)         (0.046)         (0.200)       (0.017)      (0.028)       (0.042)      (0.017)    (0.030)      (0.046)        (0.168)        (0.056)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                         0.026     0.018           0.613           0.032         0.314        0.009         0.614        0.641      0.075        0.410          0.436          0.477
p-value Treatment                           0.023     0.004           0.448           0.050         0.600        0.025         0.760        0.209      0.151        0.705          0.547          0.533
Mean in Control Group                      0.047     0.180           0.402            18.651       0.092         0.247        0.501        0.055       0.199        0.511         18.718         2.974
Sample Size                                 1,967     2,018           2,049            821          1,966        2,019         2,049        1,966      2,019        2,049           998           2,048
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. We correct for inconsistencies in 'ever married' and 'ever pregnant' across rounds.All regressions are weighted to
make them representative of the target population in the study EAs. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators,
household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to respondents who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the
program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
        Table III: Program impacts on HIV and Anemia (beneficiaries)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                                             =1 if
                                                   =1 if HIV Positive
                                                                           Anemic
                                                                Two Years Two Years
                                             During      End of
                                                                  After     After
                                            Program     Program
                                                                 Program   Program
                                              (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                 0.022       0.020    0.012     0.039
                                            (0.024)     (0.023)  (0.026)   (0.035)
Mean in Control Group                        0.06        0.094    0.135     0.255
Sample Size                                   373         694      715       711
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl               -0.020**      -0.003      -0.001          0.012
                                            (0.009)     (0.011)      (0.019)        (0.031)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl              -0.015      -0.019*      -0.002         -0.065*
                                            (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.023)        (0.033)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                          0.616       0.237        0.980          0.068
p-value Treatment                            0.112       0.249        0.996          0.122
Mean in Control Group                       0.026        0.035       0.055           0.243
Sample Size                                  1,192       2,002        1,977          1,979
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level.
All regressions are weighted to make them representative of the target population in the
study EAs. An individual is considered anemic if her hemoglobin count is less than or equal
to 11g/dL if pregnant and less than or equal to 12d/dL if non-pregnant based on WHO
guidelines to define mild anemia. Baseline values of the following variables are included as
controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index,
highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to
respondents who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after
the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***),
95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
                               Table IV: Program impacts on labor market outcomes and empowerment (beneficiaries)

Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                     Labor Market Outcomes                                               Empowerment

                                                                      Proportion of
                                                                                                     Change in
                                                                       Hours Spent Super-Index of                Super-Index of                       Super-Index of Married Index
                                                        Typical Wage                                 Subjective
                                           Opportunity                   in Self-      Overall                     Unmarried                             Married      of Economic
                                                        in Past Three                             Wellbeing from
                                           Cost of Time               Employment Empowerment                     Empowerment                          Empowerment        Control
                                                           Months                                 Five Years Ago
                                                                      or Paid Work (Standardized)                (Standardized)                       (Standardized) (Standardized)
                                                                                                     to Today
                                                                      in Past Week

                                                                                                   Two Years After Program
                                                (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)                (7)               (8)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                  -0.037          -0.140**         -0.011             -0.083            -0.032              0.018             -0.113            -0.118
                                              (0.079)          (0.068)         (0.009)           (0.074)            (0.232)            (0.112)            (0.102)           (0.096)
Mean in Control Group                          0.707            0.375           0.061             0.000              1.120              0.000              0.000             0.000
Sample Size                                     718              743             744               744                744                289                455               455
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                  -0.051          -0.011            0.003             0.049              0.276              0.111              0.068            -0.107
                                              (0.101)         (0.058)          (0.005)           (0.082)            (0.187)            (0.098)            (0.095)           (0.108)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl                -0.115           0.036            0.002            -0.159*             0.176              -0.094          -0.342***            0.147
                                              (0.074)         (0.104)          (0.008)           (0.081)            (0.190)            (0.109)            (0.099)           (0.307)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                            0.550           0.665            0.842             0.052              0.650              0.120              0.001             0.406
p-value Treatment                              0.297           0.910            0.784             0.101              0.306              0.287              0.001             0.484
Mean in Control Group                         0.897            0.212           0.029              0.000              0.906              0.000              0.000             0.000
Sample Size                                    2,002           2,048            2,045             2,049              2,049              1,271               776               774
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them representative of the target population in the
study EAs. Opportunity cost of time is calculated by taking the minimum daily wage the respondent would take for one year of work in her village. Detail on the construction of the
super-indices can be found in Appendix A and Appendix B. The change in subjective wellbeing asks the respondent where she sees herself on a 10-step ladder comparing five years
ago to today, where zero represents the worst possible life she could have and 10 represents the best possible life she could have. Baseline values of the following variables are
included as controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the
sample to respondents who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero
at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
                                            Table V: Program impacts marriage market outcomes (husband characteristics)

Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                                                                                                                                         =1 if Does
                                              Husband                       =1 if Passed =1 if Passed                               Typical             Sexual Activity
                                                               Highest                                 =1 if Passed Cognitive Test              =1 if                    Not Suffers
                                           Quality Super                      Primary       Junior                                  Wage in              and Marital                  =1 if HIV
                                                                Grade                                   Secondary       Score                 Currently                     from
                                               Index                          School      Secondary                                Past Three               Fidelity                   Positive
                                                              Completed                               School (MSCE) (Standardized)            Employed                  Psychological
                                           (Standardized)                     (PSLC)     School (JCE)                               Months              (Standardized)
                                                                                                                                                                          Distress
                                                                                                                    Two Years After Program
                                                 (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)              (5)                (6)             (7)           (8)             (9)              (10)          (11)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                    0.084            0.561          0.032           0.029           0.074**            -0.049          -0.081       -0.024           0.032             0.007        -0.005
                                               (0.106)          (0.348)        (0.054)         (0.046)          (0.037)            (0.110)         (0.225)      (0.040)         (0.106)           (0.061)       (0.035)
Mean in Control Group                           0.000            7.806          0.526           0.314            0.097              0.000           1.194        0.246           0.000             0.634         0.055
Sample Size                                      326              326            326             326              326                323             325          326             325               326           265
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                    0.141            0.046          0.024           0.012            0.059              0.014           0.014        0.045         0.284***            0.074         0.001
                                               (0.096)          (0.271)        (0.043)         (0.049)          (0.053)            (0.109)         (0.262)      (0.051)         (0.091)           (0.060)       (0.033)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl                  -0.186          -0.454          0.005           0.017           -0.088            -0.357**         -0.406       -0.091           0.013             0.008         0.010
                                               (0.180)          (0.425)        (0.068)         (0.086)          (0.054)            (0.163)         (0.344)      (0.093)         (0.219)           (0.093)       (0.041)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                             0.084            0.240          0.776           0.954            0.042              0.044           0.225        0.17            0.196             0.508         0.845
p-value Treatment                               0.145            0.490          0.845           0.964            0.118              0.087           0.432        0.358           0.006             0.471         0.971
Mean in Control Group                           0.000            9.743         0.699            0.541            0.258             0.000            1.42         0.352          0.000             0.647          0.052
Sample Size                                      543              543            543             543              543                539             540          543             542               541           457
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them representative of the target population in the study EAs. The husband quality
super index is a standardized index of all other outcomes in this table (except HIV as it is defined on a smaller sample). All variables are constructed so that higher values are better, except for HIV. The cognitive
test score is based on Raven‚Äôs Colored Progressive Matrices. The husband's sexual activity and marital fidelity index is constructed from three variables: number of sexual partners ever, number of sexual partners
in the past 12 months and an indicator for concurrent multiple partners. Psychological distress is equal to one if the summed General Health Questionaire-12 score is equal to three or higher, and is zero
otherwise. Additional details on the variables can be found in Appendix A and Appendix B. Baseline values of the following variables for the beneficiaries are included as controls in the regression analyses: age
indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to husbands of respondents who were surveyed during the latest household
survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). The husband quality super index regression also includes an indicator for whether any of the sub-components of the indicator are missing. Parameter
estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
                                        Table VI: Program impacts on child outcomes (children of beneficiaries)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                                                                                               Malawi          Reported    Reported Pro-
                                                                                          Parenting       Exclusively
                                                                                                                           Developmental         Child         Social
                                     Height-for-Age      Neonatal       Postneonatal      Practices      Breastfed for
                                                                                                                          Assessment Tool     Difficulties Behaviors (3-4
                                        z-score          Mortality       Mortality       Percentage         First 6
                                                                                                                           (3-4 year-olds) (3-4 year-olds)   year-olds)
                                                                                           Score           Months
                                                                                                                           (Standardized)   (Standardized) (Standardized)
                                                                                             Two Years After Program
                                           (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)                   (6)                 (7)                (8)
=1 if Treatment Dropout                  -0.013            0.013           -0.009          -0.003        0.030                 -0.086               0.104              0.123
                                         (0.091)          (0.011)          (0.013)         (0.018)      (0.026)                (0.112)             (0.190)            (0.157)
Mean in Control Group                    -1.351            0.015            0.026           0.496        0.804                  0.000               0.000              0.000
Sample Size                                742              958              707             861          971                    213                 223                223
Panel A: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl              0.096           -0.014            0.005           0.012            0.029             -0.294*             -0.011             -0.357
                                         (0.109)          (0.009)          (0.012)         (0.018)          (0.033)            (0.176)             (0.180)            (0.282)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl            0.065           -0.012            0.001          0.050*          0.126***             0.213               0.035             -0.132
                                         (0.176)          (0.012)          (0.010)         (0.029)          (0.039)            (0.376)             (0.173)            (0.309)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                       0.872            0.901            0.734           0.229            0.014              0.172               0.835              0.568
p-value Treatment                         0.666            0.302            0.912           0.215            0.006              0.145               0.974              0.434
Mean in Control Group                    -1.410            0.028            0.013           0.484            0.771              0.000               0.000              0.000
Sample Size                               1,032            1,167             756            1,090            1,169               185                 196                196
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them representative of the target population in
the study EAs. The height-for-age z-score is calculated using the 2006 WHO child growth standards. The parenting practices score is the percentage score on a set of parenting
practices. The Malawi Developmental Assessment Tool is a test of fine motor skills, language, and hearing administered directly to the child. The reported child difficulties and
reported pro-social behaviors are created using the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (http://www.sdqinfo.com/c3.html). Additional details on the outcome variables can
be found in Appendix A and Appendix B. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the regression analyses: gender of the child, age indicators, stratum
indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to respondents who were surveyed during the latest
household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
   Table VII: Program impacts on height-for-age z-scores (children of beneficiaries: baseline
                                         dropouts)
                                                        Raw Effect                                                       Direct Effect
                                                                         + Maternal        + Paternal
                                                                                                                            + Mother
Panel A: Born During Program                              Gender          Selection        Selection      + Child Age
                                                                                                                              Age
                                                                           weights         Controls
                                                  (1)                        (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                    -0.015                     -0.174           -0.139           -0.154          -0.051
                                                (0.128)                    (0.149)          (0.143)          (0.140)         (0.136)
Sample Size                                       367                        367              367              367             367
Panel B: Born Within 9 Months of Program Ended
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                     0.353                     0.518*            0.394           0.411*          0.577**
                                                (0.296)                    (0.303)          (0.249)          (0.234)         (0.260)
Sample Size                                       88                         88               88               88               88
Panel C: Born More than 9 Months After Program Ended
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                    -0.269                     -0.175           -0.127           -0.137          -0.183
                                                (0.168)                    (0.192)          (0.161)          (0.154)         (0.152)
Sample Size                                       287                        287              287              287             287
Control Structure:
Maternal selection controls + propensity weight                               X                X                X               X
Father selection controls                                                                      X                X               X
Cubic in child age in months                                                                                    X               X
Maternal age in years, age interactions                                                                                         X
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make
them representative of the target population in the study EAs. The height-for-age z-score is calculated using the 2006 WHO child
growth standards. Specification (1) controls for the gender of the child. Specification (2) adds selection weights and controls
directly for maternal baseline characteristics ( stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for
never had sex). Specification (3) adds controls for paternal attributes (highest education level, religion, ethnicity, main activity, and
likely HIV status). Specification (4) adds a linear, quadratic, and cubic in child age. Specification (5) adds maternal age and
maternal age interacted with the other baseline covariates. We restrict the sample to respondents who were surveyed during the
latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at
99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
  Table VIII: Program impacts on height-for-age z-scores (children of beneficiaries: baseline
                                       schoolgirls)
                                                        Raw Effect                                                       Direct Effect

                                                                         + Maternal        + Paternal
                                                                                                                            + Mother
Panel A: Born During Program                              Gender          Selection        Selection      + Child Age
                                                                                                                              Age
                                                                           weights         Controls
                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                               0.155            -0.050           -0.054          0.023            0.124
                                                          (0.162)          (0.192)          (0.186)         (0.177)          (0.155)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl                            0.953**          0.525**          0.549*          0.666**          0.523*
                                                          (0.476)          (0.221)          (0.306)         (0.315)          (0.299)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                                        0.091            0.022            0.028           0.024            0.115
p-value Treatment                                          0.123            0.040            0.089           0.072            0.218
Sample Size                                                 315              315              315             315              315

Panel B: Born Within 9 Months of Program Ended

=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                                0.251           0.156            0.235            0.125           0.086
                                                           (0.279)         (0.263)          (0.240)          (0.175)         (0.194)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl                              0.177           0.163            0.109          -0.431**        -0.434**
                                                           (0.514)         (0.315)          (0.336)          (0.183)         (0.193)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                                         0.887           0.984            0.725           0.013            0.028
p-value Treatment                                           0.663           0.787            0.619           0.028            0.047
Sample Size                                                  214             211              211              211             211
Panel C: Born More than 9 Months After Program Ended
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                                -0.011           0.497            0.149           0.264            0.257
                                                           (0.187)          (0.445)         (0.199)          (0.196)         (0.179)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl                            -0.351**        -0.651***          -0.336          -0.102           -0.123
                                                           (0.174)          (0.242)         (0.212)          (0.168)         (0.183)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                                         0.115            0.006           0.025           0.068            0.078
p-value Treatment                                           0.114            0.002           0.075           0.184            0.186
Sample Size                                                  507              506              506             506              506
Control Structure:
Maternal selection controls + propensity weight                               X                X                X               X
Father selection controls                                                                      X                X               X
Cubic in child age in months                                                                                    X               X
Maternal age in years, age interactions                                                                                         X
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make
them representative of the target population in the study EAs. The height-for-age z-score is calculated using the 2006 WHO child
growth standards. Specification (1) controls for the gender of the child. Specification (2) adds selection weights and controls
directly for maternal baseline characteristics ( stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for
never had sex). Specification (3) adds controls for paternal attributes (highest education level, religion, ethnicity, main activity, and
likely HIV status). Specification (4) adds a linear, quadratic, and cubic in child age. Specification (5) adds maternal age and
maternal age interacted with the other baseline covariates. We restrict the sample to respondents who were surveyed during the
latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at
99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.




                                                                                                                                       49
                                                  Figure I: Research Design
                                                      Treatment EAs
                                                                                                  Control EAs
                                                        (88 Clusters)
                                                                                                    (N=88)

                                      Conditional                        Unconditional
                                       (N=61*)                             (N=27)

Baseline Dropouts                                                                                    Pure
                                           CCT                                  CCT
(N=889)                                                                                             control
Baseline Schoolgirls                             Within-                               Within-
                                                                                                     Pure
(N=2,907)                           CCT           village               UCT             village
                                                                                                    Control
                                                 control                               control
*In 15 of the 61 conditional treatment clusters only baseline dropouts were treated.




                                                                                                                50
                   Figure II: Monthly marriage and fertility rates for baseline schoolgirls

                                       Panel A: Monthly Fertility Rates
          .025
             .02
          .015
             .01
          .005




                                       During Program             Utero         After Program
                    0




                               2008         2009           2010            2011            2012
                                                         Year

                                                    Control               CCT
                                                    UCT


                                       Panel B: Monthly Marriage Rates
          .025
             .02
          .015
             .01
          .005




                                       During Program         W/in 9 mos        After Program
                   0




                               2008         2009           2010            2011            2012
                                                         Year

                                                    Control               CCT
                                                    UCT


Notes: Figures illustrate the smoothed fraction of core respondents who give birth (Panel A) or get married (Panel
B) in each month using retrospective information on the month of birth and marriage, respectively.



                                                                                                               51
Figure III: Fan regressions of height-for-age z-scores by month of birth, raw and fully adjusted
                        treatment effects with 95% confidence intervals

                                                                              Panel A: Baseline Dropouts, CCT
                                                                   Raw and Direct CCT Dropout effect on Child HAZ
                                                                                         With 95 % Confidence Intervals



                                                     1
     Height for Age




                                               .5
                                                     0




                                                                       During Program                       Utero                After Program
                                               -.5




                                                           2008                 2009               2010           2011                        2012
                                                                                                  Month & Year of Birth
                                                            Adjustments include propensity weighting, child and maternal age, maternal and paternal attributes

                                                                                                  Raw                     Fully Adjusted


                                                                            Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls, CCT
                                                                   Raw and Direct CCT Schoolgirl effect on Child HAZ
                                                                                          With 95 % Confidence Intervals
                                                       1
                      Height for Age




                                                     .5
                                                       0




                                                                         During Program                           Utero                  After Program
                                                 -.5




                                                            2008                   2009                2010                      2011                   2012
                                                                                                  Month & Year of Birth
                                                               Adjustments include propensity weighting, child and maternal age, maternal and paternal attributes

                                                                                                  Raw                   Fully Adjusted


                                                                            Panel C: Baseline Schoolgirls, UCT

                                                                    Raw and Direct UCT Schoolgirl effect on Child HAZ
                                                                                          With 95 % Confidence Intervals
                                                           1
                              Height for Age




                                                     .5
                                                           0




                                                                          During Program                          Utero                 After Program
                                                     -.5




                                                               2008                 2009               2010                     2011                   2012
                                                                                                  Month & Year of Birth
                                                                Adjustments include propensity weighting, child and maternal age, maternal and paternal attributes

                                                                                                  Raw                   Fully Adjusted
                           Supplemental Online Appendix for:

                      ‚ÄúWHEN THE MONEY RUNS OUT:
       DO CASH TRANSFERS HAVE SUSTAINED EFFECTS?‚Äù
                          Sarah Baird, Craig McIntosh and Berk √ñzler*

                    *Corresponding author. E-mail: bozler@worldbank.org


                                      November 30, 2016

This PDF file includes:

       Appendix A: Pre-Analysis Plan
       Appendix B: Detailed description of construction of outcome variables
       Appendix C: Estimation of Treatment Effects on Children
       Tables S1 to S13
Appendix A: Pre-Analysis Plan for Round 4 Schooling, Income and Health Risk in Malawi
(SIHR) Data (which can also be found at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/36)

Principal Investigators:

Sarah Baird, University of Otago
Ephraim Chirwa, Chancellor College
Craig McIntosh, UCSD
Berk √ñzler, World Bank and University of Otago

Analysis plan:

The core analysis will compare the impact of the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) and
Unconditional Cash Transfer (UCT) treatment to control EAs for the baseline schoolgirl stratum,
and will compare the CCT treatment to the control for the baseline dropout stratum. Most of the
analysis will consist of Round 4 cross-sectional regression (using OLS unless not appropriate),
although where possible we will also pursue panel difference-in-differences analysis for
variables that have been consistently collected in multiple rounds. For consistency, the analysis
will include the full set of controls used in the paper by Baird, McIntosh and √ñzler (2011). These
controls include baseline values of the following: a household asset index, highest grade
attended, a dummy variable for having started sexual activity, dummy variables for age, and
strata dummies. Standard errors will be clustered at the EA level, and results will be weighted to
make them representative of the target population in the study EAs.

Only if a significant impact is found in the core analysis will further heterogeneity of impact be
explored. Heterogeneity will be explored along both experimental dimensions including the
amount of the transfer and the split between the parent and the girl, as well as based on the age at
which you got the program and differences between rural and urban.


Note on construction of indexes:

To construct indexes for classes of variables, we will adhere to the following rubric:

   a) For each sub-question in a family of variables, first align answers so that higher numbers
      always have a consistent meaning (good or bad).
   b) Calculate the mean and SD of the responses to each sub-question in the sample in the
      control group ‚Äì separately for baseline schoolgirls and baseline dropouts.
   c) Create normalized variables that have the mean subtracted off and are divided by the SD.
   d) Calculate the raw mean of the normalized variables for all sub-questions within a family
      of variables. This mean is the ‚Äòindex‚Äô for those variables. This summary index can
      further be normalized if desired.

For the core analysis we will not pursue the analysis of sub-variables within an index unless the
index as a whole is significant.



                                                                                                 54
Construction of Core Indexes: Primary outcomes are indicated in bold text.

   1. Core Respondent-level outcomes: Can be analysis with simple cross-sections comparing
      UCT, CCT, and control. No extensive margin issue with any of these variables.
         a. Schooling and Marriage (replication of QJE results with age-appropriate
            dependent variables):
                 i. Highest grade completed (S7, Q7)
                ii. Highest educational qualification achieved (S7, Q9)
               iii. Achievement, replacing the test scores with the ‚Äòcompetencies‚Äô (see
                    end of this appendix for further details on construction). We will show
                    the components, as well as the index for the quality index; and show
                    only an index for the quantity.
               iv. Ever married (Part II CS, Q2e), ever pregnant (S18, Q1, Q2), number
                    of live births (S18, Q17).
                v. Hazard model of age of first marriage (S14, Q1 (and Round 3 data for
                    those already married at Round 3)) and age at first birth (construct
                    using age of respondent and DOB), with ‚Äòuncompleted spells‚Äô for
                    those never married or never first birth.
               vi. Sexual behavior: ABC, # partners ever, as in previous papers. Ever had
                    sex (S12, Q2, Q3, Q4) age at first sex (S12 Q4), total number of partners
                    ever (S12, Q5), sexually active in past 12 months (S12, Q7), condom use
                    last sex with most recent partner (S12, Q23), having a partner with an age
                    difference of more than 5 years (S12Q12)

          b. Health: Replication of Lancet results (Baird, Garfein, McIntosh and √ñzler 2012)
                 i. HIV prevalence in R4, HIV incidence R3-R4.
                ii. Anemia: construct binary measure based on definition of mild anemia
                    from WHO and used in survey (with different thresholds if pregnant),
                    (with bednets, breastfeeding, timing of last meal, taking medical for
                    anemia, and menstruating as secondary moderator channel) (VCT, S1).
               iii. Use of reliable birth control: S12 Q27 anything except withdrawal,
                    periodic abstinence, other
               iv. Desired fertility S16 Q4 or Q10.
                v. Mental health, calculated as in Baird, de Hoop, Ozler (2013) (S9, Q9-20):
                    binary
               vi. Number of meals eaten with meat, eggs, fish in past 7 days (S9, Q 6-8)

          c. Empowerment & aspirations:
                 i. Index of self-efficacy: S11a Q1-10.
                ii. Index of preferences for child education: S11a Q17-25.
               iii. Index of social participation: S11a Q13,14,16.
               iv. Aspirations: Change in ladder from five years ago to five years from now
                    (S9, Q23-Q21)
                v. Change in ladder from five years ago to today (S9, Q22-Q21)
             Super-index of overall empowerment i-iv.

                                                                                           55
             d. Wages/Employment:
                    i. Effective wage: S8 Q2 d-g, Q6/Q4 ‚Äì converted into a daily wage rate.
                   ii. Opportunity cost of time: Minimum wage from S8 Q13-17.
                  iii. Labor income: S8 Q7.
                  iv. Typical wage: S8 Q10.
                   v. Any wage work in past 3 months (S8 Q9)
                  vi. Sector of employment: S8: Sum of Q4 a&c divided by the whole sum
                       of Q4.

             e. Consumption:
                   i. Impact on household-level consumption aggregate (Real Total comp.
                      monthly consumption in market unit prices in USD per person),
                      constructed as in previous rounds


     2. Married Core Respondent Outcomes: to be analyzed within the sample of married core
        respondents, contextualized by impacts on marriage rates and age at first marriage but no
        attempt at a ‚ÄòHeckman-style‚Äô correction. Secondary analysis will delve more into
        intensive/extensive margin impacts as necessary.
            a. Core Respondent‚Äôs Empowerment married:
                     i. Index of financial decisionmaking: S15 Q1-5, ‚ÄòResp‚Äô=2. ‚ÄòJoint‚Äô=1,
                        other=035
                    ii. Index of marital satisfaction: S15 Q20-29.
                   iii. Index of women‚Äôs divorce prospects: S15 Q39-40, S15 Q48a-d
                   iv. Index of fertility disempowerment: S16 Q6==3 & Q7==(1|2), Q39-40.
                    v. Index of self-determination in marriage: S16 Q20-28
                   vi. Index of frequency of social contact: S16 Q29+30+32
                  vii. Index of spousal abuse: S16 Q41-46, 47, 50, 52
                 viii. Age difference between wife and husband (S12, Q12-Part II CS, Q2c)
                   ix. Female ag decisionmaking power: If the answer to any of the questions
                        S3 Q12, Q16, or Q17 is the ‚ÄúCR‚Äù for any plot, the dummy variable for the
                        entire HH is defined as a ‚Äò1‚Äô and ‚Äò0‚Äô otherwise.
                    x. Female microenterprise participation: S6 Q11 Core Resp controlling any
                        enterprise profits
                   xi. Female livestock control: S3 Q22: Core Resp responsible for any
                        livestock decisionmaking.
                  xii. Ratio of female to male-specific consumption: calculate total spending for
                        CR (per month or per 12 months) on all items asked and divide it by the
                        same variable calculated for the husband from Section 27 (S10 Q3,4,7,8
                        normalized sum) / (S27 Q3,4,7,8 normalized sum).
                Super-index of empowerment: i-viii.
                Super-index of economic control: iv-xii.


35
   Also, as a rule, indices for each individual include the items with no missing values. We do not impute values for
item non-response, or exclude variables or individuals

                                                                                                                   56
       b. Husband Quality.
               i. Husband‚Äôs highest grade completed, highest certificate attained. S25 Q2,4
              ii. Husband‚Äôs wage rate S26 Q5
            iii. Currently employed S26 Q6..
             iv. Husband‚Äôs score on cognitive test
              v. Husband HIV status.
             vi. Husband marital fidelity. Partners ever: S32 Q2, Partners 12 mo. S32
                  Q3. Concurrence: S32 Q15 answer for spouse (column 1)
            vii. Husband‚Äôs mental health (constructed in same manner as CR) and then
                  standardized.
          Super-index of husband quality: i-vii.


       c. Husband Gender Empowerment.
              i. Husband Index of GE: S30 Q1-9
             ii. Husband Index of wife‚Äôs autonomy: S30 Q13-21.
            iii. Husband Index of justification for abuse S30 Q26-28.
            iv. Husband Index of divorce prospects: S31 Q10-11, 15,16
             v. Husband desired fertility. S30 Q49
          Super-index of husband gender empowerment: i-v.

3. Unmarried Core Respondent Outcomes: to be analyzed within the sample of unmarried
   core respondents.

       a. Empowerment unmarried:
              i. Index of autonomy: S17 Q2a-d, Q4, Q6
             ii. Index of abuse: S17 Q14,16,17a-e.
          Super-index of unmarried empowerment: i-ii.


4. Child-Level Outcomes: Can be analyzed two different ways. First, unconditionally
   examining simple comparison between treatment and control. Secondly, conditionally
   including dummies for the age of child and the age of the mother so as to drop out effects
   coming from delayed fertility.
       a. Health Outcomes:
               i. Birthweight: S21 Q20
              ii. Vaccinations: S22 Q5, 7, 8, 10, 11 (index)
             iii. Neonatal/Infant/Child mortality: S18 Q16-21; S21 Q10 (use Round 3
                  data for children who had already passed away by Round 3)
             iv. Bednets: S22 Q 13


       b. Parental Practices:
              i. Breastfeeding (6 months exclusive or to death is died younger than 6
                 months): S21 Q22, Q23, Q25
             ii. Parenting: S23 Q3-16, 21, 24, 27 (index)

                                                                                           57
           c. Anthropometrics:
                  i. Height for age z-score, weight for height z-score, nutritional status
                     (based on weight for height using Malawi standards)
                 ii. Stunting, wasting (binary, less than 2 std z-score)

           d. Educational Testing:
                  i. MDAT scores
                 ii. SDQ scores on behavior towards others. Use the following to score:
                     http://www.sdqinfo.com/c3.html

Detailed Description of Construction of Competencies Index:

Moderator variable for fertilizer application: S11bQ22

Fertilizer (Q23-26):

Quantity index: time taken to complete (Q23), categorize it as 1 ‚Äòbelow median‚Äô (in seconds); 2
‚Äòabove median‚Äô; and 3 ‚Äòdid not complete/did not complete in time‚Äô. Median is calculated among
those who completed under the allocated time.
Quality index: Each Q (24-26) coded as 1 if Yes 0 if No and then added up to create an index
between 0-3 of the quality of the application of fertilizer.
Normalize each by subtracting the control mean and dividing by the control SD.

Making change (Q27-28):

Same as above: (quantity index, Q27) and quality index (Q28).
Use the same procedure for Q29-30, Q31-32. Then, add the quality indices (Q28, 30, and 32).
Add quantity indices (Q27, 29, and 31).
Normalize each by subtracting the control mean and dividing by the control SD.

Sending a text message (Q35-37) ‚Äì moderator variables to be used for adjustment (Q33-34):

Same as above, then normalize each index.

Use the calculator on mobile phone (Q38-39):

Same as above, then normalize each index.

Calculate profits from trade (Q-40-42):

Same as above, then normalize each index.

Finally, average the normalized quantity indices and the quality indices separately to
produce two final competency indices.



                                                                                              58
Appendix B: Detailed description of construction of outcome variables

        This appendix provides additional detail on the full set of outcomes presented in the
tables in the main text, as well as those in this supplementary online appendix. Additional detail
can also be found in the pre-analysis plan described in Appendix A and found at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/36 or in the survey instruments which can be found
at https://sites.google.com/site/decrgberkozler/datasets.
     Our outcomes cover six domains for the core respondent ‚Äì education and competencies,
marriage and fertility, health and sexual behavior, empowerment and aspirations, employment
and wages, and consumption ‚Äì as well as outcomes in these domains for their husbands and
children. We briefly summarize these in the text below, and then provide full detail of each in
Appendix Table B1.
     Education and Competencies. The primary outcomes we examine for education are highest
grade completed (self-reported) and the overall competencies score. Secondary outcomes include
the highest qualification obtained which are separated into the Primary School Leaving
Certificate (PSLC), Junior Certificate of Education (JCE) and the Malawi Secondary Certificate
of Education (MSCE). We also present the components of the competencies index and the total
time taken to complete these tests.
     Marriage and Fertility. Our primary outcomes include self-reported data on whether or not
the core respondent was ever married or ever pregnant. We also examine age at first marriage
and at first birth,36 as well as total live births. Desired fertility is a secondary outcome.
     Health. Our primary health outcomes are HIV and anemia prevalence, both measured using
biological data. Additional secondary outcomes include psychological wellbeing measured with
the General Health Questionnaire 12 (GHQ-12), and the number of meals eaten in the last week
that contained, meat, fish, or eggs.
     Sexual behavior. All outcomes in the sexual behavior domain are secondary and self-
reported. On the extensive margin, our sexual behavior outcomes include whether the core
respondent has ever had sex, her number of lifetime sexual partners, and whether she was
sexually active during the past 12 months. On the intensive margin, we look at the core
respondent‚Äôs age at first sex, whether she had a sexual partner five or more years older, and her
condom use during her most recent sexual intercourse.
     Empowerment and Aspirations. Our primary measures of empowerment include an indicator
of changes in life satisfaction and a super index of overall empowerment. This super-index of
empowerment includes sub-indices (all secondary outcomes) that measure self-esteem,
preferences for children‚Äôs education, an index of social participation, and aspirations. We also
construct super indices of empowerment separately for the married and unmarried sub-samples,
as well as a super index of economic control within marriage for the married sub-sample. These
three indices are also primary outcomes.
     Employment and Wages. In this domain, we examine the proportion of hours spent in self-
employment or paid work, the typical wage rate for work done in the past three months, and the
opportunity cost of time which is constructed by asking the core respondents a series of
hypothetical questions regarding whether they would accept employment at a given wage rate.
Secondary outcomes include whether the core respondent participated in any wage work in the


36
 Our pre-analysis plan suggested we would use a hazard model. We instead simply use OLS to examine age at first
marriage and age at first birth in the intensive margin.

                                                                                                            59
past three months, labor income in the past five seasons, and an effective daily wage rate for
work done in the past seven days. Per capita consumption is reported as a secondary outcome.
     Husbands. Our analysis of husbands focuses on spousal quality and their attitudes towards
women‚Äôs empowerment. The husband quality index, the first primary outcome, includes sub-
components that measure the husband‚Äôs highest grade completed and highest qualification
obtained, his cognitive score on the Raven‚Äôs Colored Progressive Matrices, his employment
status and wage, his HIV status, his marital fidelity (self-reported), and his mental health
measured through the GHQ-12. The index of spousal attitudes towards women‚Äôs empowerment,
also a primary outcome, includes sub-indices for attitudes towards their daughters‚Äô schooling and
marriage, their wives‚Äô autonomy, domestic violence, as well as their divorce prospects and
desired fertility levels. Components of these two indices are presented as secondary outcomes.
     Children. The primary child outcomes fall under four domains: anthropometrics, health,
parental practices and educational testing. For anthropometrics, we construct height-for-age z-
score (HAZ) for living children younger than 60 months old. Our health outcomes include
neonatal and post-neonatal mortality. For parental practices, we construct variables for exclusive
breastfeeding in the past six months and an index of parenting practices. Finally, for educational
testing we report MDAT and SDQ scores for all 36-59 month-olds.37 The self-reported data on
children come from complete birth and death histories collected at Rounds 3 and 4 from the
mother or the primary caregiver.




37
  The pre-analysis plan also indicates that we would report impacts for an indicator for child mortality, but there are
only 22 child deaths in our entire sample during the study period, so we exclude this outcome. We also exclude
weight for height, as the prevalence of wasting (weight-for-height z-score <-2) is negligible in Malawi. Finally, due
to space considerations, we do not show impacts on secondary child outcomes, which include birth weight,
vaccinations, and whether or not the child usually sleeps under a bed-net.

                                                                                                                   60
Appendix Table B1: Detailed description of construction of outcome variables

        Outcome             Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                        Description
                                                                      Highest grade completed is the self-reported
                                                                      highest grade attended/completed by the core
                                       Core                           respondent at the time of the household survey.
Highest Grade Completed       I                     Yes      2,3,4    In rounds 2 and round 3 this is the highest
                                    Respondent
                                                                      grade attended and in round 4 in is highest
                                                                      grade completed.

                                                                      =1 if core respondent passed the Primary
Passed Primary School                  Core                           School Leaving Certificate (PSLC) at the end
                             S1                     No       2,3,4
(PSLC)                              Respondent                        of 8th grade.
                                                                      =1 if core respondent passed the Junior
Passed Junior Secondary                Core
                             S1                     No       2,3,4    Certificate of Education at the end of 10th
School (JCE)                        Respondent
                                                                      grade

Passed Secondary School                Core                           =1 if core respondent passed the Malawi
                             S1                     No       2,3,4
(MSCE)                              Respondent                        School Certificate of Education at the end of
                                                                      12th grade
        Outcome          Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                       Description
                                                                Total score from a professionally developed
                                                                test of mathematics based on the Malawian
TIMMS Math Score                    Core                        school curricula for the grades the target
                           I                   N/A       3
(Standardized)                   Respondent                     population was attending. Five questions (four
                                                                from the Fourth Grade test and one from the
                                                                eighth Grade test) from Trends in Mathematics
                                                                and Science Study (TIMMS) 2007, which is a
Non-TIMMS Math Score                Core                        cycle of internationally comparative
                           I                   N/A       3      assessments in mathematics and science
(Standardized)                   Respondent
                                                                carried out at the fourth and eighth grades
                                                                every 4 years, were added to the Math test.
Cognitive Test Score                Core                        The cognitive test score is based on Raven‚Äôs
                           I                   N/A       3      Colored Progressive Matrices.
(Standardized)                   Respondent
                                                                Competencies represent a set of skills that
                                                                were anticipated to be sensitive to education
Competencies Score                  Core                        and relevant for non-formal employment. The
                           I                    Yes      4
(Standardized)                   Respondent                     overall competencies score is a standardized
                                                                index of the five competencies listed
                                                                immediately below.
Fertilizer Application              Core                        Standardized index of ability to follow
                          S3                    No       4      instructions for applying fertilizer to maize.
(Standardized)                   Respondent
                                                                Standardized index of ability to make change
Change Given                        Core                        following hypothetical scenarios of market
                          S3                    No       4
(Standardized)                   Respondent                     transactions.
                                                                Standardized index of ability to send a text
Sending a Text Message              Core                        message saying "hello" to a specified phone
                          S3                    No       4
(Standardized)                   Respondent                     number.

Using a Calculator                  Core                        Standardized index of ability to use a cell-
                          S3                    No       4
(Standardized)                   Respondent                     phone calculator to calculate 873*17.


                                                                                                                 62
         Outcome        Table   Population Primary? Rounds                   Description
Calculating Profits                Core                    Standardized index of ability to calculate
                         S3                   No      4    profits from hypothetical scenarios.
(Standardized)                  Respondent
Total Time Spent on                                        Standardized index of average time taken
                                   Core
Competencies             S3                   No      4    across the five competencies
                                Respondent
(Standardized)
                                                                =1 if core respondent ever married at the time
                                   Core                         of the household survey. Variable is corrected
Ever Married             II                   Yes       2,3,4
                                Respondent                      for inconsistences across rounds.
                                   Core                         Age of core respondent at first marriage.
Age at First Marriage    II                   Yes        4
                                Respondent
                                                                =1 if core respondent ever pregnant at time of
                                   Core                         the household survey. Variable is corrected for
Ever Pregnant            II                   Yes       2,3,4
                                Respondent                      inconsistences across rounds.
                                   Core                         Number of live births reported by core
Number of Live Births    II                   Yes       2,3,4   respondent at time of the household survey.
                                Respondent
                                   Core                         Age of core respondent at first live birth.
Age of First Birth       II                   Yes        4
                                Respondent
                                                                Reported number of total children desired by
                                   Core
Desired Fertility        II                    No        4      the core respondent (including any they
                                Respondent
                                                                already have).
                                                                =1 if core respondent is HIV positive.
                                   Core                         Biomarker data for HIV were collected
HIV Positive             III                  Yes       2,3,4
                                Respondent                      through home based voluntary counseling and
                                                                testing (HCT).
                                                                =1 if core respondent is anemic (biomarker
                                                                data). An individual is considered anemic if
                                   Core                         her hemoglobin count is less than or equal to
Anemic                   III                  Yes        4      11g/dL if pregnant and less than or equal to
                                Respondent
                                                                12d/dL if non-pregnant based on WHO
                                                                guidelines to define mild anemia.

                                                                                                                  63
        Outcome             Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                     Description
                                                                   =1 if core respondent ever had sex at time of
                                       Core                        household survey. Variable is corrected for
Ever Had Sex                 S4                    No      2,3,4
                                    Respondent                     inconsistences across rounds.
Number of Sexual Partners              Core                        Number of lifetime sexual partners self-
                             S4                    No      2,3,4   reported by core respondent.
(lifetime)                          Respondent
Sexually Active During                 Core                        =1 if core respondent sexually active during 12
                             S4                    No      2,3,4   months prior to household survey
Past 12 Months                      Respondent
                                                                   Core respondents age at first sexual activity,
                                       Core                        reported for the sub-sample that report having
Age at First Sex             S5                    No      2,3,4
                                    Respondent                     ever had sex at time of household survey.
                                                                   =1 if core respondent reports an older partner.
                                                                   A core respondent is defined as having an
                                                                   older partner if she has had a partner who is 5
                                       Core
Older Partner                S5                    No      2,3,4   years older or more in the past 12 months.
                                    Respondent
                                                                   Variable is defined for the sub-sample that
                                                                   report having ever had sex at time of
                                                                   household survey.
                                                                   =1 if core respondent uses a condom. 'Condom
                                                                   Use' is defined as using a condom at last sex
                                       Core                        with most recent sexual partner. Variable is
Condom Use                   S5                    No      2,3,4
                                    Respondent                     defined for the sub-sample that report having
                                                                   ever had sex at time of household survey.


                                                                   =1 if core respondent suffers from
                                                                   psychological distress. Psychological distress
                                       Core                        is equal to one if the summed General Health
Psychological Distress       S6                    No      2,3,4
                                    Respondent                     Questionnaire- 12 score is equal to three or
                                                                   higher, and is zero otherwise.



                                                                                                                     64
        Outcome             Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                      Description
                                                                   Total number of times core respondent ate
Number of Times                                                    protein rich foods during the past 7 days. The
Respondent Ate Protein                 Core                        variable takes on a value of 0-21. Protein rich
                             S6                    No      2,3,4
Rich Foods During the               Respondent                     foods are defined as those containing animal
Past 7 Days                                                        proteins, i.e. meat, fish, and eggs.
                                                                   Opportunity cost of time is calculated by
                                       Core                        taking the minimum daily wage the respondent
Opportunity Cost of Time     IV                    Yes      4
                                    Respondent                     would take for one year of work in her village.
                                                                   Typical wage the core respondent reports
Typical Wage in Past                   Core                        earning in the past three months. It takes on a
                             IV                    Yes      4
Three Months                        Respondent                     value of zero if the core respondent earned
                                                                   nothing.
Proportion of Hours Spent                                          Total number of hours core respondent spent in
                                       Core                        self-employment or paid work during the past
in Self-Employment or        IV                    Yes      4
                                    Respondent                     7 days.
Paid Work in Past Week
                                                                   Effective daily wage in the past 7 days in USD.
Effective Daily Wage                   Core                        The effective daily wage is calculated using
                             S7                    No       4      total reported earnings and total hours worked
(Past 7 Days)                       Respondent
                                                                   in the past seven days.
Labor Income (Past 5                   Core                        Labor income is calculated from total reported
                             S7                    No       4      earnings over the past five seasons.
Seasons)                            Respondent
                                                                   =1 if core respondent reports doing any wage
=1 if Any Wage Work in                 Core                        work in the past three months (including any
                             S7                    No       4
Past 3 Months                       Respondent                     ganyu, or day labor)

                                                                   Real monthly per-capita exchange rate
Real Monthly Per Capita
                                       Core                        comparable trimmed consumption aggregate
Household Consumption        S7                    No      2,3,4
                                    Respondent                     using market unit prices.
(USD)


                                                                                                                     65
        Outcome            Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                      Description
                                                                  Standardized super index of overall
                                                                  empowerment for the core respondent.
Super-Index of Overall                                            Includes the following four sub-components
                                      Core
Empowerment                 IV                    Yes      4      that are described below: index of self-
                                   Respondent
(Standardized)                                                    efficacy, index of preferences for child
                                                                  education, index of social participation, and
                                                                  index of aspirations.
Index of Self-Esteem                  Core                        Standardized index of self-esteem using the
                            S8                    No       4      Rosenberg (1965) scale.
(Standardized)                     Respondent
                                                                  Standardized index of preferences for child
Index of Preferences for                                          education. Includes nine questions regarding
                                      Core
Child Education             S8                    No       4      attitudes towards the importance of schooling
                                   Respondent
(Standardized)                                                    for girls.
                                                                  Standardized index of social participation.
                                                                  Includes three questions on social
                                                                  participation: number of meetings attended in
Index of Social
                                      Core                        past year; number of times voted in past 5
Participation               S8                    No       4
                                   Respondent                     years; and number of times in the past month
(Standardized)
                                                                  core respondent has got together with
                                                                  friends for either food or drink.




                                                                  The change in subjective wellbeing asks the
                                      Core                        respondent where she sees herself on a 10-step
Aspirations                 S8                    No       4
                                   Respondent                     ladder comparing today to five years from
                                                                  now, where zero represents the worst possible
                                                                  life she could have and 10 represents the best
                                                                  possible life she could have.



                                                                                                                   66
        Outcome            Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                      Description
                                                                   The change in subjective wellbeing asks the
                                                                  respondent where she sees herself on a 10-step
Change in Subjective                                              ladder comparing five years ago to today,
                                      Core
Wellbeing from Five         IV                    Yes      4      where zero represents the worst possible life
                                   Respondent
Years Ago to Today                                                she could have and 10 represents the best
                                                                  possible life she could have.




                                                                  Standardized super index of unmarried
Super-Index of Unmarried                                          empowerment, measured for core respondents
                                      Core
Empowerment                 IV                    Yes      4      who are not married at the time of the
                                   Respondent
(Standardized)                                                    household survey. Includes two components
                                                                  described below: index of non-abuse and index
                                                                  of autonomy.



                                                                  Standardized index of unmarried non-abuse,
                                                                  measured for core respondents who are not
                                                                  married at the time of the household survey.
                                                                  Includes question on whether the core
                                      Core                        respondent has been beaten or mistreated
Index of Unmarried non-                           No       4
                             -     Respondent                     physically, whether the core respondent has
Abuse (Standardized)
                                                                  been forced to have sex against her will, and a
                                                                  series of five questions on threats or physical
                                                                  violence. The variable is constructed so that
                                                                  higher values are an indication of not
                                                                  experiencing physical abuse.



                                                                                                                    67
         Outcome              Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                     Description
                                                                     Standardized index of autonomy, measured for
                                                                     core respondents who are not married at the
                                                                     time of the household survey. Includes
                                                                     questions on whether the core respondent
Index of Unmarried                       Core
                                -                    No       4      needs permission to do certain activities,
Autonomy (Standardized)               Respondent
                                                                     whether the core respondent can travel alone,
                                                                     and whether the core respondent is allowed to
                                                                     have money set aside for her own use.

                                                                     Standardized super index of married
                                                                     empowerment, measured for core respondents
                                                                     who are married at the time of the household
                                                                     survey. It includes 8 components described
                                                                     below: index of decision-making; index of
Super-Index of Married                                               marital satisfaction; index of women's divorce
                                         Core                        prospects; index of fertility empowerment;
Empowerment                    IV                    Yes      4
                                      Respondent                     index of self-determination in marriage; index
(Standardized)
                                                                     of frequency of social contact; index of spousal
                                                                     abuse; and age difference between husband
                                                                     and wife. All variables are constructed so that
                                                                     higher values are an indicator of increased
                                                                     empowerment.
                                                                     Standardized index on a series of questions on
Index of Decision-Making                 Core                        who makes decisions in the household related
                                -                    No       4
(Standardized)                        Respondent                     to food, clothing and children.




                                                                     Standardized index on a series of questions
Index of Marital                         Core
                                -                    No       4      related to how satisfied the core respondent is
Satisfaction (Standardized)           Respondent
                                                                     with her marriage.

                                                                                                                        68
         Outcome            Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                    Description
Index of Women‚Äôs                                                   Standardized index of ability of core
                                       Core                        respondent to divorce her husband and
Divorce Prospects             -                    No       4
                                    Respondent                     maintain household property.
(Standardized)
Index of Fertility                                                 Standardized index of differences in core
                                       Core                        respondent and her husband ideal degree of
Empowerment                   -                    No       4
                                    Respondent                     family planning.
(Standardized)
Index of Self-                                                     Standardized index of core respondents need
                                       Core                        for permission from her husband to undertake
Determination in Marriage     -                    No       4
                                    Respondent                     certain activities.
(Standardized)
                                                                   Standardized index of core respondents‚Äô
Index of Frequency of
                                       Core                        frequency of travelling outside the community
Social Contact                -                    No       4
                                    Respondent                     and sending and receiving phone calls and text
(Standardized)
                                                                   messages.
                                                                   Standardized index of a series of questions
                                                                   both asking about when it is acceptable for the
Index of Spousal Abuse                 Core
                              -                    No       4      husband to beat his wife, as well as whether
(Standardized)                      Respondent
                                                                   the husband is violent towards the core
                                                                   respondent.
Age Difference Between                 Core                        Age difference between core respondent and
                              -                    No       4      her husband.
Wife and Husband                    Respondent
                                                                   Standardized super index of married economic
                                                                   control, measured for core respondents who
                                                                   are married at the time of the household
Married Index of
                                       Core                        survey. It includes 4 components described
Economic Control             VI                    Yes      4
                                    Respondent                     immediately below: agricultural decision-
(Standardized)
                                                                   making power, microenterprise participation,
                                                                   livestock control, and ratio of wife to husband
                                                                   consumption.
                                                                   =1 if the core respondent is involved in
Agricultural Decision-                 Core                        decision-making around any of the household
                              -                    No       4
making Power                        Respondent                     plots.

                                                                                                                     69
         Outcome           Table   Population Primary? Rounds                    Description
Microenterprise                       Core                    =1 if the core respondent controls the use of
                             -                   No      4    profits from any household microenterprise.
Participation                      Respondent
                                                              =1 if the core respondent is involved in
                                      Core
Livestock Control            -                   No      4    decision-making around any of the household's
                                   Respondent
                                                              livestock.
Ratio of Wife to Husband                                      Standardized index of the ratio of wife's to
                                      Core                    husband's consumption focusing on gender
Consumption                  -                   No      4
                                   Respondent                 specific goods.
(Standardized)
                                                                  Standardized quality super index for husbands
                                                                  of core respondents. Includes nine
                                                                  components listed below: highest grade
Husband Quality Super                                             completed, passed PSLC, passed JCE, passed
                            V       Husband      Yes        4
Index (Standardized)                                              MSCE, cognitive test score, typical wage in
                                                                  the past three months, employment status,
                                                                  sexual activity and marital fidelity, and
                                                                  physiological distress.
                                                                  Highest grade completed is the self-reported
Highest Grade Completed     V       Husband      No         4     highest completed by the husband at the time
                                                                  of the household survey.
                                                                  =1 if husband passed the Primary School
=1 if Passed Primary
                            V       Husband      No         4     Leaving Certificate (PSLC) at the end of 8th
School (PSLC)
                                                                  grade.
=1 if Passed Junior                                               =1 if husband passed the Junior Certificate of
                            V       Husband      No         4     Education at the end of 10th grade
Secondary School (JCE)
                                                                  =1 if husband passed the Malawi School
=1 if Passed Secondary
                            V       Husband      No         4     Certificate of Education at the end of 12th
School (MSCE)
                                                                  grade

Cognitive Test Score                                              The cognitive test score is based on Raven‚Äôs
                            V       Husband      No         4
(Standardized)                                                    Colored Progressive Matrices.


                                                                                                                   70
        Outcome            Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                     Description
                                                                  Typical wage the husband reports earning in
Typical Wage in Past                                              the past three months. It takes on a value of
                            V      Husband        No       4
Three Months                                                      zero if the husband earned nothing.
=1 if Currently Employed    V      Husband        No       4      =1 if husband currently employed.
                                                                  The husband's sexual activity and marital
                                                                  fidelity standardized index is constructed from
Sexual Activity and                                               three variables: number of sexual partners
Marital Fidelity            V      Husband        No       4      ever, number of sexual partners in the past 12
(Standardized)                                                    months and an indicator for concurrent
                                                                  multiple partners. Constructed so that higher
                                                                  values are better.
                                                                  =1 if husband does not suffer from
=1 if Does Not Suffer                                             psychological distress. Psychological distress
from Psychological          V      Husband        No       4      is equal to one if the summed General Health
Distress                                                          Questionnaire- 12 score is equal to three or
                                                                  higher, and is zero otherwise.
                                                                  =1 if husband is HIV positive. Biomarker data
=1 if HIV Positive          V      Husband        No       4      for HIV was collected through home based
                                                                  voluntary counselling and testing (HCT).


                                                                  Standardized super index of five indicators
Attitudes Towards
                                                                  listed below: preferences for children's
Women's Empowerment
                            S9     Husband        Yes      4      education, attitudes towards wife's autonomy,
Super Index
                                                                  attitudes towards abuse, divorce prospects, and
(Standardized)
                                                                  desired fertility.




                                                                                                                    71
         Outcome           Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                     Description
                                                                  Standardized index of preferences for child
                                                                  education. Includes nine questions regarding
Index of Preferences for                                          attitudes towards the importance of schooling
Children's Education               Husband                        for girls.
(Standardized)
                            S9                    No       4
                                                                  Standardized index of the husband's attitude
                                                                  towards his wife's autonomy. Series of
Index of Attitudes                                                questions asking whether the wife needs
Towards Wife's Autonomy     S9     Husband        No       4      permission to engage in day to day activities.
(Standardized)                                                    This variable takes on a higher value if the
                                                                  wife does not need permission.

                                                                  Standardized index of husband's attitudes
                                                                  towards beating his wife. This variable uses a
Index of Attitudes
                                                                  series of three questions asking when wife
Towards (non)-Abuse         S9     Husband        No       4
                                                                  beating is justified. This variable takes on a
(Standardized)
                                                                  higher value if the husband does not think
                                                                  beating is justified.

                                                                  Standardized index of wife's divorce prospects.
                                                                  This looks at a series of variables related to a
Index of Wife's Divorce                                           man's ability to leave the marriage and keep
                            S9     Husband        No       4
Prospects (Standardized)                                          things from the household. This variable takes
                                                                  on a higher value the less ability a man has to
                                                                  divorce his wife.


                                                                  Husband's desired fertility. Note that this
Desired Fertility           S9     Husband        No       4      variable is standardized and made negative
                                                                  when added to the super index.



                                                                                                                     72
        Outcome             Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                      Description
                                                                   The height-for-age (length-for-age) z-score is
                                                                   calculated using the 2006 WHO child growth
                                                                   standards. See the following for more details:
                            VI-                                    Leroy, Jef L (2011). zscore06: Stata command
Height-for-Age Z-Score                Child        Yes      4
                            VIII                                   for the calculation of anthropometric z-scores
                                                                   using the 2006 WHO child growth standards.
                                                                   http://www.ifpri.org/staffprofile/jef-leroy.

Neonatal Mortality           VI       Child        Yes     3,4     =1 if child died at or before 31 days.
                                                                   =1 if child died between the ages of one month
Post-Neonatal Mortality      VI       Child        Yes     3,4     and one year. Defined for those that survived
                                                                   the first month of life.
                                                                   Percentage score across a series of 16
                                                                   questions on parenting practices related to
Parenting Practices                                                addressing behavior problems to interacting
                             VI       Child        Yes      4      with the child (the total number of questions
Percentage Score
                                                                   asked various by the age of the child). These
                                                                   questions are only asked of living children.

                                                                   =1 if mother exclusively breastfed for the first
Exclusively Breastfed for                                          6 months of life, is still exclusively
                             VI       Child        Yes     3,4     breastfeeding for those under 6 months, or who
First Six Months
                                                                   breastfed until death.
                                                                   The standardized Malawi Developmental
Standardized Malawi                                                Assessment Tool (MDAT) is a test of fine
Development Assessment       VI       Child        Yes      4      motor skills, language, and hearing
Tool                                                               administered directly to the child.


                                                                                                                      73
        Outcome       Table   Population   Primary? Rounds                     Description
                                                             The standardized reported child difficulties and
                                                             reported pro-social behaviors are created using
Reported Child
                       VI       Child        Yes      4      the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
Difficulties
                                                             (SDQ) and administered to the parent. Details
                                                             on construction of these variables can be found
Reported Pro-Social                                          at http://www.sdqinfo.com/c3.html.
                       VI       Child        Yes      4
Behaviors




                                                                                                                74
Appendix C: Estimation of Treatment Effects on Children

        This appendix provides an overview of the empirical issues involved in estimating
treatment effects on child outcomes when the intervention under investigation targets prospective
mothers and starts prior to their pregnancies. As the intervention may have altered the
composition of children subsequently observed, we suggest a simple sequence of assumptions
and steps in an attempt to move from the total reduced-form effect of the intervention to a more
standard causal effect on the children actually born.
        The natural experimental literature has recognized that maternal selection and differential
mortality represent plausible causal pathways when analyzing child outcomes. Using data from
the US, Buckles and Hungerman (2013) show that nearly half of the well-documented effects of
season of birth on later-life outcomes can be explained by variation in the types of women giving
birth across seasons. Aaronson, Lange and Mazumder (2014) show extensive margin selection
also contributes to the quantity-quality tradeoff for children. This phenomenon is well
documented in the developed world, and yet Currie and Vogl (2012) suggest that these extensive
margin effects are likely to be more pronounced in the developing world where differential
mortality, as well as differential fertility, is an operative channel. It has now become standard in
the natural experiments literature to test for the presence of selection effects when studying child
outcomes (see, for example, Almond 2006; Black et al. 2014; Adhvaryu et al. 2016). In many
cases in this literature, the obvious selection effect suggests that the simple casual effects are
lower bounds, but we present a context in which selection and treatment effects go in the same
direction. It is therefore critical to attempt to control for the selection mechanism as a mediator,
in order to isolate how much of the observed effect may have a simple causal interpretation.
        To use counterfactual outcomes to represent impacts on subsequent children, we must
define the universe as being the potential children: all those who might exist under either the
treated or control state.38 Outcome measured for potential child i at time t is Yit . This outcome is
only observed if the child is born and survives, a binary outcome denoted by Sit ÔÄΩ 1 . The
probability that woman i has a surviving child at time t, as a function of her baseline
characteristics, can be written as Sit ÔÄΩ S ( X i ) , where X i is a set of pre-treatment maternal
characteristics. For children who are born, we observe
       Yit ÔÄΩ Yit ( xit , ait ; X i , Ait , Zit | Sit ÔÄΩ 1)
where Ait is the age of the mother at the time at which child data is collected, xit are child-level
determinants of the outcome, ait is child age, and Z it gives attributes of the father.
        Critically, in a study tracking potential mothers, X i is observed for all respondents
(regardless of whether or not they had children) and hence can be used to predict fertility within
the universe of these potential mothers. Controlling for selection into motherhood thus resembles
standard attrition adjustment, and requires a (weaker) selection on observables assumption.
Controlling for factors that are observed only among extant children, however, must be done on
the intensive margin, and so resembles mediation analysis as in Baron and Kenny (1986), which

38
   This study tracks female respondents and their descendants, so it is concerned with the potential children of a
fixed set of women. We do not attempt to capture all potential children born to the fathers in this study, and to do so
would have needed to specify a group of males at baseline and tracked them. The control for father characteristics in
this context therefore sits behind a layer of female selection, and so the assumptions needed to control for father type
are stronger than those needed to control for mother type.
requires substantially stronger assumptions. Specifically, we must now assume that there is a
globally correct functional form across both treatment and control, so that inclusion of the
mechanism controls does not open a ‚Äòbackdoor path‚Äô between the mediator and some other,
unobserved determinant of outcomes (for more discussion of these assumptions, see Sobel 2008;
Flores and Flores-Lagunes 2009; Bullock, Green and Ha 2010; Imai, Tingley and Yamamoto
2013; Huber 2014; and Heckman and Pinto 2015).
       Given these strong assumptions, we now walk through a set of distinct treatment effects
that we may wish to estimate, each of which has a different causal interpretation. We start with
the simple reduced-form impact of the treatment on child outcomes and proceed to add
successively stronger controls until we have isolated the ceteris paribus treatment effect that
would have been observed had an experiment been conducted on the sample of children actually
observed, rather than their mothers. Appendix Figure C1 presents a conceptual framework.

Total effect:

        (1)      E ÔÄ®Yit1 ÔÄ≠ Yit 0 | Sit ÔÄΩ 1ÔÄ© .

This is the simple difference in outcomes between the children of those exposed to the treatment
versus the control.

Correcting for Maternal Type Selection:

        We can begin to control for the extensive margin effects of the treatment by modeling the
probability that a child is born to a mother i during epoch t as: Pr(Sit ÔÄΩ 1) ÔÄΩ ÔÅÜ( X i , Ti ) ÔÄ´ ÔÅ• it . This
problem is exactly analogous to attrition, and so we can exploit the familiar toolkit to test and
correct for it (Hanson 1978, Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983). Observational correction can be
conducted using a probit model that regresses a binary indicator for giving birth during an epoch
on a rich set of baseline covariates, a treatment indicator, and the interaction between treatment
and the covariates. We can use this regression to predict the probability of birth for all core
respondents by epoch, and weight the subsequent analysis by the inverse of this probability. This
is the application of standard attrition-based inverse probability weighting to the fertility
problem. The required assumption is that there be no unobserved determinants of fertility that are
correlated with the treatment or the treatment*covariate interactions. Regressions weighted by
  1
    ÀÜ S ÔÄΩ 1) , subject to this assumption, are now representative of the entire original sample of
    Pr( it
core respondents and hence not subject to selection effects arising from the decision to give birth
or not. We can also use OLS to control for the same set of maternal baseline characteristics X i
to provide estimates that are ‚Äúdoubly robust‚Äù to the extensive margin selection controls (Robins
and Rotnitzky 2001; Van der Laan and Robins 2003; Bang and Robins 2005). This then provides
an estimate of the impact on children if the composition of women who gave birth was identical
in treatment and control in each epoch:
        (2)      E ÔÄ®Yit1 ÔÄ≠ Yit 0 | X ÔÄΩ X , Pr(S ÔÄΩ 1| T ) ÔÄΩ S ÔÄ©




                                                                                                        76
Correcting for Paternal Type Selection:

        The next selection margin is father type. In our data structure we do not observe the
attributes of the universe of potential fathers, and rather have data on the fathers of children
actually born. We therefore must control for paternal characteristics on the intensive margin
rather than using the selection IPW approach that we use for mothers. The assumptions
underlying these paternal controls are therefore the strong assumptions of mediation analysis,
rather than those of attrition propensity weighting. Subject to these assumptions, the inclusion of
paternal covariates gives us the expected treatment-control difference holding both maternal and
paternal types constant across the treatment and control groups.
        (3)      E ÔÄ®Yit1 ÔÄ≠ Yit 0 | X ÔÄΩ X , Z (T ) ÔÄΩ Z , Pr(S ÔÄΩ 1| T ) ÔÄΩ S ÔÄ©

Correcting for Child Age:

        Differences in the composition of child age across treatment and control can lead to large
differences that are, in fact, completely trivial. If, for example, the treatment led to a delay in
births, then the treatment children will be younger on average and hence may perform more
poorly on a broad range of tasks than the control children.39 We can recover a meaningful
treatment effect by comparing children in treatment and control at the same age. We achieve this
by including linear, quadratic, and cubic controls for child age in months in our regressions:
         (4)    E ÔÄ®Yit1 ÔÄ≠ Yit 0 | a(T ) ÔÄΩ a , X ÔÄΩ X , Z (T ) ÔÄΩ Z , Pr(S ÔÄΩ 1| T ) ÔÄΩ S ÔÄ©

Direct Treatment Effect:

     Maternal age represents a potentially important mechanism for improvements in child
outcomes for the same set of mothers, even though it represents an extensive margin effect in
that changes in maternal age must necessarily lead to a different set of children being born. It is
possible, for example, that an intervention that, all else equal, simply delayed fertility from age
13 to age 18 would lead to improved child outcomes due to increased gynecological maturity.
Effects driven only by changes in age therefore have a meaningful causal interpretation that can
be seen as ceteris paribus for mothers even though it operates on the extensive margin for
children. To control for age as a mediating variable, we can include age and A * X interactions
as covariates.
        Subject to strong assumptions of (i) selection on observables in the fertility equation, and
(ii) correct functional form and common support in the Barron-Kenny controls for the
mechanisms, the resulting adjusted difference provides the ‚Äòdirect‚Äô treatment effect of the
program on a sample of children made homogeneous across treatment and control by
reweighting and regression adjustments. The result is a suggestive answer to an obvious policy
question: ‚ÄúDoes the intervention confer a protective effect on a given child?‚Äù

39
  Conversely, as shown in Appendix Figure C2, the mean height-for-age z-score in our control group starts out very
close to the mean of the reference group at birth, but declines steadily and rapidly as children get older, ending up
almost two standard deviations below the global distribution by the time they are 36 months old. This seems to be a
common pattern in poor countries (see, for example, Figure 1 in Barham, Macours and Maluccio 2013). Hence,
comparing a younger cohort of children in the treatment group to an older cohort in control would spuriously show
lower stunting in the treatment group in the absence of any meaningful effects on height.

                                                                                                                 77
                             (5)               E ÔÄ®Yit1 ÔÄ≠ Yit 0 | a(T ) ÔÄΩ a , Z (T ) ÔÄΩ Z , X ÔÄΩ X , A(T ) ÔÄΩ A, Pr(S ÔÄΩ 1| T ) ÔÄΩ S ÔÄ©

                             Figure C1: Conceptual Framework for Causal Pathways to Child Treatment Effects
                            Ti :          Treatment


                                          Mother:
                                                                                                         Maternal Selection effects that alter the
                 Sit ( X , T ) ÔÄΩ 1 Birth Outcome: Is a child born in this interval?
                                                                                                          identity of the woman who gives birth




                       C
                     Ait (T ) : Birth Timing: Child Age                             Father                 Child Selection effects that alter the
                        M                                                                                    identity of the child who is born
                      A (T ) : Birth Timing: Maternal Age
                       it
                                                                        Z i (T ) : Father Selection



                                                                Child
                                                                                                           Direct Treatment effect on the child
                                                          D1. Direct impacts
                                                                                                                      actually born




                                            Figure C2. Height-for-age z-score by age in months (control group)
                                          .5
                                            0
Height for Age




                                      -.5 -1
                                   -1.5
                                          -2




                                                     3   6   9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60
                                                                             Age in Months

                                                                                 Males                Females


                 References (for the Appendix)

                                                                                                                                                    78
Aaronson, Daniel, Fabian Lange, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2014. Fertility transitions along the
extensive and intensive margins. Am Econ Rev 104 (11): 3701-3724.
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Prashant Bharadwaj, James Fenske, Anant Nyshadham, and Richard
Stanley. 2016. Dust and Death: Evidence from the West African Harmattan. CSAE Working
Paper WPS/2016-03. Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of Oxford.
Almond, D. 2006. Is the 1918 influenza pandemic over? Long-term effects of In Utero Influenza
Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population. Journal of Political Economy 114 (4): 672-712.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk √ñzler. 2011. Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash
Transfer Experiment. Q J Econ 126 (4): 1709-1753.
Baird, Sarah J, Richard S Garfein, Craig T McIntosh, and Berk √ñzler. 2012. Effect of a cash
transfer programme for schooling on prevalence of HIV and herpes simplex type 2 in Malawi: a
cluster randomised trial. The Lancet 379 (9823): 1320-1329.
Baird, Sarah, Jacobus De Hoop, and Berk √ñzler. 2013. Income shocks and adolescent mental
health. Journal of Human Resources 48 (2): 370-403.
Bang, Heejung and James M Robins. 2005. Doubly robust estimation in missing data and causal
inference models. Biometrics 61 (4): 962-973.
Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A Maluccio. 2013. Boys' Cognitive Skill Formation
and Physical Growth: Long-Term Experimental Evidence on Critical Ages for Early Childhood
Interventions. Am Econ Rev 103 (3): 467-471.
Baron, Reuben M and David A Kenny. 1986. The moderator--mediator variable distinction in
social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 51 (6): 1173.
Black, Sandra E, Aline B√ºtikofer, P Devereux, and K Salvanes. 2014. This Is Only a Test? Long-
Run and Intergenerational Impacts of Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout. Unpublished
manuscript.
Buckles, Kasey S and Daniel M Hungerman. 2013. Season of birth and later outcomes: Old
questions, new answers. Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (3): 711-724.
Bullock, John G, Donald P Green, and Shang E Ha. 2010. Yes, but whats the mechanism?(dont
expect an easy answer). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 98 (4): 550.
Currie, Janet and Tom Vogl. 2012. Early-life health and adult circumstance in developing
countries. NBER Working Paper 18371. National Bureau of Economic Research. National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Flores, Carlos A. and Alfonso Flores-Lagunes. 2009. Identification and Estimation of Causal
Mechanisms and Net Effects of a Treatment under Unconfoundedness. IZA Discussion Paper
No. 4237.
Hanson, Robert Harold. 1978. The current population survey: design and methodology



                                                                                                   79
Heckman, James J and Rodrigo Pinto. 2015. Econometric mediation analyses: Identifying the
sources of treatment effects from experimentally estimated production technologies with
unmeasured and mismeasured inputs. Econometric Reviews 34 (1-2): 6-31.
Huber, Martin. 2014. Identifying causal mechanisms (primarily) based on inverse probability
weighting. Journal of Applied Econometrics 29 (6): 920-943.
Imai, Kosuke, Dustin Tingley, and Teppei Yamamoto. 2013. Experimental designs for
identifying causal mechanisms. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in
Society) 176 (1): 5-51.
Robins, James M and Andrea Rotnitzky. 2001. COMMENTS. Statistica Sinica 920-936.
Rosenbaum, Paul R and Donald B Rubin. 1983. The central role of the propensity score in
observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika 70 (1): 41-55.
Sobel, Michael E. 2008. Identification of causal parameters in randomized studies with
mediating variables. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 33 (2): 230-251.
Van der Laan, Mark J and James M Robins. 2003. Unified methods for censored longitudinal
data and causality. Springer Science & Business Media.




                                                                                                   80
                                       Table S1: Baseline means and balance
                                          Baseline Dropout                                Baseline Schoolgirl
                                             Mean (s.d.)                                 Mean (s.d.)                      p-value
                                                    Conditional            Control    Conditional Unconditional           (CCT-
                                   Control group
                                                       group                group       group         Group                UCT)
                                        (1)              (2)                 (3)          (4)            (5)                (6)
Urban Household                        0.181           0.129                0.346        0.478         0.418               0.726
                                     (0.385)          (0.335)              (0.476)     (0.500)       (0.494)
Mother Alive                           0.783           0.749                0.839        0.800         0.828               0.431
                                     (0.413)          (0.434)              (0.368)     (0.401)       (0.378)
Father Alive                           0.656           0.649                0.709        0.718          0.76               0.341
                                     (0.476)          (0.478)              (0.454)     (0.451)       (0.428)
Household Size                         6.120           6.104                6.375        6.341         6.659               0.156
                                     (2.388)          (2.617)              (2.262)     (2.134)       (2.063)
Asset Index                           -0.831           -0.743               0.632        1.100        1.373*               0.572
                                     (2.233)          (2.484)              (2.575)     (2.721)       (2.444)
Age                                   17.579          17.162               15.228       14.919        15.466               0.002
                                     (2.397)          (2.478)              (1.904)     (1.828)       (1.926)
Highest Grade Attended                 6.105           5.940                7.506        7.262       7.928**               0.004
                                     (2.856)          (2.864)              (1.651)     (1.601)       (1.587)
Never Had Sex                          0.315           0.294                0.800        0.807         0.790               0.682
                                     (0.465)          (0.456)              (0.400)     (0.395)       (0.408)
Ever Pregnant                          0.445           0.420                0.021        0.029         0.029               0.964
                                     (0.498)          (0.494)              (0.144)     (0.169)       (0.168)
Chi-squared joint test of
                                                           0.168                         0.122            0.121           0.032
orthogonality (p-value)
Notes: Mean differences statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence. Stars on the
coefficients in columns (2) indicate significantly different than the control group for baseline dropouts.Stars on the coefficients
in column (4) and (5) indicate significantly different than the control group for baseline schoolgirls. Means are weighted to make
them representative of the target population in the study EAs.




                                                                                                                                  81
                                                 Table S2: Attrition
                                              Baseline Dropout                         Baseline Schoolgirl
                                                    =1 if Completed Household Survey Round 4
                                            (1)                (2)             (3)                         (4)
=1 if Conditional                         -0.007               -0.008              0.055***             0.056***
                                          (0.031)              (0.029)              (0.019)              (0.018)
=1 if Unconditional                                                                0.058***             0.061***
                                                                                    (0.023)              (0.021)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                         -                    -                   0.896                0.825
p-value Treatment                         0.828                0.774                 0.004                0.002
Baseline controls interacted
                                           NO                   YES                   NO                  YES
with treatment?
p-value on joint F-test for
                                             -                 0.009                   -                  0.332
interactions CCT
p-value on joint F-test for
                                             -                    -                    -                  0.101
interactions UCT
p-value UCT interactions vs.
                                             -                    -                    -                  0.690
CCT interactions
Mean in Control Group                     0.843                0.843                 0.875                0.875
Number of observations                     885                  885                  2,273                2,273
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are
weighted to make them representative of the target population in the study EAs. All regressions include baseline
centered values of the following variables: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade
attended, an indicator for never had sex. Columns (2) and (4) interact the centered baseline controls with treatment.
Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.




                                                                                                                        82
                                     Table S3: Program impacts on educational qualifications and competencies (beneficiaries)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                                                    Educational Qualifications                                                                  Competencies (Standardized)
                                                                                                                                                                                  Sending a                                    Total
                                             =1 if Passed Primary School         =1 if Passed Junior Secondary        =1 if Passed Secondary School          Fertilizer    Change              Using a Calculating
                                                                                                                                                                                    Text                                       Time
                                                       (PSLC)                             School (JCE)                           (MSCE)                     Application     Given             Calculator    Profits
                                                                                                                                                                                   Message                                     Spent
                                                              Two Years                 Two Years                                            Two Years
                                           During End of                 During  End of            During                         End of
                                                                After                     After                                                After                               Two Years After Program
                                          Program Program               Program Program           Program                        Program
                                                               Program                   Program                                              Program
                                             (1)         (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)                             (8)         (9)             (10)         (11)        (12)        (13)          (14)         (15)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                0.030     0.058** 0.081***   0.012  0.049**   0.034    0.004                           0.003       0.016          -0.044        -0.014      0.101       0.065         0.094        -0.007
                                           (0.025)    (0.025)  (0.026)  (0.019) (0.021)  (0.022)  (0.008)                         (0.010)     (0.011)         (0.069)      (0.062)     (0.072)     (0.071)       (0.076)      (0.091)
Mean in Control Group                       0.328      0.351    0.366    0.085   0.123    0.136    0.008                           0.025       0.026          0.000         0.000      0.000       0.000         0.000         0.000
Sample Size                                  697        718      744      697     718      744      697                             718         744             742          741         741         741           742          742
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                0.030      0.013       -0.014        -0.013     0.055*        0.033       -0.004*      0.005        0.006          0.015        0.048      0.077        0.060        -0.006        -0.113
                                           (0.039)    (0.024)      (0.019)       (0.022)    (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.002)     (0.011)      (0.021)        (0.071)      (0.071)    (0.070)      (0.054)       (0.076)      (0.085)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl              0.046      0.030        0.017         0.002      0.016        0.010       -0.006*     -0.009      -0.065**         0.096        -0.017    0.161**       0.098        -0.045        -0.118
                                           (0.038)    (0.026)      (0.016)       (0.022)    (0.045)      (0.035)      (0.003)     (0.015)      (0.027)        (0.092)      (0.057)    (0.079)      (0.064)       (0.090)      (0.085)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                         0.755      0.600        0.166         0.546      0.439        0.565        0.325       0.385        0.022          0.378        0.389      0.364        0.584         0.636        0.963
p-value Treatment                           0.386      0.488        0.359         0.797      0.148        0.486        0.150       0.683        0.045          0.570        0.685      0.105        0.249         0.862        0.258
Mean in Control Group                       0.496     0.776        0.879         0.144       0.337        0.537        0.004      0.054         0.170         0.000         0.000      0.000       0.000         0.000         0.000
Sample Size                                 1,967      2,019        2,047         1,967      2,019        2,047        1,967       2,019        2,047          2,048        2,046      2,047        2,047         2,048        2,048
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them representative of the target population in the study EAs. Baseline values of the following
variables are included as controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to respondents who were
surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Competencies represent a set of skills that were anticipated to be sensitive to education and relevant for non-formal employment. The
skills tested included reading and following instructions to apply fertilizer; making correct change during hypothetical market transactions; sending text messages and using the calculator on a mobile phone, and calculating profits
under hypothetical business scenarios. All competency components are standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one in the control group. Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***),
95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
                               Table S4: Program impacts on sexual behavior (beneficiaries: extensive margin)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                                                      Number of Sexual Partners           =1 if Sexually Active During the
                                                    =1 if Ever Had Sex
                                                                                             (lifetime)                           Past 12 Months

                                                                   Two Years                              Two Years                               Two Years
                                            During      End of                     During  End of                          During      End of
                                                                     After                                  After                                   After
                                           Program     Program                    Program Program                         Program     Program
                                                                    Program                                Program                                 Program

                                              (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                -0.036*     -0.034       -0.004         0.004      -0.118       -0.023       -0.123*** -0.094**         -0.046
                                            (0.020)     (0.021)      (0.010)       (0.153)     (0.153)      (0.095)        (0.035)  (0.037)         (0.028)
Mean in Control Group                        0.814       0.918        0.976         1.395       1.734        2.063          0.503    0.674           0.830
Sample Size                                   698         718          744           698         718          744            697      718             744
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                 -0.009     -0.003        0.005        -0.023       0.005        0.005         -0.009       0.001       -0.030
                                            (0.017)     (0.024)      (0.035)       (0.040)     (0.048)      (0.061)       (0.023)      (0.029)      (0.035)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl               -0.022      0.003        0.041        -0.044      -0.007        0.108         -0.021      -0.036        0.037
                                            (0.021)     (0.030)      (0.036)       (0.049)     (0.036)      (0.066)       (0.030)      (0.032)      (0.044)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                          0.581       0.864        0.414         0.699       0.815        0.142         0.728        0.327        0.177
p-value Treatment                            0.551       0.984        0.519         0.627       0.969        0.218         0.768        0.514        0.395
Mean in Control Group                        0.303      0.455        0.701          0.335      0.559        1.045          0.175       0.308        0.563
Sample Size                                  1,965       2,016        2,048         1,964       2,016        2,047         1,965        2,015        2,048
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them representative of the
target population in the study EAs. We correct for inconsistencies in 'ever had sex' across rounds. Baseline values of the following variables are included as
controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We
restrict the sample to respondents who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter
estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
                          Table S5: Program impacts on sexual behavior (beneficiaries: intensive margin)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts

                                                       Age at First Sex                        =1 if Older Partner              =1 if Use a Condom

                                                                     Two Years                                                             Two Years
                                              During      End of                      During  End of  Two Years     End of
                                                                        After                                                                After
                                             Program     Program                     Program Program After Program Program
                                                                      Program                                                               Program
                                                (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                  -0.064      -0.061       0.110          0.018       -0.005          0.015         0.046        0.030
                                             (0.137)      (0.144)     (0.133)        (0.054)      (0.045)        (0.037)       (0.037)      (0.030)
Mean in Control Group                        16.250       16.578       16.790         0.230        0.300          0.309         0.159        0.156
Sample Size                                    525          625         723            303          427            578           446          600
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                  0.220        0.136        0.147         -0.074      -0.006         -0.041        -0.006         0.015
                                             (0.146)      (0.130)      (0.146)       (0.050)      (0.044)        (0.038)       (0.055)       (0.041)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl                -0.152      -0.039       -0.207         0.022       -0.081          0.018         0.102         0.057
                                             (0.179)      (0.189)      (0.127)       (0.103)      (0.057)        (0.049)       (0.086)       (0.048)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                           0.064        0.404        0.052         0.351        0.258          0.248         0.268         0.482
p-value Treatment                             0.143        0.536        0.128         0.291        0.367          0.422         0.483         0.479
Mean in Control Group                        15.731       16.393       17.199         0.193       0.274          0.304         0.247         0.268
Sample Size                                    522          893         1,494          376          661           1,162          672          1,183
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them
representative of the target population in the study EAs. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the regression
analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the
sample to respondents who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). We correct for
inconsistencies in 'ever had sex' across rounds. 'Age at First Sex' is defined for those that had ever had sex. 'Older Partner' is defined as having a
partner who is 5 years older or more in the past 12 months. 'Condom Use' is defined as using a condom at last sex with most recent sexual
partner. Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
                  Table S6: Program impacts on health and nutrition (beneficiaries)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts

                                                                                  Number of Times Respondent
                                            =1 if Suffers from Psychological
                                                                                  Ate Protein Rich Foods During
                                                         Distress
                                                                                   the Past 7 Days (out of 21)

                                                                                                           Two
                                                                    Two Years
                                            During       End of                During  End of             Years
                                                                      After
                                           Program      Program               Program Program             After
                                                                     Program
                                                                                                         Program
                                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                -0.002        0.010        0.038        0.326       0.224      0.228
                                            (0.039)      (0.036)      (0.042)      (0.202)     (0.192)    (0.181)
Mean in Control Group                        0.463        0.314        0.424        3.678       3.989      3.741
Sample Size                                   698          715          743          698         718        744
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                -0.068**     -0.037       -0.030       0.385** 0.596*** 0.072
                                             (0.032)     (0.047)      (0.032)      (0.195) (0.174) (0.141)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl             -0.139***     -0.026       -0.002       0.445** 0.338** -0.043
                                             (0.035)     (0.054)      (0.046)      (0.199) (0.153) (0.240)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                           0.068       0.860        0.552        0.814    0.215  0.672
p-value Treatment                             0.000       0.677        0.627        0.023    0.001  0.858
Mean in Control Group                         0.372      0.313        0.369         3.967   4.052   4.134
Sample Size                                   1,963       2,013        2,045        1,967    2,018  2,047
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are
weighted to make them representative of the target population in the study EAs. Psychological distress is equal to
one if the summed GHQ- 12 score is equal to three or higher, and is zero otherwise. Protein rich foods are
defined as those containing animal proteins, i.e. meat, fish, and eggs. The number of days each item was consumed
over the past week are summed to create the outcome variable. Baseline values of the following variables are
included as controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest
grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to respondents who were surveyed
during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates
statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
     Table S7: Program impacts on labor market outcomes and consumption (beneficiaries: secondary outcomes)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts

                                            Effective                      =1 if Any
                                                         Labor Income                                 Real Total Household Monthly
                                           Daily Wage                    Wage Work in
                                                        (Past 5 Seasons)                                   Consumption (USD)
                                          (Past 7 Days)                  Past 3 Months

                                                                                                  During        End of        Two Years
                                                       Two Years After Program
                                                                                                 Program       Program       After Program

=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                 -0.228              4.129             -0.020        -0.257         -1.941*           0.535
                                             (0.148)            (8.620)            (0.037)       (1.029)        (1.113)          (1.130)
Mean in Control Group                         0.753             52.840              0.366        17.502         20.860           17.977
Sample Size                                    263                744                744           712            719              737
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                  0.121              7.476             -0.010        3.192**        3.223**          2.804*
                                             (0.424)            (7.466)            (0.030)       (1.261)        (1.364)          (1.432)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl               -0.549*            10.688              0.001         -0.586         -0.880          -0.817
                                             (0.285)           (12.721)            (0.055)       (1.441)        (1.524)          (1.876)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                           0.278              0.829              0.838         0.032          0.034            0.127
p-value Treatment                             0.121              0.420              0.939         0.030          0.044            0.137
Mean in Control Group                         0.902             33.302             0.250         18.638         23.342           20.774
Sample Size                                    465               2,049              2,049         2,006          2,021            2,040
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them
representative of the target population in the study EAs. Effective daily wage is calculated using earnings and activities in the past seven
days. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators,
household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to respondents who were surveyed
during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at
99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
      Table S8: Program impacts on empowerment (beneficiaries: secondary outcomes)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                                                    Empowerment
                                                             Index of
                                          Index of Self-                 Index of Social
                                                         Preferences for
                                             Efficacy                     Participation           Aspirations
                                                         Child Education
                                          (Standardized)                 (Standardized)
                                                         (Standardized)
                                                (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                  -0.041             -0.020            -0.052           -0.221
                                              (0.076)            (0.079)           (0.068)          (0.225)
Mean in Control Group                         0.000              0.000             0.000            3.267
Sample Size                                     744                744               744              744
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                   0.059             -0.004            -0.026            0.235
                                              (0.079)            (0.076)           (0.068)          (0.228)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl                -0.149             -0.106            -0.095            0.004
                                              (0.100)            (0.087)           (0.069)          (0.207)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                            0.061              0.343             0.424            0.379
p-value Treatment                              0.170              0.477             0.393            0.566
Mean in Control Group                         0.000              0.000             0.000            3.352
Sample Size                                    2,049              2,049             2,049            2,049
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are
weighted to make them representative of the target population in the study EAs. Detail on the construction of
the indices can be found in Appendix A and Appendix B. Aspirations asks the respondent where she sees herself
on a 10-step ladder comparing today to five years from now, where zero represents the worst possible life she
could have and 10 represents the best possible life she could have. Baseline values of the following variables
are included as controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index,
highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to respondents who were
surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter
estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
Table S9: Attrition Analysis for Primary Round 4 Outcomes (Baseline Dropouts)

                                          Dependent Variable: =1 if Conditional Schoolgirl

                                                                         Lower         Upper
 Outcomes                                  Original       IPW
                                                                        Bound          Bound
                                               (1)       (2)               (3)           (4)
 Highest Grade Completed                   0.621*** 0.606***           0.616***     0.632***
                                            (0.125)   (0.128)           (0.125)       (0.125)
 Competencies Score (Standardized)            0.064     0.065             0.061         0.089
                                            (0.057)   (0.057)           (0.057)       (0.056)
 =1 if Ever Married                       -0.107*** -0.108***         -0.112***     -0.106***
                                            (0.032)   (0.033)           (0.032)       (0.032)
 Age at First Marriage                     0.431*** 0.434***           0.418***     0.471***
                                            (0.155)   (0.154)           (0.156)       (0.153)
 =1 if Ever Pregnant                        -0.040*  -0.041**          -0.044**       -0.040*
                                            (0.021)   (0.021)           (0.021)       (0.021)
 Number of Live Births                    -0.147*** -0.145***         -0.153***      -0.127**
                                            (0.054)   (0.055)           (0.053)       (0.052)
 Age at First Birth                          0.272*   0.328**             0.251       0.329**
                                            (0.164)   (0.163)           (0.165)       (0.163)
 = if HIV Positive                            0.012     0.007             0.011         0.019
                                            (0.026)   (0.026)           (0.026)       (0.026)
 =1 if Anemic                                 0.039     0.041             0.038         0.045
                                            (0.035)   (0.035)           (0.035)       (0.035)
 Opportunity Cost of Time                    -0.037    -0.041            -0.038         0.065
                                            (0.079)   (0.079)           (0.079)       (0.052)
 Typical Daily Wage in Last Three          -0.140**   -0.132*          -0.141**        -0.074
 Months                                     (0.068)   (0.069)           (0.068)       (0.055)
 Proportion of Hours Spent in Self-          -0.011    -0.012            -0.011        -0.007
 Employment or Paid Work in Past            (0.009)   (0.009)           (0.009)       (0.008)
 Super Index of Overall                      -0.083    -0.073            -0.097        -0.065
 Empowerment (Standardized)                 (0.074)   (0.075)           (0.074)       (0.072)
 Change in Subjective Wellbeing              -0.032    -0.050            -0.091         0.048
 from Five Years Ago to Today               (0.232)   (0.235)           (0.232)       (0.226)
 Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All
 regressions are weighted to make them representative of the target population in the study
 EAs. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the regression
 analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, an
 indicator for never had sex, and whether the respondent participated in the pilot phase of the
 development of the testing instruments. We restrict the sample to respondents who were
 surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4).
 Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*)
 confidence.




                                                                                                   89
                        Table S10: Attrition Analysis for Primary Round 4 Outcomes
                          (Baseline Schoolgirls: CCT vs. Control/UCT vs. Control)
                                             Dependent Variable: =1 if Conditional          Dependent Variable: =1 if Unconditional
                                                         Schoolgirl                                       Scoolgirl
                                                                     Lower        Upper                      Lower              Upper
Outcomes                                  Original       IPW                                Original     IPW
                                                                    Bound        Bound                       Bound              Bound
                                              (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)     (6)     (7)                (8)
Highest Grade Completed                      0.120       0.122     0.208***        0.041      0.095   0.095  0.210*              0.052
                                           (0.080)     (0.080)      (0.075)      (0.084)    (0.129) (0.129) (0.123)            (0.132)
Competencies Score (Standardized)            0.065       0.066     0.129**        -0.045      0.098   0.101 0.176***             0.028
                                           (0.058)     (0.058)      (0.060)      (0.050)    (0.067) (0.068) (0.063)            (0.067)
=1 if Ever Married                          -0.035      -0.035     0.208***     -0.065**     -0.010  -0.010  0.210*             -0.049
                                           (0.027)     (0.028)      (0.075)      (0.027)    (0.046) (0.048) (0.123)            (0.045)
Age at First Marriage                       -0.011      -0.006        0.086       -0.136    0.486** 0.468** 0.650***             0.306
                                           (0.148)     (0.148)      (0.154)      (0.137)    (0.200) (0.202) (0.202)            (0.190)
=1 if Ever Pregnant                         -0.024      -0.025       -0.001       -0.046     -0.001   0.000   0.027             -0.034
                                           (0.034)     (0.034)      (0.033)      (0.035)    (0.042) (0.043) (0.039)            (0.042)
Number of Live Births                        0.020       0.020        0.044       -0.027     -0.024  -0.022   0.002            -0.094*
                                           (0.036)     (0.037)      (0.036)      (0.035)    (0.046) (0.048) (0.046)            (0.049)
Age at First Birth                          -0.144      -0.144        0.028     -0.283**      0.001   0.002   0.123             -0.131
                                           (0.136)     (0.136)      (0.119)      (0.132)    (0.168) (0.173) (0.179)            (0.146)
= if HIV Positive                           -0.001      -0.002        0.002    -0.057***     -0.002  -0.002   0.001           -0.055***
                                           (0.019)     (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.008)    (0.023) (0.023) (0.025)            (0.008)
=1 if Anemic                                 0.012       0.011        0.029       -0.031    -0.065* -0.067** -0.054           -0.105***
                                           (0.031)     (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.033)    (0.033) (0.033) (0.035)            (0.031)
Opportunity Cost of Time                    -0.051      -0.049       -0.015    -0.343***     -0.115  -0.112  -0.083           -0.320***
                                           (0.101)     (0.100)      (0.102)      (0.060)    (0.074) (0.071) (0.079)            (0.062)
Typical Daily Wage in Last Three            -0.011      -0.009       -0.003    -0.131***      0.036   0.036   0.052           -0.177***
Months                                     (0.058)     (0.058)      (0.061)      (0.035)    (0.104) (0.105) (0.109)            (0.038)
Proportion of Hours Spent in Self-           0.003       0.004        0.005    -0.010***      0.002   0.001   0.004           -0.021***
Employment or Paid Work in Past            (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.003)    (0.008) (0.008) (0.008)            (0.003)
Super Index of Overall                       0.049       0.046        0.121       -0.079    -0.159* -0.156*  -0.079           -0.260***
Empowerment (Standardized)                 (0.082)     (0.082)      (0.085)      (0.072)    (0.081) (0.082) (0.089)            (0.071)
Change in Subjective Wellbeing               0.276       0.275     0.706***       -0.142      0.176   0.174 0.515***            -0.108
from Five Years Ago to Today               (0.187)     (0.189)      (0.173)      (0.157)    (0.190) (0.190) (0.179)            (0.190)
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them
representative of the target population in the study EAs. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the
regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, an indicator for never had sex,
and whether the respondent participated in the pilot phase of the development of the testing instruments. We restrict the sample to
respondents who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter
estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.




                                                                                                                                      90
         Table S11: Attrition Analysis for Primary Round 4 Outcomes
                    (Baseline Schoolgirls: CCT vs. UCT)
                                              Dependent Variable: =1 if Unconditional
                                                           Schoolgirl
                                                                      Lower          Upper
Outcomes                                   Original      IPW
                                                                      Bound          Bound
                                              (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)
Highest Grade Completed                     -0.021       -0.020       -0.005         -0.027
                                           (0.129)      (0.129)      (0.127)        (0.129)
Competencies Score (Standardized)            0.029        0.032        0.039          0.015
                                           (0.072)      (0.073)      (0.070)        (0.072)
=1 if Ever Married                           0.011        0.009        0.013          0.006
                                           (0.049)      (0.050)      (0.049)        (0.049)
Age at First Marriage                      0.536**      0.527**      0.536**        0.527**
                                           (0.220)      (0.223)      (0.220)        (0.221)
=1 if Ever Pregnant                          0.010        0.010        0.013          0.006
                                           (0.046)      (0.047)      (0.046)        (0.047)
Number of Live Births                       -0.053       -0.052       -0.051         -0.061
                                           (0.053)      (0.054)      (0.054)        (0.053)
Age at First Birth                           0.088        0.086        0.088          0.042
                                           (0.186)      (0.189)      (0.186)        (0.176)
= if HIV Positive                            0.003        0.003        0.004         -0.006
                                           (0.029)      (0.029)      (0.029)        (0.028)
=1 if Anemic                               -0.074*      -0.075*      -0.072*       -0.086**
                                           (0.042)      (0.041)      (0.041)        (0.042)
Opportunity Cost of Time                    -0.040       -0.035       -0.037         -0.119
                                           (0.106)      (0.103)      (0.107)        (0.095)
Typical Daily Wage in Last Three             0.079        0.077        0.080         -0.058
Months                                     (0.108)      (0.108)      (0.109)        (0.046)
Proportion of Hours Spent in Self-          -0.003       -0.003       -0.003        -0.013*
Employment or Paid Work in Past            (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.009)        (0.007)
Super Index of Overall                    -0.221**     -0.214**      -0.206*       -0.243**
Empowerment (Standardized)                 (0.106)      (0.107)      (0.108)        (0.104)
Change in Subjective Wellbeing              -0.134       -0.134       -0.073         -0.203
from Five Years Ago to Today               (0.221)      (0.221)      (0.202)        (0.219)
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level.
All regressions are weighted to make them representative of the target population in the
study EAs. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the
regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade
attended, an indicator for never had sex, and whether the respondent participated in the pilot
phase of the development of the testing instruments. We restrict the sample to respondents
who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the
program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95%
(**), and 90% (*) confidence.




                                                                                                 91
                        Table S12: Primary outcomes with multiple testing adjustments
                                    (Original p-values and FDR q-values)
                                                                    Baseline Schoolgirl                                Baseline Dropout

Outcomes                                   CCT vs. Control            UCT vs. Control             CCT vs. UCT          CCT vs. Control
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
                                          p-value      q-value      p-value        q-value     p-value     q-value     p-value    q-value
Highest Grade Completed
                                           0.136        1.000        0.465          1.000       0.850       1.000       0.000      0.007

Competencies Score (Standardized)
                                           0.269        1.000        0.147          0.478       0.630       1.000       0.263      0.237

=1 if Ever Married
                                           0.206        1.000        0.829          1.000       0.613       1.000       0.001      0.007

Age at First Marriage
                                           0.940        1.000        0.016          0.289       0.032       0.465       0.006      0.022

=1 if Ever Pregnant
                                           0.471        1.000        0.980          1.000       0.614       1.000       0.054      0.099

Number of Live Births
                                           0.580        1.000        0.600          1.000       0.410       1.000       0.007      0.022

Age at First Birth
                                           0.292        1.000        0.997          1.000       0.436       1.000       0.100      0.145

= if HIV Positive
                                           0.955        1.000        0.938          1.000       0.980       1.000       0.649      0.504

=1 if Anemic
                                           0.699        1.000        0.053          0.299       0.068       0.465       0.263      0.237
Opportunity Cost of Time
                                           0.617        1.000        0.120          0.478       0.550       1.000       0.641      0.504

Typical Daily Wage in Last Three
                                           0.847        1.000        0.726          1.000       0.665       1.000       0.041      0.090
Months
Proportion of Hours Spent in Self-
                                           0.502        1.000        0.831          1.000       0.842       1.000       0.221      0.237
Employment or Paid Work in Past
Super Index of Overall
                                           0.551        1.000        0.051          0.299       0.052       0.465       0.890      0.504
Empowerment (Standardized)
Change in Subjective Wellbeing
from Five Years Ago to Today               0.143        1.000        0.354          1.000       0.650       1.000       0.263      0.237

Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them
representative of the target population in the study EAs. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the
regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators, household asset index, highest grade attended, an indicator for never had sex, and
whether the respondent participated in the pilot phase of the development of the testing instruments. We restrict the sample to
respondents who were surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates
statistically different than zero at 99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.




                                                                                                                                         92
         Table S13: Program impacts on marriage market outcomes (husband attitudes towards women's empowerment)
Panel A: Baseline Dropouts
                                             Attitudes
                                                               Index of        Index of      Index of
                                             Towards                                                      Index of Wife's
                                                            Preferences for    Attitudes     Attitudes
                                            Women's                                                           Divorce                     Desired
                                                              Children's    Towards Wife's Towards (non)-
                                          Empowerment                                                        Prospects                    Fertility
                                                              Education       Autonomy        Abuse
                                           Super Index                                                    (Standardized)
                                                            (Standardized) (Standardized) (Standardized)
                                          (Standardized)
                                                                                  Two Years After Program
                                                (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                   0.145             -0.000             0.189             0.162*             -0.162           -0.161
                                              (0.100)            (0.117)           (0.129)            (0.091)           (0.129)           (0.138)
Mean in Control Group                          0.000              0.000             0.000              0.000             0.000             3.649
Sample Size                                     326                326               326                325               325               324
Panel B: Baseline Schoolgirls
=1 if Conditional Schoolgirl                   0.069             0.013              0.125              0.123             -0.048            0.050
                                              (0.108)           (0.095)            (0.117)            (0.103)           (0.167)           (0.118)
=1 if Unconditional Schoolgirl                 0.254            -0.315*             0.462              0.175             0.171            -0.066
                                              (0.199)           (0.183)            (0.389)            (0.109)           (0.123)           (0.201)
p-value UCT vs. CCT                            0.374             0.078              0.392              0.683             0.252             0.586
p-value Treatment                              0.414             0.196              0.325              0.208             0.336             0.837
Mean in Control Group                          0.000             0.000              0.000              0.000             0.000             3.194
Sample Size                                     543               543                543                543               542               541
Notes: Regressions are OLS models with robust standard errors clustered at the EA level. All regressions are weighted to make them representative
of the target population in the study EAs. All variables are constructed so that higher values are better. The husband gender empowerment super index
is a standardized index of the other variables in this table. Additional detail on the construction of the indices can be found in in Appendix A and
Appendix B. Baseline values of the following variables are included as controls in the regression analyses: age indicators, stratum indicators,
household asset index, highest grade attended, and an indicator for never had sex. We restrict the sample to husbands of respondents who were
surveyed during the latest household survey conducted two years after the program (Round 4). Parameter estimates statistically different than zero at
99% (***), 95% (**), and 90% (*) confidence.
