                                                    WPS7984


Policy Research Working Paper                      7984




 Agent Banking in a Highly Under-Developed
              Financial Sector
      Evidence from the Democratic Republic of Congo

                                  Robert Cull
                                  Xavier Gine
                                  Sven Harten
                               Anca Bogdana Rusu




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
February 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7984


  Abstract
 The paper provides evidence on the number and volume of                            transactions are higher in low-income, densely popu-
 financial transactions undertaken by agents (local businesses                      lated areas with high levels of commercial development.
 that double as more convenient, lower cost alternatives                            This finding suggests that the agent network has been
 to formal branches) of the largest microfinance insti-                             best at supporting financial transactions among the
 tution operating in the Democratic Republic of Congo.                              urban poor. In addition, branding and effective liquid-
 More important than agents‚Äô personal characteristics,                              ity management are strongly linked to agent activity.




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at rcull@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                  Agent Banking in a Highly Under-Developed Financial Sector:
                        Evidence from the Democratic Republic of Congo




                Robert Cull, Xavier Gine, Sven Harten, and Anca Bogdana Rusu1




Keywords: microfinance institutions, agent banking, financial inclusion
JEL Codes: G21, G23, G29




1
 Robert Cull and Xavier Gine are with the World Bank. Sven Harten is with the German Institute for Development
Evaluation. Anca Bogdana Rusu is with the International Finance Corporation. This research was funded under the
Partnership for Financial Inclusion, a joint initiative of IFC and The MasterCard Foundation to expand microfinance
and advance digital financial services in Sub-Saharan Africa. It brings together the intellectual and financial support
of the Foundation with IFC's market knowledge, expertise and client base. The partnership is also supported by The
Development Bank of Austria, OeEB, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
    1. Introduction

        A growing body of evidence indicates that financial services provide substantial benefits

to users in terms of managing risks, absorbing financial shocks, accumulating savings, and

investing in businesses, all of which can contribute to less volatile income and consumption

patterns.2 And as a result, promotion of broader financial inclusion has become an important

objective for policy makers across the globe.3 But transaction costs (e.g., time and expenses

associated with travel) and actual costs (e.g., fees for account opening and for conducting financial

transactions) associated with using financial services can be prohibitively high for many, and the

available financial products from formal providers such as banks are often poorly suited to the

needs of large segments of the population.4 Those financial institutions that do cater to the poor

are still mainly credit driven and do not offer a full set of financial products and services. This is

especially true in developing countries where nearly half (46%) of all adults lack a formal banking

account.5

        We therefore study an alternative model for providing financial services to poorer clients,

agent banking. Agents, trusted local retailers selling everything from sundries to automotive parts,

can also double as less formal, lower-cost alternatives to bank branches that enable customers to

more conveniently make deposits, withdrawals, money transfers, and payments on loans (Lyman

et al., 2006; Siedek, 2008; Mas and Kumar, 2008; Flamming et al., 2011). Because of their lower


2
  See e.g. World Bank (2014) for an overview of that literature.
3
  Two-thirds of bank regulators surveyed in 143 jurisdictions report that they have a mandate to promote financial
inclusion (World Bank, 2014). And more than 50 countries have set formal goals and targets for financial inclusion
(Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper, Singer, and Oudheusden, 2015; Maya Declaration Commitments, Alliance for Financial
Inclusion, http://www.afi-global.org/maya-declaration-commitments).
4
  See Collins et al. (2009) for detailed evidence from financial diaries on the vast array of financial arrangements
(both formal and informal) used by the poor in developing countries to manage their economic lives, and the lack of
fit between many formal products and their needs.
5
  Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper, Singer, and Oudheusden (2015).

                                                                                                                   2
costs and closer proximity (both physical and social) to typically underserved market segments,

agents hold the promise of reaching poorer customers living further from formal bank branches,

and thus could more cost-effectively expand financial inclusion than traditional banking and

microfinance approaches.

        We rely on data on the number and volume of transactions from the agents of FINCA DRC,

a microfinance institution that has achieved rapid growth in the number of clients that it serves

within a short time span despite facing a challenging context in which to deliver financial services.

In general, agents are small-scale business owners who offer FINCA banking services in addition

to operating an already established retail business.6 At an agent, a FINCA client can make transfers

to other FINCA accounts, receive a loan payout or do other withdrawals, repay loans or make

deposits into an account. While there is no fee for cash-in transactions, there is a fee for

withdrawals. Still, customers use the service for withdrawals since agents are often located closer

to their own businesses and queues are generally shorter than at bank branches.7 During the first 3

months of their activity as agents, FINCA agents receive a monthly subsistence stipend of $100.

From inception onwards, agents are compensated in relation to the number and value of

transactions they facilitate and receive coaching on how to increase foot traffic in their locations.

In total, it costs FINCA between $2,500 and $3,000 to set up an agent, of which the largest expense

($1,200) is for the Point of Sale (POS) device.

        In our regressions, we assume that variables describing local market characteristics

(average income levels, level of commercial development) are exogenous in that they are not likely

to be affected by agent activities. There is, of course, some nonrandom selection into being an



6
  FINCA agents cannot also be agents of banks or other microfinance institutions but can be agents for providers of
mobile money services such as Tigo, Airtel, and Orange.
7
  Other financial services providers also charge fees on transactions.

                                                                                                                      3
agent, but because the agents had established businesses prior to the opportunity to become an

agent, their locations were pre-determined. In other words, none of the owners relocated their main

business to become agents. Moreover, in our analysis we compare agent transactions only with

those of other agents, so all of our data set is comprised of retailers that selected into this activity.8

At the time of data collection, FINCA‚Äôs was the largest agent banking network in DRC, which

makes our results, if not necessarily fully generalizable to other contexts, at least highly relevant

for the DRC banking sector.9

         Specifically, we regress the number and volume of agents‚Äô cash-in, cash-out transactions

on variables describing their personal and business characteristics that are taken from their

applications to become agents, and on variables describing income levels, population, population

density, commercial development, and financial development for the localized markets in which

these agents operate. These are taken from official sources or were created by a local economic

consulting firm that we retained. Our key market variables are aggregated at the level of 23

municipalities in and around Kinshasa. Our main findings are that market characteristics explain

substantially more variation in transaction activity than do characteristics of the agent or his/her

business. In addition, and perhaps more importantly, the number and volume of transactions is

highest in low income, densely populated markets with high levels of established commercial

development. This suggests to us that FINCA DRC‚Äôs agent network has been best at generating

financial transactions among the poor in the most densely populated areas.10 To our knowledge,



8
  Agents were almost all existing clients, so data on account usage helped FINCA to identify business owners who
could be viable agents.
9
  FINCA‚Äôs is largest agent network for a bank/microfinance institution in the DRC, but mobile money providers
have larger networks, mostly because the requirements for the two types of agents differ. Banking agents generally
have to meet higher standards, especially in terms of security and liquidity.
10
   FINCA only operates in urban and peri-urban environments in our sample. It is conceivable that FINCA would
have greater impact on rural customers, but their expansion beyond urban areas is just beginning and thus the topic
is left for future research.

                                                                                                                      4
this is the first econometric study of the activities of agents of a microfinance institution in a

developing country, certainly the first in a country as poor and financially underdeveloped as the

DRC. Conducting such a study in a country that most often lacks reliable data and where local

research capacity is limited was challenging, but this also marks our study as an early contribution

to better understanding the economy in DRC.11

        Our work is closely related to a recent literature that explores how lowering the transaction

costs of transferring funds within social networks improves household financial management. Jack

and Suri (2014) have shown how mobile telephony has reduced the costs of such within-network

transfers in Kenya and find that mobile money has helped households to smooth consumption in

the face of economic shocks. Specifically, they find that shocks reduce the consumption of non-

users of a widely adopted mobile money service called M-PESA by 7 percent, while shocks have

no significant effect on the consumption of households with an M-PESA user. Similarly, Yang

and Choi (2007) find that shocks to the incomes of Philippine households are associated with

significant increases in the international remittances that they receive, an indication that those

remittances could be used to smooth consumption.

        Both the volume and diversity of remittance senders increase after a shock and the average

distance from senders to receivers of remittances also increases substantially (Jack and Suri, 2014),

suggesting that M-PESA has enabled households to expand or make fuller use of their social

networks at lower cost. Relatedly, Aycinena, Martinez, and Yang (2009) show that reductions in

remittance fees increase the frequency with which Salvadoran migrants receive them. Jack and

Suri (2013) also find that the purposes of remittances differ between users and non-users of M-


11
  There are, however, less formal studies that describe the business model and provide information on the financial
viability of agents. See, for example, http://www.cgap.org/data/india-banking-agents-survey-2012 and
http://www.helix-institute.com/data-and-insights/agent-network-accelerator-survey-uganda-country-report-2015 for
evidence from India and Uganda, respectively.

                                                                                                                  5
PESA. Users are more likely to receive remittances via M-PESA for credit or in response to an

emergency, while the fraction of total M-PESA transactions for regular support declines. The

patterns suggest that M-PESA enables households to more easily draw on their social networks for

support in trying circumstances.12

         Our work is also therefore related to a body of research showing that monetary transfers

within networks of family members and friends are pervasive and crucial for household risk

mitigation in developing countries. A number of papers have shown that informal financial

arrangements provide insurance for households that experience illness (Gertler and Gruber, 2002;

DeWeerdt and Dercon, 2006; Genoni, 2012). For example, Genoni (2012) shows that in Indonesia

household members who do not personally experience an illness increase their supply of labor,

and transfers increase from other households to the affected household. A related literature tries to

uncover the motives for participation in informal financial and insurance arrangements and finds

evidence consistent with the notion that reciprocity (rather than altruism) motivates most in-

network transfers (Fafchamps and Lund, 2003; Blumenstock, Eagle, and Fafchamps, 2011).13

         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes FINCA DRC and

its place with the financial context of the DRC. Section 3 describes our data and our approach to

estimation. Section 4 lays out our econometric specification and provides hypotheses about how

our explanatory variables are expected to affect agent transactions. We present our main results in

Section 5. In Section 6, we perform a series of robustness checks. Section 7 offers conclusions.



12
   Relatedly, Blumenstock, Eagle, and Fafchamps (2015) show that Rwandan households affected by earthquake
received increased amounts of cellular ‚Äúairtime‚Äù (a simple precursor to mobile money) from members of their social
network, especially those with whom they had already established reciprocal relationships.
13
   The reciprocity motive for participation in informal financial networks appears to be a pervasive one in the
developing world. For example, using historical loan contract data from low-income rural villages in China in the
1930s, Brandt and Hosios (2010) show that informal loans were predominantly used for consumption purposes and
that a large share of these loans carried no interest rate. They argue that these arrangements should be interpreted as
‚Äúlong-term reciprocal insurance or patronage relationships between households.‚Äù

                                                                                                                      6
       2. FINCA and the DRC Context

           Even within Africa, which lags other developing regions in financial development (Allen

et al., 2014, 2015: Beck and Cull, 2014, 2015), the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has

stood out as one of the least banked countries in the region. In 2014, 17% of adults in the DRC

had an account with a formal financial institution. In comparison, 34% of adults in Sub-Saharan

Africa, 54% of adults in developing economies, and 62% of adults worldwide had formal

accounts.14 Moreover, the 17% figure represents a substantial gain in financial inclusion in the

DRC, since the 2011 figure stood at less than 5% (Demirguc-Kunt and Klapper, 2012a,b).

           The country‚Äôs long history of conflict has no doubt led to institutional and infrastructural

deficiencies that impede economic growth, and thus also impede demand for financial services.

However, evidence from financial diaries in other developing countries (Collins et al., 2009)

suggests strongly that poor clients have many financial needs and, because their incomes are often

irregular and emergencies arise, their financial lives are unpredictable. The low financial usage

ratios reported above therefore make it highly likely that demands for financial services for large

segments of the Congolese population go unmet by its formal financial services providers such as

commercial banks.

            FINCA DRC is part of FINCA, an international microfinance institution present in 23

countries worldwide, focused on offering financial services and products to small scale businesses

and households. Founded in 1985 in Bolivia, FINCA opened its first program in Africa in 1992 in

Uganda. In 2009 FINCA introduced branchless banking ‚Äì ATMs, computerized points-of-sale

transactions, and cellular banking ‚Äì in an effort to expand its outreach while keeping associated

costs low. In late 2016, 2016 FINCA had over 643,000 savers in Africa, an average disbursed loan



14
     The figures for account ownership are from Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper, Singer, and Van Oudheusden (2015).

                                                                                                             7
size of $754 and a gross loan portfolio of $166 million. Of that, FINCA DRC accounted for

256,000 clients and $77 million of the loan portfolio.15

        The products offered by FINCA vary to some extent by local context and are adapted to

local regulations. Scaling access to financial services for the majority of the population in the

uniquely challenging context of DRC required going beyond existing business models and branch-

based delivery channels. Branchless banking is a potentially powerful tool to increase outreach

given the even higher cost of establishing branch infrastructure in a post-conflict environment.

Since 2012, FINCA DRC has been rolling out an agent banking network that had grown swiftly to

more than 500 agents by the end of 2015. With agents facilitating transactions worth over

$115,000/month, roughly 65% of all FINCA‚Äôs transactions are now done with an agent.

        As part of the application process the potential agents had to provide information regarding

the business owner (age, gender, education, nationality) and her/his business (industry, age,

location, inventory value, daily turnover, profits, hours of operation, number of employees). In

addition, a FINCA branch officer scored the business on a scale of 0-2 on 10 essential

characteristics, ranging from the establishment‚Äôs location in terms of potential customers, its

security and potential for branding, as well as the aforementioned business-related information

such as age, operating schedule, stock value and daily turnover. Both the agent application and the

score sheet were used to assess a business‚Äôs potential for becoming a FINCA agent.

        For the period that we study, the selection of agents was done in an opportunistic manner.

The vast majority of agents as of 2015 were current clients of FINCA, whose businesses had



15
  Globally, however, we acknowledge that FINCA faced financial difficulties dating from at least 2015 due to
several factors such as the weakening economic climate and increased competition in many of its key markets.
FINCA also had some in-house challenges involving its business model as it had a rather large headcount in the US
and a reliance on multiple donor funding sources that has not been conducive to a clear strategic focus. FINCA DRC
has been one of the more successful outlets, but here also the influence of multiple donors pulling the organization
and its overstretched staff into different directions was noticeable.

                                                                                                                  8
good track records, and who were therefore approached by branch officers about becoming an

agent. As such, less than 0.1% of applications to become an agent have been rejected to this

point. There were thus too few rejected applicants (less than ten) to permit meaningful analysis

differentiating the characteristics of those who became agents from those who did not.16

     3.   Data and the Estimation Approach

          Our data come from 190 FINCA DRC agents who began operations at some point from

2012 to 2015. We rely on monthly transactions data for the dependent variables in the regressions

that follow. Although we have some data on other transfers to FINCA accounts, those transactions

occurred too infrequently to permit meaningful analysis. Similar to Jack and Suri (2013, 2014),

we therefore focus on cash-in, cash-out transactions in our analysis.

          As explanatory variables, we rely on the personal/business characteristics of the agents and

the socio-economic characteristics of the agents‚Äô locations. Personal and business characteristics

are taken from the applications that agents submitted to FINCA. Our data are from agents located

in and around Kinshasa since that was the focus of FINCA DRC in the initial phases of their agent

rollout. Agents are located in four major business districts‚Äì Funa, Lukunga, Tshangu and Mont

Amba ‚Äìwhich are further subdivided into 24 so-called municipalities.17 In our regressions, we rely

on data from agents operating in 23 of those municipalities. These municipalities vary greatly in




16
   In principle, it might be possible to distinguish the characteristics of agents who ceased operations from those that
continued throughout our period of study to assess the viability of the agent model in different contexts. But
according to FINCA agent network representatives, hardly any agents quit the business in the first few years of
developing the network, precisely because those agents were picked based on ongoing business relationships with
branch officers. We acknowledge, however, that 14% of our sample is comprised of agents that are missing
operational data for some or all of the last five months covered by our study. We cannot say with certainty whether
they quit or took a break from agent work, which sometimes happened due to liquidity issues, or whether data were
missing for some other reason.
17
   About 10 percent of our transactions data come from agents located outside Kinshasa. We were unable to create
reliable measures of income and commercial/financial development for those locations, many of which were larger
than a municipality, and thus we have excluded them from the regressions that include municipal-level variables that
follow.

                                                                                                                      9
size, and population density, as well as a variety of other characteristics (Appendix A).

Municipality-level data therefore offer a relatively fine level of geographic aggregation. Data on

population and population density are taken from official sources. Since DRC lacks most common

socio-economic and demographic statistics, data on income, commercial development, and

financial development at the municipal level had to be created by a local consulting firm.

       Specifically, in order to measure these municipality characteristics, we consulted Experts

SARL, a market research firm with over 15 years of experience working in the DRC. Given their

focus on the city of Kinshasa and their extensive experience with fieldwork across all

municipalities of the capital city, we asked them to indicate the level of urban, commercial and

financial development of each municipality, as well as their average income levels on a scale of

low-medium-high. We also asked them to identify the predominant type of financial services

provider in each municipality (banks, microfinance institutions, or providers of mobile banking

services).

       While Experts SARL has an extensive network of enumerators, the core team in Kinshasa

is composed of 9-10 enumerators. Each person on the core team is assigned a subset of

municipalities, on which they have in depth knowledge and therefore have become the go-to

experts in the team. The input of the enumerators was taken into account when determining the

municipality characteristics used in our analysis. Their assessment was based on prior knowledge

accumulated during a variety of market research projects in Kinshasa, as well as direct observation

of area characteristics completed under the first phase of a scoping mission to identify potential

locations for future rollout of FINCA agents.

       The ultimate questions that motivate our research are whether and why some clients would

prefer to do their banking transactions with an agent rather than at a formal branch, and what types



                                                                                                 10
of agents are best able to attract those clients based on their own characteristics and the

characteristics of their locations such as population density. One possibility is that clients are more

comfortable with, and trusting of, agents than a branch. This could be especially true for poorer

clients who lack knowledge of financial products,18 but could also hold for wealthier clients in

DRC where trust in institutions is low and business transactions depend on personal relationships.

Indeed, at an agent outlet it may be easier to establish trust since it is usually the same person

dealing with clients, often an entrepreneur with a long track record in the community. At branches,

young professionals from outside the neighborhood deal with clients and are often rotated or

promoted from the entry-level client-facing positions to other jobs. The notion of trust, therefore,

may be more abstract with respect to branches and linked to an institution rather than to an

individual. We lack a survey that would enable us to track levels of income, financial education,

and usage of agents versus branches at the household level. We therefore provide indirect tests of

the comfort/trust hypothesis by examining whether proxies for an agent‚Äôs standing in the local

community such as his/her age and the age of his/her business are associated with more

transactions. Gender may also play a role in promoting comfort/trust as female clients may be

more comfortable doing banking transactions with a female agent.19

         Convenience and a lack of alternative providers may also prompt some clients to rely more

heavily on agents. Since the agents that we study are located in and around Kinshasa, all of them

are situated reasonably close to a FINCA DRC branch. Thus, most (if not all) clients can choose



18
   Equity Bank in Kenya, for example, has made a concerted effort to expand financial inclusion by establishing
branches beyond urban centers and having their staff speak to clients in their native languages (Allen et al., 2013).
19
   About a quarter of our observations on monthly cash in/cash out come from female agents (see summary statistics
in Appendix B). We recognize that age and gender may proxy for factors beyond trust. However, we control for
additional characteristics of the agent and his/her business and of the market in which he/she operates, and thus the
age of the agent and his/her business (which provide information on how well established he/she is in the
community) and gender (which, for female agents, could indicate greater ease in serving female clients) are our best
proxies for testing hypotheses regarding trust between agents and their clients.

                                                                                                                  11
to do transactions with either a branch or an agent. In that sense, they have a choice between at

least two alternatives. Still, agents are likely to be physically closer to many potential clients, have

longer opening hours and transactions may take less time and be less formal than at a branch.

Lacking client survey data, however, we again rely on indirect tests of these hypotheses.

Controlling for population and population density (both of which should be positively associated

with the frequency and volumes of agent transactions), potential clients in less commercially

developed municipalities might benefit less from the convenience of, or have less need for, agents.

That is, clients in commercially active municipalities might have greater appreciation for the time-

saving convenience of an agent, and thus agent transactions might be more frequent in those

areas.20

           While agent transactions are likely to be heavier in commercially developed municipalities,

how the general level of local financial development affects agent transactions is harder to predict.

On the one hand, the level of financial development may simply be an indication that the local

demand for financial services is high, and thus we would expect more transactions from both

agents and other providers in financially developed municipalities. But the demand for financial

services is likely to be strongly linked to the level of local commercial activity. Since we already

control for the level of local commercial development in our regressions, financial development

could be negatively related to agents‚Äô transactions to the extent that the financial services provided

by agents are substitutes for those from other providers.




20
  We are assuming that population density serves as a proxy for the number of potential clients that are near an
agent. In that sense, density provides information on the convenience associated with reduced travel time to agents
rather than branches. In a separate ongoing field experiment, we study how the density of the local FINCA agent
network (i.e., the number of agents in close proximity) affects the financial behavior of clients and the profitability
of the agents themselves.

                                                                                                                      12
     4. Specification and Hypotheses

     To identify the factors that drive agents‚Äô transaction frequencies and volumes, we estimate the

following equation:

          Ì†µÌ±åÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±öÌ†µÌ±° = Ì†µÌªº + Ì†µÌªΩ1 Ì†µÌ∞¥Ì†µÌ±îÌ†µÌ±íÌ†µÌ±õÌ†µÌ±°Ì†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±ö + Ì†µÌªΩ2 Ì†µÌ∞µÌ†µÌ±¢Ì†µÌ±†Ì†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±õÌ†µÌ±íÌ†µÌ±†Ì†µÌ±†Ì†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±ö + Ì†µÌªΩ3 Ì†µÌ±ÄÌ†µÌ±éÌ†µÌ±üÌ†µÌ±òÌ†µÌ±íÌ†µÌ±°Ì†µÌ±ö + Ì†µÌªΩ4 Ì†µÌ∞πÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±õÌ†µÌ±éÌ†µÌ±õÌ†µÌ±êÌ†µÌ±íÌ†µÌ±ö + Ì†µÌºÄÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±öÌ†µÌ±°

Y is the number or the volume of cash-in or cash-out transactions for agent i in municipality m in

month t.21 Agent represents personal characteristics of the agent including his/her age, education

level, and gender. We estimate all models first using robust standard errors and then using standard

errors that allow for clustering at the municipality level. While clustering at the municipality level

is clearly a more conservative approach, comparing the significance levels across the two sets of

estimates provides a way to gauge the robustness and reliability of particular findings.

         To the extent that older agents are better established and more trusted than younger ones,

we expect agent age to be positively linked to transactions. On the other hand, however, younger

agents may be more proficient with technology and therefore able to deliver better service,

especially when the need arises to troubleshoot problems with the POS device. If female clients

are more likely to use an agent if she is also a woman, we expect that the dummy variable for male

agent, which appears in the regressions, would be negatively linked to transactions. The

relationship between transactions and agent education is harder to predict. Better educated agents

may be more trusted or have business acumen that others lack, and thus we would expect the

dummy variable for having a primary education (or less) to be negatively related to the number

and volume of transactions. At the same time, highly educated agents might be more socially

distant from the bulk of their potential clients, and thus less trusted. In that case, the primary level

education variable could be positively linked to agent transactions.


21
  We look at cash-in and cash-out transactions separately because the fee structure linked to each operation is
different. Similarly, the commissions paid to agents are different for the two types of transactions.

                                                                                                                                 13
         Business represents characteristics of the business that operates in tandem with FINCA

agent activities. Like agent age, we expect that the age of the agent‚Äôs business could be positively

linked to agent transactions to the extent that more firmly established businesses inspire trust

and/or already have experience with a wider number of potential clients. We also hoped to explore

how the nature of the business affects agent transactions. To proxy for interactions between an

agent‚Äôs established and banking businesses, we tried a number of variables including the number

of days per week (and hours per day) that the business is open, the number of employees of the

business, and the economic sector of the agent‚Äôs business.22 We were unable to derive robust

results for those variables, and thus rely on the value of stock (meaning inventory) in the retail

business as a simple summary indicator of how demanding are an agent‚Äôs duties to maintain that

business. To the extent that demands from the retail business on an agent‚Äôs time are high, it might

make it harder (and relatively less financially lucrative) for her/him to fully pursue banking, and

thus we would expect a negative relationship between retail stock value and agent transactions.

         Market represents a set of variables that describe the demographic characteristics of the

municipality including population, population density, commercial development, and average

income level. Both population and population density are taken from official sources for the most

recent year for which data are available.23 We expect both to be positively linked to the number

and volume of agent transactions. Average income levels and the level of commercial development

were derived by Experts SARL Consulting, as described above. Lacking a census of businesses

and a representative survey of households, we asked Experts SARL to sort municipalities into one

of three categories for these variables ‚Äì high, medium, and low. Our hope was to derive coarse,


22
   Unfortunately, we were only able to categorize agents‚Äô businesses as providing either services or manufactured
goods. A finer delineation of the types of goods and services that agents sell might have produced better insights
into the types of businesses that are best suited to accommodate and foster agent transactions.
23
   Population figures are taken from the most recent census, which occurred in 2004.

                                                                                                                     14
but reliable indicators of the market characteristics that might affect agent transactions based on

the consulting firm‚Äôs long experience in Kinshasa.

         We include a dummy variable for high income and another for low commercial density in

the regressions that follow. To the extent that agents are an effective way to reach low income

market segments that are typically financially excluded, we would expect a negative relationship

between the high income dummy and agent transactions.24 The level of commercial development

is an indicator of both demand for financial transactions and the ease with which many clients can

perform them, especially during the course of the business day. We therefore expect the low

commercial density dummy variable to be negatively linked to the number and volume of agent

transactions. Note that the market characteristics that we include in the regressions are time-

invariant because it was not possible to create reliable measures that varied over time. At the same

time, however, we argue that variables such as these are slow to change and thus they should do a

good job of accurately sorting municipalities into a few bins within the tight window for which we

have agent transactions data.

         Finally, and as described above, Experts SARL created variables to describe the level of

financial development in each municipality, including an overall assessment of financial density

as being high, medium, or low, and an assessment of the predominant type of financial institution

(banks, microfinance institutions, providers of mobile banking services). To the extent that the

services provided by FINCA agents are effective in reaching market segments that are underserved

by other providers, we would expect agent transactions to be higher in locations where there are

fewer alternative service providers. Thus, we would expect a negative relationship between the

dummy variable for high financial density and our agent transactions variables.


24
  Our assumption is that higher income clients are more likely to access financial services from providers other than
FINCA DRC agents.

                                                                                                                  15
       Three dummy variables are used to indicate whether the predominant type of financial

services provider in a municipality is a bank, microfinance institution, or mobile financial services

provider, respectively. Since FINCA DRC is itself a microfinance institution, the dummy variable

for microfinance predominance could be positively linked to agent transactions because those are

municipalities in which microfinance products are in high demand. The dummy variables for

banking and mobile banking predominance could provide an indication of whether services from

those providers are complementary to (or substitutes for) those provided by FINCA DRC agents.

If their coefficients are positive, it would provide evidence consistent with complementarities.

   5. Empirical Results

       In models 1-4 of Table 1 we regress the number of monthly cash-in transactions for each

agent on his/her personal characteristics and the characteristics of his/her retail business. We find

that an agent‚Äôs age is positively linked to transactions, which supports the notion that older agents

may be more trusted or at least better known among potential clients. As agent age increases by a

year, the number of cash-in transactions increases by roughly four. The median (mean) number of

monthly cash-in transactions is 117 (202), with a standard deviation of 259. Our model thus

predicts that an agent ten years older than another would have a sizable advantage (almost 40) in

performing cash-in transactions. The age variable is significant both in the models that employ

robust standard errors and in model 4, which used standard errors clustered at the municipality

level. Similarly, and also as hypothesized, female agents perform about 30 more cash-in

transactions per month, although that coefficient is significant in only the models that use robust

standard errors. There is no significant relationship between the primary education variable and

the number of cash-in transactions in our base results in Table 1.




                                                                                                   16
           Business characteristics also explain variation in the number of cash-in transactions that

FINCA DRC agents perform in a month. For example, the coefficient for stock value, our proxy

for the demands on the agent‚Äôs time that are imposed by her/his business, is negative and

significant for models using either type of standard error. The coefficient for stock value is -0.287

in models 3 and 4. If stock value increases by one standard deviation ($64,190), the number of

cash-in transactions per month decreases by 18.25 We hypothesized that, like owner age, the age

of the retail business would also be positively associated with transactions. However, we find a

negative relationship in models 3 and 4. One interpretation is that retail business age is a better

proxy for the demands of running the business (or an indication of the interest that an agent has in

running his/her retail business relative to banking) rather than an indication of the degree of trust

that potential clients place in him/her. However, the coefficient is not significant when standard

errors are clustered at the municipality level in any of the models in Table 1.

           In models 5-8 we begin to examine the effects of market characteristics on the number of

monthly cash-in transactions. We introduce fixed effects for each business district (models 5 and

6) and municipality (models 7 and 8) to get an initial indication of the variation in agent

transactions that local market conditions can potentially explain.26 The overall fit of the regressions

improves dramatically when we introduce these fixed effects, especially the municipality fixed

effects. The r-squared of the models with only agent and retail characteristics is .02-.03.; with

municipality fixed effects, the r-squared improves to .21. This suggests that substantial variation

in the number of agent transactions can potentially be explained by variables that describe the

characteristics of markets at the municipal level. Note also that the coefficients for owner age and

stock value of the established business remain significant when controlling for district or


25
     The stock value variable is expressed in thousands of $US. 64.19*-0.287 = 18.42 fewer transactions.
26
     Again, the 23 municipalities in our study fall within four business districts.

                                                                                                           17
municipality fixed effects. Indeed, the coefficient for owner age becomes larger in magnitude,

increasing from 3.7 to 5.5.

        In models 9 and 10, we replace the municipality fixed effects with variables designed to

capture salient characteristics of the local market. We include population (in 10,000s) and

population density (population/sq km), both measured at the municipality level. Coefficients for

both are positive and significant, as hypothesized, regardless of the type of standard errors that we

use. The mean number of residents in a municipality is 368,661, and the standard deviation is

241,783. Increasing population by 10,000 residents is associated with 3.2 more cash-in

transactions per month; increasing by one standard deviation yields 78 additional monthly cash-in

transactions.27 Similar, if somewhat less pronounced, relationships are found for population

density. Increasing that variable by one standard deviation is associated with 42 additional cash-

in transactions per month.28

        The variables for municipality income levels and commercial density that were constructed

by Experts SARL also explain substantial variation in agents‚Äô cash-in transactions, and they

provide indications of the markets where conducting banking transactions with an agent is most

desired. For example, the negative significant coefficient for the high income dummy variable

implies that agents in high income municipalities perform 97 fewer cash-in transactions per month

than those in medium- and low-income municipalities. The negative significant coefficient for

municipalities with low levels of commercial development implies that agents in less

commercially developed municipalities perform 77 fewer cash-in transactions per month than

those in municipalities that have medium or high levels of commercial development.



27
   The population coefficient is 3.223. Increasing population by one standard deviation implies 3.223*24.1783 =
77.93 additional cash-in transactions per month.
28
   2.232*18.91561 = 42.22 additional transactions.

                                                                                                                  18
       In all, the municipality characteristics variables paint a vivid picture of the types of markets

where agent services seem to be flourishing. These are low income, highly and densely populated

areas with a relatively high level of commercial activity. These patterns suggest strongly that

FINCA DRC agents are targeting and effectively reaching the urban poor. Note also that the r-

squared of models 9 and 10 with municipality characteristics is 0.136, an indication that these

variables can account for a large share of the substantial gain in the overall fit of the regressions

when controlling for municipality-level fixed effects.

       Finally, we include the variables describing financial development at the municipal level

in models 11-16. Agents perform 49 fewer cash-in transactions in municipalities with a dense

network of financial service providers, an indication that their services compete with, and thus are

substitutes for, those of other providers. In models 13-16, we include the dummy variables

describing the predominant type of financial services provider in each municipality. As

hypothesized, agent cash-in transactions are more prevalent where microfinance institutions are

identified as the dominant providers. This could be a reflection that clients have greater demand

for and familiarity with the services from that type of provider since FINCA DRC is itself a

microfinance institution. While the patterns for the financial development coefficients are

suggestive of where FINCA DRC agents are best fitting into the local financial sector, we put less

stock in those results since they are generally insignificant when we use standard errors clustered

at the municipality level.

       In Table 2, the number of cash-out transactions replaces cash-in transactions as the

dependent variable and we rerun the same set of regressions. Results are very similar to those for

cash-in transactions. Two minor differences are that significance levels for some variables,

especially those describing agent and retail business characteristics, are lower and the magnitudes



                                                                                                    19
of most coefficients are smaller (in absolute value) than they were for cash-in transactions.

However, smaller coefficients are to be expected in that the average number of cash-out

transactions is 131 per month, which is sixty-five percent of the average number of cash-in

transactions. This is, however, above that for the agent banking sector in other contexts, where

much larger gaps are the norm. Recall that there is a fee incurred for cash-out but not cash-in

transactions which is likely driving the disparity. Still, the results for cash-out transactions

reinforce those for cash-in transactions and indicate that market characteristics explain

substantially more variation in agent transactions than personal or business characteristics.

        In Table 3, we rerun the same regressions using (log of) cash-in volumes as the dependent

variable. In general, we find the results to be similar to those for the number of cash-in transactions.

In models 1-4, focused on the agent‚Äôs personal characteristics and the characteristics of his/her

retail business, as well as in models 5-8 where fixed effects for business districts (models 5-6) or

municipality (7-8) are introduced, we find the sign and significance of the explanatory variables

to be very much in line with those observed in Table 1. Specifically, an agent‚Äôs age is significantly

positively linked to cash-in volumes, while the stock value of his/her retail business is associated

with lower cash-in volumes. We do note however that, while those patterns are similar, the r-

squared for the cash-in volume models is systematically lower than that of the cash-in transactions

models.

        Results for models 9-10, in which we introduce variables designed to capture market

characteristics, are also similar to those observed for cash-in transactions. However, once we

account for financial development at the municipal level (models 11-16), we find that variables

such as municipal income level and commercial density lose significance. Population is the only

market characteristic that is consistently significant in explaining cash-in volumes, regardless of



                                                                                                     20
the standard errors that we use. For an agent with the median level of cash-in volume ($14,927 per

month), an increase in municipal population of one standard deviation would be associated with a

$4,952 increase in cash-in volume. Finally, and similar to the results for the number of transactions,

cash-in volumes are 50-70% higher in areas where microfinance institutions are the dominant

financial alternative.

        In Table 4, we use the monthly volume of cash-out transactions as the dependent variable.

In models 1-4 we find that, compared to the results for the number of cash-out transactions, or

even cash-in volumes, personal and business characteristics are less able to explain variation in

cash-out volumes. While introducing fixed effects for business districts does little to increase the

explanatory power of our models, including municipality level fixed effects increases r-squared

from .016 (models 5-6) to .161 (models 7-8), which is higher than the r-squared levels for the

comparable cash-in volumes models (Table 3, models 7-8). For the agent with the median level of

cash-out volume ($3,742), a one standard deviation increase in stock value is associated with a

$453 decline in monthly cash-out volume. However, all personal and business characteristics lose

significance in models 9-16 once we account for municipality characteristics.

        Unlike for cash-in volumes, results for cash-out volumes show that, in addition to

population, municipality characteristics such as income and commercial density explain

substantial variation. Interestingly, the financial density level is not significantly associated with

cash-out volumes, regardless of the standard errors that we use. However, and similar to the results

for cash-in volumes, cash-out volumes are higher in areas where microfinance institutions are the

dominant providers of financial services. In contrast, in municipalities where mobile banking is

the dominant financial alternative, the volume of cash‚Äìout transactions is dramatically lower (67%

lower in model 13; 95% lower in models 15-16). We asked the consulting firm to construct the



                                                                                                   21
variable to focus on ‚Äúmobile banking‚Äù using a broad definition that captures mobile money

services provided by mobile network operators (MNOs) largely to send and receive remittances.

These services are much more common in Africa than mobile banking where the customer

connects to his bank account via a smartphone or computer.

       We do not interpret this coefficient as indicating that competition from providers of mobile

banking services causes lower cash-out volumes for FINC DRC agents. It is more plausible that,

in the handful of municipalities where mobile money is dominant, FINCA DRC agents simply

have yet to establish sizable monthly cash-out volumes, likely due to market features that we are

unable to observe directly from our data. For example, the MNOs had pre-existing agent networks

and expertise in logistics that gave them advantages in providing cash in/cash out services in some

areas. Overall, however, the regression model does about as well in explaining cash-in and cash-

out volumes as reflected in the respective r-squared statistics.

   6. Robustness Checks, Additional Tests

       To this point, our results indicate that market characteristics explain more variation in agent

transactions than personal and business characteristics, and that agents perform more and larger

transactions in low income areas that are dense in terms of population and commercial

development. In this section, we create sub-samples based on municipal population density, and

we test how agents‚Äô personal/business characteristics and market characteristics (other than

population density) affect transactions in densely versus sparsely populated areas. This enables us

to examine whether different characteristics drive agent transactions in different types of markets.

We also exploit data from regular visits by FINCA DRC headquarters staff that assess how well

an agent is following FINCA protocols to test whether such monitoring can help agents to adapt

to their markets and increase their transactions.



                                                                                                   22
6a. High vs. Low Population Density

        We rerun our base models after separating municipalities into ‚Äúhigh‚Äù and ‚Äúlow‚Äù population

density groups to create sub-samples of roughly equal size.29 Agent age has a positive association

with the number of cash-in transactions that is of very similar magnitude in municipalities with

high or low population density, though that coefficient only achieves significance in models that

use robust standard errors (Table 5).30 However, an agent‚Äôs level of educational attainment appears

to play a different role in explaining the number of cash-in transactions in high and low density

environments. Agents with some high school or college-level education perform substantially

more cash-in transactions per month (75 more) in low density areas than those with a primary

school education (or less). In contrast, in high density areas, agents with a primary school education

perform substantially more transactions than those with more education. Although the coefficients

for the primary education variable are not significant in the models that use standard errors

clustered at the municipality level, the patterns suggest that trust in agents might work differently

in densely and sparsely populated areas. In low density areas, where there are likely fewer daily

interactions between agents and potential clients, advanced education might help agents signal that

they are competent and trustworthy. Also, within Kinshasa, relatively low density could signal

higher income residential neighborhoods. Hence, it could be that most agents are relatively well

educated in those neighborhoods, and perform more transactions than less educated agents in those

areas. In densely populated areas, where daily interactions are frequent, education seems to have

an adverse effect on an agent‚Äôs business. This could be because the vast majority of potential




29
   Because the number of observations differs across municipalities, there was no possible breakdown by municipal
population density that would have resulted in sub-samples of equal size.
30
   In part, the reduced number of observations in the sub-sample regressions likely contributes to reduced
significance for the models that use standard errors clustered at the municipality level.

                                                                                                               23
clients in those areas also have low levels of education, and thus there is less social distance

between them and less-educated agents.

         In terms of business characteristics, the negative relationship between the stock value of

an agent‚Äôs retail business and the number of cash-in transactions is more pronounced in areas with

high population density. This suggests that the demands imposed by his/her other business on an

agent‚Äôs time are likely to reduce the number of transactions performed in densely populated urban

areas. However, and perhaps surprisingly, the negative relationship between retail stock value and

cash-in volumes is significant only in low density areas (Table 6). Since the stock value coefficient

is small and not robustly significant in low density areas in the models that use the number of cash-

in transactions as the dependent variable, this suggests that those agents perform about same the

number of transactions but that the average value of those transactions is decreasing in retail stock

value. It is not clear to us why agents with high retail stock value would attract clienteles that

perform cash-in transactions of smaller average size in low density areas.31

         Finally, market characteristics other than population density also appear to impact agents‚Äô

cash-in transactions differently in high and low density areas. The coefficients for low levels of

commercial development and high average income are negative, larger (in absolute value), and

more robustly significant in high density areas when we use either the number or volume of cash-

in transactions as the dependent variable. The patterns suggest that service provision is more

effectively targeted toward low income areas with relatively high levels of commercial

development in municipalities that are more densely populated. To date at least, the services




31
  One potential explanation may be that these low density areas are in fact relatively high income areas (such as
residential or with governmental bureaucracy and embassies) as we noted above, where businesses have a high stock
value since they are selling more expensive goods. Wealthier clients may use agent banking services for small
convenient transactions while in an agent‚Äôs retail business, but they may also be more likely to go to formal financial
institutions for their major transactions.

                                                                                                                    24
provided by FINCA DRC agents could therefore be viewed as a better fit for the urban poor than

for other groups. We derive similar results when we replace the cash-in variables with the cash-

out variables on the left-hand-side of our sub-sample regressions, and so we do not report those

results in the paper.

6b. Monitoring of FINCA Agents

         FINCA agents receive unannounced visits from agent network officers to assess how well

they are following FINCA protocols and to suggest areas for performance improvement. Agents

are supposed to be visited on a monthly basis, though the monitoring reports that we have indicate

that visits are less frequent than that for a large number of them. Agents are rated in four broad

categories: liquidity management, client service, transactions performance, and branding. Within

each category, agents receive scores in multiple sub-categories.32 For example, for liquidity

management agents receive a score for the management of ‚Äúe-float,‚Äù that is, money in the agent‚Äôs

account that can be transferred to a client‚Äôs account in exchange for cash, and ‚Äúcash float‚Äù (which

can be exchanged for e-float). For client service, agents receive scores for state of shop,

connectivity/service availability, and operator availability. For branding, scores are given for agent

visibility, posting of FINCA images, and the quality of FINCA signage outside the shop.

         We sum the scores from the sub-categories to derive a score in each of the four broad

categories, which we include in Table 7 in the regressions that we presented earlier.33 Although

we lose a large number of observations because most agents did not receive visits in all months

for which we have transactions data, the total number of observations in the regressions still



32
   It should be noted that this assessment of the agent is not in any way linked to the agent‚Äôs performance in terms of
number of transactions or volumes transacted. These assessments are carried out in the field by personnel that does
not have access to the headquarters database on transactions.
33
   Because the transactions performance category and its sub-components were not significantly associated with
transaction numbers or volumes, we do not include it among the explanatory variables in the models presented in
Table 7.

                                                                                                                    25
approaches 900. Estimated coefficients and patterns of significance are also similar to those for

the base results, although we lose significance on a few coefficients in the models that use standard

errors clustered at the municipality level. We note that the market characteristic variables (income,

commercial density) lose significance when we include the monitoring variables in our

regressions. In part, this could merely reflect changes in sample composition due to the reduced

number of observations. Another interpretation, however, is that learning through the monitoring

process enables agents to adapt to their markets to increase their transactions, and thus the

characteristics of those markets matter less for predicting their transactions performance.

         Indeed, the large and highly significant positive coefficients for the scores for liquidity

management, client services, and branding are striking. Those for liquidity management and

branding are especially robust across models. A one standard deviation increase in the liquidity

management variable is associated with 53-65 additional cash-in transactions per month,

depending on the specification; the same increase in the branding variable implies 40-48 more

transactions.34 Note also that the overall fit of the regressions (as reflected in the r-squared statistic)

increases to around 0.25 when monitoring variables are included, regardless of the dependent

variable or the standard errors that we use. Of course, we do not view the correlations in Table 7

as demonstrating a causal link from improved monitoring scores to more agent transactions.

Rather, it seems at least as likely that the monitoring scores could be summarizing characteristics

that are unobservable to us as researchers that lead to greater (or less) success of agents. We

therefore perform additional tests in which we explain variation in transactions using agent-

specific fixed effects and the monitoring variables. Agent fixed effects are included to summarize

the average transactions performance of each agent. These models are therefore designed to test


34
   For example, the coefficient for the liquidity variable in models 3 and 4 is 20.69 and its standard deviation is 3.12
(the score can range from 0 to 10.5). 20.69*3.12 = 64.6 additional transactions.

                                                                                                                      26
whether improvements (declines) in an agent‚Äôs monitoring scores are associated with more (fewer)

transactions than his/her average.

        Table 8 presents agent fixed effects models using the number of cash-in transactions as the

dependent variable; Table 9 uses the log of cash-in volume. Again, we find very similar results

when the number of cash-out transactions or their volumes is used as the dependent variable, and

so we do not present those results here. In Table 8, the total scores for liquidity management and

branding remain highly significant and economically meaningful. For example, models 1 and 2

imply that a one standard deviation increase in the liquidity variable is associated with 21 cash-in

transactions more than an agent‚Äôs typical monthly number.

        When we de-compose the liquidity and branding variables into their sub-components in

models 3 and 4, it appears that most of the explanatory power is loading on cash-float management

for the liquidity variable and FINCA signage for the branding variable. The cash-float result points

to the importance of having sufficient cash on hand to operate effectively as an agent. Note that,

even though we present this result in the context of a cash-in regression, it also holds when we use

the number of cash-out transactions as the dependent variable (results not reported to conserve

space). Effective liquidity management, therefore, is an essential element of a successful agent‚Äôs

business strategy, since failure to perform transactions due to a lack of cash on hand undermines

clients‚Äô faith in an agent‚Äôs reliability.

        We do not take the result for FINCA signage too literally since it is correlated with agent

visibility, which also approaches significance. Our sense is that it is the overall effort to improve




                                                                                                  27
branding, rather than improvement on one particular detail that is associated with increased agent

transactions.35

         In Table 9, we present agent fixed effects models that use (log of) monthly cash-in volumes

as the dependent variable. The coefficient for branding is positive and highly significant, though

that for liquidity management is not significant (models 1 and 2). However, when the sub-

components of those variables enter the regressions (models 3 and 4), the cash float and the FINCA

signage variables are positive and highly significant, just as they were in the models that used the

number of cash-in transactions as the dependent variable. The coefficients imply sizable gains in

cash-in volumes associated with improvement on these dimensions. For example, for an agent with

the median cash-in volume ($14,297 per month), increasing the branding total score by one

standard deviation would be associated with a $12,072 gain in monthly cash-in volume. In all, the

agent fixed effects models suggest that monitoring the performance of agents and suggesting areas

for improvements can help them increase the number and volume of their cash-in/cash-out

transactions.

     7. Conclusions

         Does agent banking hold the potential for cost-effective provision of financial services to

clients that are typically excluded by the formal financial system? We provide evidence on the

transaction activities of the agents of a microfinance institution operating in and around Kinshasa,

DRC. To our knowledge, this is some of the first empirical research on agents, and certainly the

first evidence from a country as financially underdeveloped as the DRC.




35
  That said, the FINCA sign is a distinctive and easily recognized trademark that can only be legally provided
through official FINCA channels. The sign may therefore provide an important indication to a client that an agent is
officially authorized.

                                                                                                                  28
         We focus on explaining variation in the number and volume of agents‚Äô monthly cash-

in/cash-out transactions, and find support for the notion that trust in an agent (because of his/her

age or the age of his/her retail business) is associated with more transactions. We also find some

evidence that the lack of available financial services in a local market and the suitability of

microfinance products for that market are associated with greater numbers and volumes of agent

transactions. But even after controlling for those factors, basic characteristics of the local market

and the agent‚Äôs potential clientele explain the lion‚Äôs share of variation in cash-in/cash-out

transactions. In this context, at least, agents appear to thrive in densely populated, low income

areas that have relatively high levels of commercial activity. We also provide evidence suggesting

that monitoring visits can help to improve agents‚Äô numbers and volumes of transactions, regardless

of the profile of their local markets.

         Our results suggest that agents can be effective providers of basic financial services among

the urban poor who lack suitable alternatives. But a key challenge is to spur financial inclusion

among those in more sparsely populated areas, and our results could be viewed as casting doubt

on the notion that agents would be feasible providers in those environments, since they rely so

heavily on foot traffic in commercially developed, densely populated areas to drive the number

and volume of transactions. To be fair, however, our analysis covers only municipalities in and

around Kinshasa and thus it is only our conjecture that the agent model might face additional

challenges outside those areas.36 Thus it remains to be seen how the agent banking model will play

out in less densely populated areas of the DRC.37




36
   In addition, relatively low population density within our sample does not imply that these are geographically
remote or poor areas relative to the rest of the DRC.
37
   In a country of the size of Western Europe, it may be unrealistic to expect agent banking to reach the most
scarcely populated areas.

                                                                                                                   29
       However, the fact that demographic variables explain substantial variation in agent

transactions in a relatively homogenous set of urban and peri-urban municipalities suggests to us

that more sparsely populated settings will likely pose challenges for the agent banking model.

Cost-reducing adaptations of the model, incorporating perhaps mobile banking options, could be

required. Also important is the question about the external validity of a model calculated with

Kinshasa data. While it should be a good estimate of agent transactions in major cities, further

research is needed in smaller cities and towns. Here larger challenges in terms of liquidity

management and agent quality management may prove difficult obstacles for operators of agent

networks such as FINCA. Going forward, better data on agent profitability over time would help

in assessing the viability of this model in different types of markets and survey data from users

(and nonusers) of agent services would help to assess how the availability of those services affects

financial behavior.




                                                                                                 30
References

Aker, Jenny C. and Isaac M. Mbiti. 2010. ‚ÄúMobile Phones and Economic Development in Africa.‚Äù
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(3): 207-232.

Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Robert Cull, Jun Qian, Lemma Senbet, and Patricio Valenzuela.
       2013. ‚ÄúImproving Access to Banking: Evidence from Kenya.‚Äù World Bank, Policy
       Research Working Paper 6593.

Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Robert Cull, Jun Qian, Lemma Senbet, and Patricio Valenzuela.
       2014. ‚ÄúThe African Financial Development and Financial Inclusion Gaps.‚Äù Journal of
       African Economies 23(5): 614-642.

Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Robert Cull, Jun Qian, Lemma Senbet, and Patricio Valenzuela.
       2015. ‚ÄúResolving the African Financial Development Gap: Cross-Country Comparisons
       and a Within Country Study of Kenya.‚Äù In Sebastian Edwards, Simon Johnson, and David
       N. Weil, Editors, African Successes, Volume 3: Modernization and Development, Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.

Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2012. ‚ÄúAgent Banking in Latin America.‚Äù AFI discussion paper,
       March.

Aycinena, Diego Mart√≠nez, and Dean Yang. 2010. ‚ÄúThe Impact of Remittance Fees on Remittance
      Flows: Evidence from a Field Experiment among Salvadorian Migrants.‚Äù University of
      Michigan, mimeo.

Beck, Thorsten and Robert Cull. 2015. ‚Äú‚ÄúBanking in Africa,‚Äù In A.N. Berger, P. Molyneux, and
       J.O.S. Wilson, Editors. Oxford Handbook of Banking, 2nd Edition, Oxford: Oxford
       University Press. pp. 913-937.

Beck, Thorsten and Robert Cull. 2014. ‚ÄúBanking Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Progress
       Report.‚Äù Revue D‚ÄôEconomique Financiere 116(4): 43-56.

Blumenstock, Joshua, Nathan Eagle and Marcel Fafchamps, 2011, ‚ÄúRisk and Reciprocity Over the
      Mobile Phone Network: Evidence from Rwanda,‚Äù CSAE Working Paper 2011-19; Oxford,
      UK.

Brandt, Loren and Arthur J. Hosios, 2010. ‚ÄúInterest-free Loans between Villagers.‚Äù Economic
       Development and Cultural Change 58(2): 345-372.

Collins, Daryl, Jonathan Morduch, Stuart Rutherford, and Orlanda Ruthven. 2009. Portfolios of
       the Poor: How the World‚Äôs Poor Live on $2 a Day. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
       Press.

De Weerdt, Joachim and Stefan Dercon. 2006. ‚ÄúRisk Sharing Networks and Insurance Against
     Illness.‚Äù Journal of Development Economics 81(2): 337-356.

                                                                                            31
Demirg√º√ß-Kunt, Aslƒ± and Leora Klapper. 2012a. ‚ÄúMeasuring Financial Inclusion: The Global
      Findex Database.‚Äù World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6025, Washington, DC:
      World Bank.

Demirg√º√ß-Kunt, Aslƒ± and Leora Klapper. 2012b. ‚ÄúThe Global Findex Database: Financial
      Inclusion in Sub-Saharan Africa.‚Äù Findex Note 4. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Demirg√º√ß-Kunt, Aslƒ±, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, and Peter Van Oudheusden. 2015. ‚ÄúThe
      Global Findex Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World.‚Äù World
      Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7255, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Fafchamps, Marcel, and Susan Lund. 2013. ‚ÄúRisk Sharing Networks in Rural Philippines.‚Äù Journal
      of Development Economics 71(2): 261-287.

Flamming, Mark, Claudia McKay, and Mark Pickens. 2011. Agent Management Toolkit: Building
      a Viable Network of Branchless Banking Agents. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
      (CGAP) Technical Guide. CGAP: Washington, D.C.

Genoni, Maria Eugenia. 2012. ‚ÄúHealth Shocks and Consumption Smoothing: Evidence from
      Indoensia.‚Äù Economic Development and Cultural Change 60(3): 475-506.

Gertler, Paul, and Jonathan Gruber. 2002. ‚ÄúInsuring Consumption Against Illness.‚Äù American
        Economic Review 92(1): 51-76.

Jack, William, Adam Ray, and Tavneet Suri. 2013. ‚ÄúMoney Management by Households and
       Firms in Kenya.‚Äù American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 103(3): 1-8.

Jack, William and Tavneet Suri. 2014. ‚ÄúRisk Sharing and Transactions costs: Evidence from
       Kenya‚Äôs Mobile Money Revolution.‚Äù American Economic Review 104(1): 183-223.

Lyman, Timothy, Gautam Ivatury, and Stefan Staschen. 2006. ‚ÄúUse of Agents in Branchless for
      the Poor: Rewards, Risks, and Regulation.‚Äù Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP),
      Focus Note No.38.

Mas, Ignacio, and Kabir Kumar. 2008. ‚ÄúBanking on Mobiles: Why, How, for Whom?‚Äù
      Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), Focus Note No.48.

Mbiti, Isaac and David N. Weil. 2015. ‚ÄúMobile Banking: The Impact of M-PESA in Kenya.‚Äù In
        Sebastian Edwards, Simon Johnson, and David N. Weil, Editors, African Successes,
        Volume 3: Modernization and Development, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Siedek, Hannah. 2008. ‚ÄúExtending Financial Services with Banking Agents.‚Äù Consultative Group
       to Assist the Poor (CGAP) Brief. CGAP: Washington, D.C.




                                                                                           32
World Bank. 2014. Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion. Washingotn,
      DC: World Bank.

Yang, Dean, and HwaJung Choi. 2007. ‚ÄúAre Remittances Insurance? Evidence from Rainfall
      Shocks in the Philippines.‚Äù World Bank Economic Review 21(2): 219-248.




                                                                                         33
               Table 1. Cash In Number of Transactions Regression
               P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two methods: robust standard errors OLS
               and clustering errors by municipality OLS
                                                   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)
                                                        (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)         (13)         (14)         (15)         (16)
                                                   3.630***      3.630      3.773***     3.773*      3.747***     3.747*      5.504***     5.504**     5.271***     5.271**     5.412***     5.412**     5.298***      5.298**     5.411***      5.411**
                                    Owner age       (0.583)     (2.146)      (0.605)     (2.167)      (0.617)     (2.185)      (0.733)     (2.381)      (0.663)     (2.534)      (0.661)     (2.521)      (0.629)      (2.300)      (0.639)      (2.311)
characteristics




                                     Owner          9.520        9.520       5.625        5.625       -11.81       -11.81       15.87       15.87        4.819       4.819       1.700        1.700           3.754     3.754           2.993        2.993
                                     Primary
                                    Education       (11.59)     (53.80)      (12.05)     (55.74)      (14.08)     (68.60)      (15.16)     (77.35)      (13.13)     (61.80)      (13.74)     (64.64)      (13.83)      (65.52)      (13.96)      (65.98)
Owner




                                  Owner Gender     -32.60***     -32.60     -31.10***     -31.10      -23.87*      -23.87      -13.41       -13.41      -1.808       -1.808      0.223        0.223       -0.701        -0.701          0.298        0.298
                                   (F=0, M=1)       (11.46)     (35.06)      (11.69)     (34.81)      (12.29)     (38.07)      (13.44)     (42.56)      (12.60)     (40.51)      (12.63)     (40.53)      (12.37)      (40.20)      (12.48)      (40.49)
characteristcs




                                     Business                               -2.040***     -2.040     -2.234***     -2.234     -1.774**      -1.774       0.408       0.408       0.0731      0.0731       -0.566        -0.566       -0.366       -0.366
  Business




                                       Age                                   (0.704)     (2.051)      (0.671)     (1.896)      (0.748)     (1.645)      (0.689)     (2.050)      (0.709)     (2.238)      (0.705)      (2.212)      (0.701)      (2.135)
                                                                            -0.287***   -0.287**     -0.246***   -0.246**     -0.221***   -0.221***    -0.155***     -0.155     -0.153***     -0.153     -0.151***      -0.151     -0.150***      -0.150
                                   Stock Value                              (0.0344)     (0.118)     (0.0338)     (0.0968)    (0.0325)     (0.0751)    (0.0561)     (0.116)     (0.0515)     (0.108)      (0.0506)     (0.0957)     (0.0503)     (0.0950)
                                   Commercial                                                                                                          -76.91***    -76.91*     -96.68***   -96.68**     -59.02***      -59.02     -79.90***     -79.90*
                                   low density                                                                                                          (11.75)     (40.67)      (12.22)     (40.49)      (11.41)      (35.10)      (15.94)      (40.75)
                                                                                                                                                       -96.81***   -96.81**     -63.97***     -63.97     -111.8***      -111.8     -102.1***      -102.1
                                  Income high                                                                                                           (14.59)     (34.99)      (18.29)     (56.37)      (25.37)      (82.12)      (26.86)      (87.97)
                                                                                                                                                       3.223***    3.223***     2.997***    2.997***     3.033***     3.033***     3.030***     3.030***
   Municipality characteristics




                                    Population                                                                                                          (0.377)     (0.857)      (0.355)     (0.859)      (0.360)      (0.933)      (0.359)      (0.926)
                                                                                                                                                       2.232***     2.232**     2.262***     2.262**     1.383***       1.383      1.538***      1.538*
                                      Density                                                                                                           (0.335)     (1.020)      (0.336)     (0.957)      (0.331)      (0.863)      (0.361)      (0.847)
                                    Financial                                                                                                                                   -48.52***     -48.52                                -45.77**      -45.77
                                   density high                                                                                                                                  (17.43)     (63.62)                                (23.29)      (62.02)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          45.62*        45.62       46.26**          46.26
                                       Banks                                                                                                                                                              (23.48)      (71.07)      (23.44)      (71.38)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         89.64***      89.64**      51.37**          51.37
                                  Micro finance                                                                                                                                                           (16.48)      (41.09)      (24.59)      (61.76)
                                      Mobile                                                                                                                                                              23.45*        23.45        -8.875       -8.875
                                      banking                                                                                                                                                             (14.09)      (36.55)      (17.42)      (42.91)
                                  Mean od           202.6        202.6       206.5        206.5        206.5       206.5        206.5       206.5        210.4       210.4       210.4        210.4           210.4     210.4           210.4        210.4
                                  cashintx          (259.7)     (259.7)      (264.1)     (264.1)      (264.1)     (264.1)      (264.1)     (264.1)      (272.3)     (272.3)      (272.3)     (272.3)      (272.3)      (272.3)      (272.3)      (272.3)
                                  Observations      2,296        2,296       2,202        2,202        2,202       2,202        2,202       2,202        1,921       1,921       1,921        1,921           1,921     1,921           1,921        1,921
                                  R-squared         0.023        0.023       0.028        0.028        0.053       0.053        0.205       0.205        0.136       0.136       0.140        0.140           0.143     0.143           0.144        0.144
                                  District fixed
                                  effects          No          No           No          No           Yes         Yes          No          No           No          No           No          No           No           No           No           No

                                  Municipality
                                  fixed effects    No          No           No          No           No          No           Yes         Yes          No          No           No          No           No           No           No           No




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             34
                Table 2. Cash Out Number of Transactions Regression
                P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two methods: robust standard errors OLS
                and clustering errors by municipality OLS
                                                      Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)
                                                           (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)         (13)        (14)         (15)        (16)
                                                      2.437***      2.437      2.530***      2.530      2.363***      2.363      3.670***      3.670      3.127***      3.127      3.136***      3.136      2.975***      2.975      3.059***      3.059
  Owner characteristics




                                     Owner age         (0.506)     (1.749)      (0.526)     (1.835)      (0.540)     (1.957)      (0.639)     (2.233)      (0.581)     (2.223)      (0.577)     (2.201)      (0.528)     (2.031)      (0.539)     (2.067)
                                                       -9.384       -9.384      -11.89       -11.89       -18.72      -18.72       9.251       9.251       -6.437       -6.437      -6.639       -6.639      -4.453       -4.453      -5.012       -5.012
                                  Owner Primary        (9.692)     (43.24)      (10.10)     (45.12)      (11.89)     (54.72)      (12.95)     (63.66)      (11.34)     (52.03)      (11.84)     (54.29)      (11.84)     (54.74)      (11.98)     (55.15)
                                    Education
                                                       -10.46       -10.46      -10.67       -10.67       -7.529      -7.529       -5.153      -5.153      18.33*       18.33       18.46*       18.46       17.39*       17.39       18.12*       18.12
                                   Owner Gender        (9.441)     (31.52)      (9.697)     (32.40)      (10.31)     (36.15)      (11.63)     (40.35)      (10.60)     (35.96)      (10.64)     (36.19)      (10.32)     (35.79)      (10.40)     (36.22)
                                    (F=0, M=1)
                                                                                -1.041*      -1.041     -1.576***     -1.576     -2.044***     -2.044      -0.750       -0.750      -0.772       -0.772     -1.238**      -1.238     -1.091**      -1.091
characteristcs




                                      Business
  Business




                                        Age                                     (0.577)     (1.715)      (0.549)     (1.693)      (0.620)     (1.649)      (0.511)     (1.640)      (0.534)     (1.805)      (0.535)     (1.779)      (0.537)     (1.724)
                                                                               -0.137***     -0.137     -0.113***    -0.113*     -0.128***   -0.128**     -0.0550*     -0.0550     -0.0549*     -0.0549      -0.0443     -0.0443      -0.0438     -0.0438
                                    Stock Value                                (0.0286)     (0.0900)     (0.0255)    (0.0646)     (0.0268)    (0.0591)    (0.0298)     (0.0720)    (0.0296)     (0.0720)    (0.0270)     (0.0609)    (0.0268)     (0.0608)
                                                                                                                                                          -77.25***    -77.25*     -78.53***   -78.53**     -56.37***    -56.37*     -71.70***    -71.70*
                                  Commercial low
                                     density                                                                                                               (9.351)     (38.41)      (9.352)     (36.07)      (8.195)     (28.14)      (13.07)     (37.23)
                                                                                                                                                          -81.18***   -81.18**     -79.06***     -79.06     -134.3***   -134.3**     -127.2***    -127.2*
                                 Income high                                                                                                               (13.61)     (32.97)      (15.25)     (48.31)      (21.19)     (62.52)      (21.99)     (66.83)
                                                                                                                                                          2.352***    2.352***     2.338***    2.338***     2.431***     2.431**     2.429***     2.429**
  Municipality characteristics




                                     Population                                                                                                            (0.376)     (0.832)      (0.355)     (0.819)      (0.359)     (0.876)      (0.359)     (0.870)
                                                                                                                                                          0.959***      0.959      0.961***      0.961       0.210        0.210       0.324        0.324
                                       Density                                                                                                             (0.230)     (0.701)      (0.229)     (0.682)      (0.220)     (0.583)      (0.245)     (0.555)
                                                                                                                                                                                    -3.142       -3.142                               -33.61*      -33.61
                                  Financial density
                                        high                                                                                                                                        (13.56)     (50.54)                               (19.65)     (42.98)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            68.87***      68.87      69.34***      69.34
                                       Banks                                                                                                                                                                 (18.83)     (52.95)      (18.78)     (53.13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            49.93***     49.93*       21.82        21.82
                                   Micro finance                                                                                                                                                             (11.97)     (24.47)      (21.34)     (44.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -1.670       -1.670      -25.41*      -25.41
                                  Mobile banking                                                                                                                                                             (11.57)     (29.11)      (13.06)     (32.94)
                                                        131.0       131.0       133.2        133.2        133.2       133.2        133.2       133.2       131.8        131.8       131.8        131.8       131.8        131.8       131.8        131.8
                                 Mean of
                                 cashouttx             (215.9)     (215.9)      (219.9)     (219.9)      (219.9)     (219.9)      (219.9)     (219.9)      (223.0)     (223.0)      (223.0)     (223.0)      (223.0)     (223.0)      (223.0)     (223.0)
                                 Observations          2,296        2,296       2,202        2,202        2,202       2,202        2,202       2,202       1,921        1,921       1,921        1,921       1,921        1,921       1,921        1,921
                                 R-squared             0.013        0.013       0.015        0.015        0.037       0.037        0.166       0.166       0.102        0.102       0.102        0.102       0.110        0.110       0.110        0.110
                                 District fixed
                                 effects              No          No           No          No           Yes         Yes          No          No           No          No           No          No           No          No           No          No

                                 Municipality fixed
                                 effects              No          No           No          No           No          No           Yes         Yes          No          No           No          No           No          No           No          No




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35
                       Table 3. Cash In Volume (Log) Regression
                       P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two methods: robust standard errors OLS
                       and clustering errors by municipality OLS
                                                Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)
                                                     (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)         (13)         (14)         (15)         (16)
                                                0.0175***    0.0175*     0.0194***     0.0194*     0.0194***    0.0194**     0.0272***    0.0272***    0.0232***    0.0232**     0.0247***    0.0247**     0.0256***    0.0256**     0.0262***    0.0262***
Owner characteristics




                                 Owner age      (0.00430)   (0.00966)    (0.00430)    (0.00962)    (0.00466)    (0.00810)    (0.00533)    (0.00855)    (0.00429)     (0.0107)    (0.00428)     (0.0104)    (0.00454)    (0.00927)    (0.00456)    (0.00919)
                                                 0.0879      0.0879       0.0497       0.0497       0.0488       0.0488       0.224*        0.224       0.0633       0.0633       0.0309       0.0309       0.0398       0.0398       0.0355       0.0355
                                  Owner
                                  Primary        (0.0920)    (0.219)      (0.0964)     (0.223)      (0.102)      (0.274)      (0.121)      (0.315)      (0.102)      (0.239)      (0.103)      (0.244)      (0.104)      (0.247)      (0.104)      (0.248)
                                 Education
                                                -0.283***     -0.283     -0.294***      -0.294     -0.300***      -0.300      -0.259**      -0.259       -0.148       -0.148       -0.127       -0.127       -0.124       -0.124       -0.118       -0.118
                               Owner Gender      (0.0973)    (0.193)      (0.0981)     (0.199)      (0.0969)     (0.200)      (0.104)      (0.214)      (0.106)      (0.180)      (0.106)      (0.185)      (0.107)      (0.183)      (0.106)      (0.182)
                                (F=0, M=1)
                                                                         -0.0173*      -0.0173     -0.0225**     -0.0225     -0.0242**     -0.0242     -0.00157     -0.00157     -0.00494     -0.00494     -0.00880     -0.00880     -0.00768     -0.00768
characteristcs




                                  Business
  Business




                                    Age                                  (0.00903)     (0.0154)    (0.00922)     (0.0155)     (0.0101)     (0.0159)    (0.00859)     (0.0180)    (0.00876)     (0.0184)    (0.00916)     (0.0179)    (0.00925)     (0.0179)
                                                                         -0.002***    -0.00201*    -0.002***    -0.0021**    -0.002***     -0.00202    -0.002***    -0.0020**    -0.002***    -0.00203*    -0.002***    -0.0021**    -0.002***    -0.0021**
                                Stock Value                              (0.000628)   (0.00110)    (0.000604)   (0.000995)   (0.000690)   (0.00124)    (0.000726)   (0.000957)   (0.000734)   (0.00101)    (0.000734)   (0.000976)   (0.000735)   (0.000976)
                                                                                                                                                         -0.194       -0.194     -0.397***      -0.397       -0.140       -0.140       -0.256       -0.256
                                Commercial
                                low density                                                                                                             (0.132)      (0.227)      (0.138)      (0.249)      (0.143)      (0.225)      (0.180)      (0.282)
                                                                                                                                                       -0.410***     -0.410*      -0.0750      -0.0750       -0.238       -0.238       -0.184       -0.184
                               Income high                                                                                                              (0.115)      (0.220)      (0.150)      (0.349)      (0.205)      (0.531)      (0.217)      (0.574)
                                                                                                                                                       0.0123***    0.0123***    0.00992**    0.00992*     0.00975**    0.00975*     0.00973**    0.00973*
Municipality characteristics




                                                                                                                                                       (0.00193)    (0.00434)        *
                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.00198)    (0.00496)        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.00200)    (0.00499)        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.00200)    (0.00500)
                                 Population
                                                                                                                                                       0.00610**     0.00610     0.00637**     0.00637     0.000494     0.000494      0.00135      0.00135
                                   Density                                                                                                             (0.00283)    (0.00769)    (0.00282)    (0.00692)    (0.00361)    (0.00738)    (0.00380)    (0.00749)
                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.495***      -0.495                                 -0.255       -0.255
                                 Financial
                                density high                                                                                                                                      (0.138)      (0.382)                                (0.251)      (0.368)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.000671    -0.000671     0.00317      0.00317
                                   Banks                                                                                                                                                                    (0.221)      (0.476)      (0.221)      (0.480)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.700***      0.700**      0.487*        0.487
                               Micro finance                                                                                                                                                                (0.191)      (0.308)      (0.287)      (0.436)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.129        0.129       -0.0502      -0.0502
                                    Mobile
                                   banking                                                                                                                                                                  (0.151)      (0.287)      (0.230)      (0.346)
                               Mean of            9.274       9.274        9.285        9.285        9.285        9.285        9.285        9.285        9.263        9.263        9.263        9.263        9.263        9.263        9.263        9.263
                               cashin_volum      (2.047)     (2.047)      (2.053)      (2.053)      (2.053)      (2.053)      (2.053)      (2.053)      (2.052)      (2.052)      (2.052)      (2.052)      (2.052)      (2.052)      (2.052)      (2.052)
                               e (ln)
                               Observations       2,281       2,281        2,187        2,187        2,187        2,187        2,187        2,187        1,913        1,913        1,913        1,913        1,913        1,913        1,913        1,913
                               R-squared          0.012       0.012        0.019        0.019        0.028        0.028        0.116        0.116        0.042        0.042        0.049        0.049        0.054        0.054        0.054        0.054
                               District fixed
                               effects          No          No           No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No           No           No           No           No           No           No           No           No

                               Municipality
                               fixed effects    No          No           No           No           No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No           No           No           No           No           No           No




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             36
                          Table 4. Cash Out Volume (Log) Regression
                          P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two methods: robust standard errors OLS
                          and clustering errors by municipality OLS
                                                Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE    Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)   Robust SE   Cluster(M)
                                                     (1)       (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)        (12)         (13)        (14)         (15)        (16)
                                                -0.00206    -0.00206     -0.000641    -0.000641    -0.000438    -0.000438    0.0171***     0.0171*      0.00153     0.00153      0.00186     0.00186      0.00659     0.00659      0.00756     0.00756
Owner characteristics




                                  Owner age     (0.00482)    (0.0120)    (0.00493)     (0.0125)    (0.00515)     (0.0109)    (0.00551)    (0.00846)    (0.00497)    (0.0122)    (0.00495)    (0.0121)    (0.00505)    (0.0100)    (0.00506)   (0.00994)
                                                 -0.0387     -0.0387      -0.0759      -0.0759      -0.0134      -0.0134     0.446***       0.446       0.0192      0.0192       0.0117      0.0117       0.0304      0.0304       0.0240      0.0240
                               Owner Primary    (0.0996)     (0.281)      (0.104)      (0.291)      (0.111)      (0.316)      (0.122)      (0.324)      (0.108)     (0.314)      (0.110)     (0.325)      (0.109)     (0.309)      (0.109)     (0.310)
                                 Education
                                                 -0.0944     -0.0944       -0.118       -0.118       -0.154       -0.154      -0.0711      -0.0711      0.0727      0.0727       0.0776      0.0776        0.105       0.105        0.113       0.113
                               Owner Gender      (0.110)     (0.279)      (0.111)      (0.284)      (0.109)      (0.283)      (0.109)      (0.258)      (0.116)     (0.235)      (0.116)     (0.238)      (0.115)     (0.222)      (0.115)     (0.222)
                                (F=0, M=1)
                                                                         -0.00146     -0.00146      -0.00974     -0.00974    -0.0205**     -0.0205      0.00158     0.00158     0.000766    0.000766     -0.000903   -0.000903    0.000764    0.000764
characteristcs




                                   Business
  Business




                                     Age                                 (0.00850)     (0.0138)    (0.00878)     (0.0158)    (0.00965)     (0.0152)    (0.00896)    (0.0206)    (0.00913)    (0.0211)    (0.00956)    (0.0198)    (0.00969)    (0.0197)
                                                                         -0.00147*    -0.00147          -       -0.00173*         -       -0.00232*    -0.00127    -0.00127     -0.00126    -0.00126     -0.00147    -0.00147     -0.00146    -0.00146
                                                                         (0.000863)   (0.00125)    0.00173**
                                                                                                   (0.000841)   (0.00101)    0.00232**
                                                                                                                             (0.000926)   (0.00128)    (0.00117)   (0.00153)    (0.00117)   (0.00154)    (0.00117)   (0.00140)    (0.00117)   (0.00140)
                                 Stock Value
                                                                                                                                                       -0.366**      -0.366     -0.413***     -0.413      -0.278*      -0.278     -0.458**      -0.458
                               Commercial low
                                  density                                                                                                               (0.142)     (0.486)      (0.153)     (0.571)      (0.145)     (0.383)      (0.201)     (0.522)
                                                                                                                                                       -0.504***     -0.504     -0.426***     -0.426     -0.780***     -0.780     -0.697***     -0.697
                               Income high                                                                                                              (0.130)     (0.436)      (0.162)     (0.482)      (0.226)     (0.602)      (0.241)     (0.631)
                                                                                                                                                       0.0158***    0.0158*     0.0153***    0.0153      0.0162***    0.0162      0.0162***    0.0162
Municipality characteristics




                                  Population                                                                                                           (0.00238)   (0.00904)    (0.00250)    (0.0103)    (0.00250)    (0.0104)    (0.00250)    (0.0104)
                                                                                                                                                       0.00733**    0.00733     0.00739**    0.00739     -0.00332    -0.00332     -0.00200    -0.00200
                                   Density                                                                                                             (0.00314)    (0.0110)    (0.00313)    (0.0109)    (0.00381)   (0.00991)    (0.00403)   (0.00968)
                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.116       -0.116                               -0.390       -0.390
                                  Financial
                                 density high                                                                                                                                    (0.151)     (0.472)                               (0.279)     (0.421)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0845      0.0845       0.0880      0.0880
                                    Banks                                                                                                                                                                 (0.228)     (0.398)      (0.228)     (0.404)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.610***     0.610*        0.282       0.282
                                Micro finance                                                                                                                                                             (0.188)     (0.313)      (0.312)     (0.468)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.669***     -0.669     -0.946***    -0.946*
                               Mobile banking                                                                                                                                                             (0.165)     (0.436)      (0.257)     (0.517)
                               mean of            7.994       7.994        7.992        7.992        7.992        7.992        7.992        7.992        7.922       7.922        7.922       7.922        7.922       7.922        7.922       7.922
                               cashout_volum     (2.213)     (2.213)      (2.229)      (2.229)      (2.229)      (2.229)      (2.229)      (2.229)      (2.222)     (2.222)      (2.222)     (2.222)      (2.222)     (2.222)      (2.222)     (2.222)
                               e (ln)
                               Observations      2,274        2,274        2,180        2,180        2,180        2,180        2,180        2,180        1,907       1,907        1,907       1,907        1,907       1,907        1,907       1,907
                               R-squared         0.001        0.001        0.003        0.003        0.016        0.016        0.161        0.161        0.040       0.040        0.040       0.040        0.066       0.066        0.067       0.067
                               District fixed
                               effects          No          No           No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No           No          No           No          No           No          No           No          No
                               Municipality
                               fixed effects    No          No           No           No           No           No           Yes          Yes          No          No           No          No           No          No           No          No




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         37
      Table 5. Municipality Density Model (simple) - Cash In Transactions
      P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two
      methods: robust standard errors OLS and clustering errors by municipality OLS

                                                           Robust SE errors                                       Cluster (municipality)
                                                     Low density      High density                           Low density        High density
   Owner                                                4.691***                    4.179***                      4.691                           4.179
Characteristics         Owner Age                        (0.910)                     (0.865)                     (2.968)                        (3.312)
                       Owner Primary                   -74.56***                    82.15***                     -74.56                           82.15
                         Education                       (18.44)                     (22.32)                     (82.10)                        (111.8)
                        Owner Gender                     -36.02*                     -1.061                      -36.02                          -1.061
                            (F=0, M=1)                   (18.46)                     (16.82)                     (68.75)                        (39.10)
  Business                                                -0.532                     -0.100                      -0.532                          -0.100
Characteristics          Business Age                    (1.009)                     (1.011)                     (2.505)                        (2.754)
                                                       -0.248***                   -1.007***                     -0.248                         -1.007*
                          Stock Value                   (0.0398)                     (0.181)                     (0.129)                        (0.485)
 Municipality                                          -122.7***                   -130.7***                     -122.7                        -130.7**
Characteristics      Commercially Low                    (25.72)                     (17.74)                     (121.0)                        (52.78)
                                                       -108.3***                   -145.4***                     -108.3                        -145.4**
                         Income High                     (26.25)                     (13.85)                     (129.2)                        (59.60)
                    Mean of dependent                     186.1                       233.2                       186.1                           233.2
                        variable                         (258.4)                     (270.3)                     (258.4)                        (270.3)
                      Observations                         927                         994                         927                             994
                       R-squared                          0.081                       0.082                       0.081                           0.082


      Table 6. Municipality Density Model (simple) - Log of Cash In Volume
      P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two
      methods: robust standard errors OLS and clustering errors by municipality OLS

                                                                Robust SE errors                                           Cluster (municipality)
                                                         Low density         High density                             Low density        High density
   Owner                                                  0.0213***                       0.0225***                     0.0213**                       0.0225
Characteristics         Owner Age                          (0.00591)                      (0.00639)                     (0.00830)                     (0.0197)
                       Owner Primary                          -0.133                         0.312*                       -0.133                        0.312
                         Education                           (0.128)                        (0.175)                       (0.253)                      (0.510)
                        Owner Gender                         -0.245*                         -0.171                       -0.245                       -0.171
                           (F=0, M=1)                        (0.141)                        (0.158)                       (0.347)                      (0.204)
  Business                                                  0.0195*                        -0.0217*                       0.0195                      -0.0217
Characteristics          Business Age                       (0.0117)                       (0.0131)                      (0.0268)                     (0.0262)
                                                         -0.00296***                      -0.000745                    -0.00296**                    -0.000745
                          Stock Value                     (0.000781)                      (0.00180)                    (0.000836)                    (0.00333)
 Municipality                                                 -0.142                       -0.419**                       -0.142                       -0.419
Characteristics      Commercially Low                        (0.187)                        (0.188)                       (0.455)                      (0.407)
                                                            -0.300**                        -0.794*                       -0.300                      -0.794*
                        Income High                          (0.139)                        (0.436)                       (0.507)                      (0.383)
                    Mean of dependent                         9.247                          9.336                         9.247                        9.336
                    variable                                 (1.977)                        (2.150)                       (1.977)                      (2.150)
                    Observations                               922                            991                           922                          991
                    R-squared                                 0.031                          0.028                         0.031                        0.028



                                                                                                                                                      38
Table 7. Progressive OLS with Monitoring variables
P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two methods: robust standard errors OLS
and clustering errors by municipality OLS
                                                                         Cash in Transactions                            Cash out Transactions                             Cash in Volume (Log)                            Cash out Volume (Log)
                                                                        Cluster(M      Robust    Cluster(M    Robust    Cluster(M     Robust     Cluster(M               Cluster(M                 Cluster(M               Cluster(M                Cluster(M
                                                            Robust SE        )            SE          )         SE           )           SE           )      Robust SE        )        Robust SE        )      Robust SE        )       Robust SE        )
                                                               (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)          (11)        (12)        (13)        (14)         (15)        (16)
                                                            5.636***      5.636       5.574***     5.574     4.096***     4.096      3.985***      3.985     0.0109*      0.0109       0.0127**     0.0127      0.00241     0.00241      0.00517     0.00517
                                        Owner age            (1.116)     (3.525)      (1.091)     (3.467)    (1.032)     (3.458)      (0.995)     (3.449)    (0.00622)   (0.0131)     (0.00634)    (0.0111)    (0.00674)   (0.0148)     (0.00676)   (0.0126)
                                                            -57.77***    -57.77      -55.48**     -55.48     -56.4***    -56.40      -55.1***     -55.09      -0.146      -0.146        -0.130      -0.130      -0.0899     -0.0899      -0.0695     -0.0695
 characteristics




                                      Owner Primary          (21.64)     (68.29)      (21.61)     (67.68)    (19.87)     (67.05)      (19.80)     (66.40)     (0.130)     (0.196)      (0.131)      (0.200)     (0.135)     (0.250)      (0.135)     (0.241)
                                        Education
 Owner




                                                             12.73        12.73       12.22       12.22      36.21**      36.21      35.15**      35.15      -0.277**     -0.277*      -0.248*      -0.248*     -0.0291     -0.0291      0.0158      0.0158
                                    Owner Gender(F=0,
                                          M=1)               (18.52)     (51.10)      (17.84)     (50.04)    (16.12)     (50.78)      (15.43)     (49.72)     (0.129)     (0.151)      (0.128)      (0.140)     (0.140)     (0.229)      (0.138)     (0.214)
                                                             -0.503      -0.503       -0.799      -0.799     -2.12***    -2.124      -2.34***     -2.337     -0.00701    -0.00701      -0.00867    -0.00867     -0.0101     -0.0101      -0.0119     -0.0119
 characteristcs




                                         Business
   Business




                                           Age               (0.915)     (2.016)      (0.920)     (2.076)    (0.737)     (1.780)      (0.742)     (1.809)    (0.00945)   (0.0162)     (0.00978)    (0.0162)    (0.00998)   (0.0182)     (0.0104)    (0.0179)
                                                             -0.145*     -0.145       -0.156*     -0.156     -0.0544     -0.0544      -0.0533     -0.0533    -0.00109    -0.00109      -0.00126    -0.00126    -0.00107    -0.00107     -0.00125    -0.00125
                                        Stock Value         (0.0873)     (0.120)     (0.0918)     (0.126)    (0.0631)   (0.0865)     (0.0623)    (0.0846)    (0.00137)   (0.00137)    (0.00133)    (0.00124)   (0.00201)   (0.00194)    (0.00200)   (0.00178)
                                                            -87.03***   -87.03**     -50.61**     -50.61     -80.3***    -80.32*     -58.7***     -58.73      0.248        0.248       0.444**      0.444*      -0.0956     -0.0956      0.0995      0.0995
                                      Commercial low
                                         density             (21.34)     (39.82)      (22.32)     (43.96)    (16.39)     (39.12)      (17.02)     (37.08)     (0.209)     (0.205)      (0.225)      (0.242)     (0.216)     (0.383)      (0.219)     (0.340)
                                                             -43.16*     -43.16       -34.69      -34.69     -73.3***    -73.31      -79.1***     -79.06      0.306        0.306        0.402       0.402       -0.0999     -0.0999      -0.105      -0.105
                                   Income high               (25.82)     (53.00)      (29.31)     (66.67)    (22.44)     (51.85)      (25.25)     (60.51)     (0.195)     (0.408)      (0.249)      (0.544)     (0.213)     (0.590)      (0.262)     (0.675)
                                                            3.733***    3.733***     3.629***    3.629***    2.996***   2.996**      2.964***    2.964**     0.0100**    0.0100**     0.00964**    0.00964*    0.00979**   0.00979     0.0101***     0.0101
    Municipality characteristics




                                                             (0.561)     (0.943)      (0.552)     (0.985)    (0.576)     (1.061)      (0.565)     (1.085)        *
                                                                                                                                                             (0.00253)   (0.00426)        *
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.00253)        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.00374)       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (0.00316)   (0.00905)    (0.00317)   (0.00900)
                                        Population
                                                            1.016**       1.016      0.907**      0.907       0.127       0.127       0.0248      0.0248     -0.00232    -0.00232      -0.00545    -0.00545    -0.00734*   -0.00734    -0.013***     -0.0131
                                          Density            (0.431)     (0.995)      (0.418)     (1.094)    (0.328)     (0.808)      (0.316)     (0.955)    (0.00353)   (0.00752)    (0.00406)    (0.00690)   (0.00403)   (0.0113)     (0.00424)   (0.00898)
                                                            -82.25***    -82.25                              -37.49**    -37.49                              -0.500***    -0.500                               -0.430**     -0.430
                                   Financial density high    (22.37)     (58.18)                             (17.70)     (46.78)                              (0.172)     (0.448)                               (0.187)     (0.548)
                                                                                      -26.95      -26.95                              3.996       3.996                                 -0.345      -0.345                               -0.293      -0.293
                                           Banks                                      (27.46)     (57.94)                             (22.43)     (48.82)                              (0.282)      (0.607)                              (0.266)     (0.598)
                                                                                     71.95***     71.95                              38.41**      38.41                                0.559**      0.559                               0.637***     0.637
                                       Micro finance                                  (23.52)     (55.29)                             (18.59)     (46.01)                              (0.232)      (0.419)                              (0.218)     (0.450)
                                                                                     63.08**      63.08                               36.18*      36.18                                 0.0217      0.0217                               -0.296      -0.296
                                      Mobile banking                                  (24.58)     (41.25)                             (20.51)     (35.63)                              (0.220)      (0.356)                              (0.231)     (0.489)
                                                            20.27***    20.27***     20.69***    20.69***    17.00***   17.00***     17.17***    17.17***    0.135***    0.135***     0.136***     0.136***    0.141***    0.141***     0.141***    0.141***
                                       Liquidity Total       (2.801)     (5.669)      (2.829)     (5.774)    (2.365)     (5.727)      (2.397)     (5.808)    (0.0211)    (0.0186)      (0.0210)    (0.0196)    (0.0214)    (0.0249)     (0.0212)    (0.0267)
 Monitoring
 indicators




                                                            28.84***     28.84*      28.46***    28.46**      9.976       9.976       9.946       9.946      0.230***    0.230**      0.225***     0.225**      0.154*      0.154        0.149*      0.149
                                    Client Service Total     (8.203)     (13.87)      (8.149)     (13.38)    (6.820)     (9.768)      (6.765)     (9.363)    (0.0788)    (0.0948)      (0.0789)    (0.0954)    (0.0791)    (0.0985)     (0.0781)    (0.0982)
                                                            37.52***    37.52***     36.86***    36.86***    32.10***   32.10***     31.84***    31.84***    0.514***    0.514***     0.505***     0.505***    0.580***    0.580***     0.568***    0.568***
                                      Branding Total         (5.695)     (7.675)      (5.757)     (8.122)    (4.413)     (7.172)      (4.514)     (7.627)    (0.0716)    (0.0977)      (0.0722)    (0.0977)    (0.0679)     (0.106)     (0.0672)     (0.103)
                                                             242.3        242.3       242.3       242.3       162.3       162.3       162.3       162.3       9.482        9.482        9.482       9.482        8.381      8.381        8.381       8.381
                                   Mean of dependent
                                   variable                  (297.3)     (297.3)      (297.3)     (297.3)    (258.3)     (258.3)      (258.3)     (258.3)     (1.965)     (1.965)      (1.965)      (1.965)     (2.081)     (2.081)      (2.081)     (2.081)
                                   Observations               886         886          886         886         886        886          886         886         884         884           884         884         884         884          884         884
                                   R-squared                 0.276        0.276       0.278       0.278       0.233       0.233       0.233       0.233       0.235        0.235        0.248       0.248        0.229      0.229        0.252       0.252




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             39
Table 8. Agent Fixed effects- Cash In Transactions
P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two
methods: robust standard errors OLS and clustering errors by municipality OLS
                                          Robust SE                 Cluster (M)              Robust SE                Cluster (M)
  Liquidity Total (e-float + cash         6.617***                   6.617***
               float)                      (1.662)                    (2.045)
                                                                                              0.0224                    0.0224
              E-float                                                                         (2.577)                   (3.449)
                                                                                             15.47***                  15.47***
            Cash float                                                                        (3.579)                   (3.679)
    Branding Total (visibility +          22.40***                   22.40***
   FINCA images +FINCA sign)               (5.358)                    (7.823)
                                                                                               24.70                     24.70
          Agent visibility                                                                    (17.38)                   (15.79)
                                                                                              -6.805                    -6.805
          FINCA Images                                                                        (9.284)                   (7.535)
                                                                                             41.32***                  41.32***
            FINCA Sign                                                                        (9.063)                   (11.68)
                                           -3.581                     -3.581                   0.745                     0.745
       Client Service Total                (5.948)                    (8.841)                 (5.754)                   (7.981)
                                            233.0                      233.0                   233.1                     233.1
  mean of dependent variable               (289.8)                    (289.8)                 (290.2)                   (290.2)
          Observations                       964                        964                     960                       960
            R-squared                       0.063                      0.063                   0.095                     0.095
       Number of agentid                     160                        160                     160                       160


Table 9. Agent Fixed effects- Log of Cash In Volume
P-values are in brackets. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. All models are estimated via two
methods: robust standard errors OLS and clustering errors by municipality OLS

                                       Robust SE                Cluster (M)                Robust SE                Cluster (M)
   Liquidity Total (e-float +            0.0237                   0.0237
          cash float)                   (0.0200)                 (0.0190)
                                                                                           -0.0241                    -0.0241
            E-float                                                                        (0.0281)                  (0.0250)
                                                                                          0.0971***                  0.0971**
          Cash float                                                                       (0.0314)                  (0.0374)
  Branding Total (visibility +          0.482***                 0.482***
  FINCA images +FINCA sign)             (0.0738)                  (0.104)
                                                                                             0.355                     0.355
        Agent visibility                                                                    (0.247)                   (0.270)
                                                                                            0.0141                    0.0141
        FINCA Images                                                                        (0.129)                   (0.117)
                                                                                           0.882***                  0.882***
          FINCA Sign                                                                        (0.164)                   (0.217)
                                        -0.0155                   -0.0155                   0.0153                    0.0153
     Client Service Total               (0.0721)                  (0.0901)                 (0.0698)                  (0.0857)
     Mean of dependent                    9.423                     9.423                    9.427                     9.427
           variable                      (1.995)                   (1.995)                  (1.989)                   (1.989)
 Observations                              964                       964                      960                       960
 R-squared                                0.063                     0.063                    0.095                     0.095
 Number of agentid                         160                       160                      160                       160




                                                                                                                                                40
Appendix A. Municipality level statistics




                             municipality surface       municipality population
  business municipality      (sq km)                    (10,000s)                 number of agents
  Bandalungwa                                    6.82                   20.2341                       4
  Bumbu                                           5.5                   32.9234                       2
  Kalamu                                         6.64                   31.5342                       5
  Kasa-Vubu                                      5.04                    15.732                       8
  Makala                                          5.6                   25.3844                       3
  Ngiri Ngiri                                     3.4                   17.4843                       3
  Selembao                                      23.18                   33.5581                       2
  Barumbu                                        4.72                   15.0319                       3
  Gombe                                         29.33                    3.2373                       8
  Kintambo                                       2.72                   10.6772                       5
  Lingwala                                       2.88                    9.4635                       4
  Mont Ngafula                                 358.92                   26.1004                       8
  Ngaliema                                      244.3                   68.3135                      20
  Kisenso                                        16.6                   38.6151                       1
  Lemba                                          23.7                   34.9838                      15
  Limete                                         67.7                   37.5726                      14
  Matete                                         4.88                   26.8781                       8
  Ngaba                                             4                    18.065                       2
  Kimbasenke                                   237.78                   94.6372                      13
  Maluku                                       7948.8                     6.745                       4
  Masina                                        69.73                   48.5167                      11
  N'Djili                                        11.4                   44.2138                      12
  N'Sele                                       898.79                   14.0929                       7
  Lubumbashi                                     747                   178.6397                      15
  Kolwezi                                        213                    45.3147                       4
  Matadi                                         110                    30.6053                       7
  Tshofa                                                                                              1
  Soyo                                                                                                1




                                                                                              41
Appendix B. Variable Descriptive Statistics

 Variables                 Definition                                N      mean       min       max          sd            variance       kurtosis       skewness       p1          p25            p50           p99
                           owner's last degree (primary,
 last_degree               highschool or university)                 2315   0.796112         0            2    0.591559      0.349942          2.595018   0.089628               0              0            1               2
                           dummy variable, owner's gender
 owner_gender              (0=female, 1=male)                        2324   0.745267         0            1    0.435805      0.189926          2.267477       -1.12582           0              0            1               1
 business_number_          number of employees an agent's
 employees                 business has                              2265   4.326269         0         111     12.40981      154.0035          67.66187   7.917733               1              1            2            111
                           number of days per week the agent's
 business_daysperweek      location is open for business             2282   6.640228         6            7    0.480039      0.230437          1.341481       -0.58436           6              6            7               7
                           number of hours per day the agent's
 hrsopenperday             location is open for business             2273   13.09793         8           24    2.587159      6.693389          6.332575   0.914328               8           11.3           13              24
                           indicates whether the business is
 business_registered       formally registred or not                 2313          1         1            1            0               0   .              .                      1              1            1               1
                           net profit of business, reported
 net_profit                weekly                                    1582   1491.597      15       39141       3375.348      1.14E+07          79.82377   7.583774              15           175           560          12000
 account_balance           current FINCA account balance             1799   1028.397         3         5000    743.1064      552207.1          14.18041   3.026752              10           500          1000            5000
 daily_transactions        daily transactions amount (USD)           2245   1483.303      35      120000       6932.114      4.81E+07          266.8851   15.70515              60           250           550          10000
 stock_value               Current inventory value USD               2230   20294.58     110     1000000       64190.54      4.12E+09          149.1209        11.149         1000           4200         7500          200000
 min_pos_balance           Minimum POS balance                       2261   0.813799         0            2    0.633368      0.401155          2.388218   0.174242               0              0            1               2
 owner_age                 business owner's age                      2296   43.66202      24             70    10.05934      101.1903          2.790635   0.551494              27             36           42              69
                           number of years the agent's business
 business_age              has been open                             2324   13.71601         1         2010    102.0555      10415.32          378.2991   19.33814               1              4            6              79


 municipality_surface      municipality surface, in sq km            2032   416.2711    2.72      7948.8       1477.783       2183842          24.61068   4.815137            2.72            5.6         29.33         7948.8
 municipality_population   municipality population, 2004 data        2032   368660.8   32373      946372       241783.1      5.85E+10          3.162925   0.921581        32373            174843    335581             946372
                           municipality density, as derived from
 municipality_density      population/surface                        1948   18980.62         8     59860       18915.61      3.58E+08          1.994131   0.695122               8           2796         6957          59860
                           number of administrative divisions
 municipality_divisions    inside the municipality                   2032   15.65748         6           30        5.9721    35.66598          3.271088   0.633162               6             13           15              30
                           level of urban development
 urban_level               (urban/peri-urban/rural)                  2032   0.222933         0            1    0.416316      0.173319          2.772542   1.331368               0              0            0               1
                           indicates level of income in a
 income_level              municipality (high, medium ,low)          2032   1.050689         0            2    0.767951      0.589748          1.700499       -0.08635           0              0            1               2
                           indicates level of commercial activity
 comercially_developed     in a municipality (high, medium ,low)     1958    0.52094         0            2    0.720047      0.518468            2.6115   1.006969               0              0            0               2
                           indicates level of density of financial
 financial_alternatives_   alternatives in a municipality (high,
 density                   medium ,low)                              1766   0.650623         0            2    0.841365      0.707895          1.806339       0.73067            0              0            0               2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 42
                          indicates the form of financial services
financial_alternatives_   predominant in one municipality
types                     (banks, microfinance, mobile banking)      1676   0.738664   0   2   0.832021    0.69226   1.638885   0.519457   0   0   0   2
                          dummy variable, indicates is business
                          owner is a graduate of primary
primary_educ              education only                             2324   0.296472   0   1     0.4568   0.208666   1.794411   0.891297   0   0   0   1
                          dummy variable, indicates is business
                          owner is a graduate of secondary
secondary_educ            education only                             2324   0.606282   0   1   0.488679   0.238807   1.189287   -0.43507   0   0   1   1
                          dummy variable, indicates is business
                          owner is a graduate of tertiary
tertiary_educ             education                                  2324   0.093374   0   1   0.291018   0.084691   8.812667   2.795115   0   0   0   1
                          indicates that a municipality's level of
                          development can be qualified as
urban                     urban, dummy variable                      2324   0.679432   0   1   0.466795   0.217898   1.591281   -0.76895   0   0   1   1
                          indicates that a municipality's level of
                          development can be qualified as peri-
peri_urban                urban, dummy variable                      2324   0.194923   0   1   0.396226   0.156995   3.372359   1.540247   0   0   0   1
                          indicates high level of income in a
income_high               municipality, dummy variable               2324   0.236661   0   1   0.425124    0.18073   2.535488   1.239148   0   0   0   1
                          indicates medium level of income in a
income_med                municipality, dummy variable               2324   0.356713   0   1   0.479132   0.229568   1.357893   0.598241   0   0   0   1
                          indicates low level of income in a
income_low                municipality, dummy variable               2324   0.280981   0   1   0.449575   0.202118   1.949743   0.974547   0   0   0   1
                          indicates high level of commercial
                          activity in a municipality, dummy
comercially_high          variable                                   2324   0.516781   0   1   0.499826   0.249826   1.004511   -0.06716   0   0   1   1
                          indicates medium level of commercial
                          activity in a municipality, dummy
comercially_med           variable                                   2324   0.212565   0   1    0.40921   0.167453   2.974399   1.405133   0   0   0   1
                          indicates low level of commercial
                          activity in a municipality, dummy
comercially_low           variable                                   2324   0.113167   0   1   0.316865   0.100403    6.96411   2.442153   0   0   0   1
                          indicates high density of financial
                          alternatives in a municipality, dummy
financial_density_high    variable                                   2324   0.447935   0   1   0.497389   0.247396   1.043848     0.2094   0   0   0   1
                          indicates medium density of financial
                          alternatives in a municipality, dummy
financial_density_med     variable                                   2324   0.129518   0   1   0.335845   0.112792   5.869719   2.206744   0   0   0   1
                          indicates low density of financial
                          alternatives in a municipality, dummy
financial_density_low     variable                                   2324   0.182444   0   1   0.386293   0.149222    3.70429   1.644473   0   0   0   1
                          indicates banks as the form of
                          financial services predominant in one
banks                     municipality, dummy variable               2324   0.368331   0   1   0.482456   0.232763    1.29806   0.545948   0   0   0   1


                                                                                                                                                           43
                       indicates microfinance as the form of
                       financial services predominant in one
microfinance           muncipality, dummy variable                2324   0.172978   0         1   0.378309   0.143118   3.990252   1.729234    0          0          0          1
                       indicates mobile banking as the form
                       of financial services predominant in
mobile_banking         one muncipality, dummy variable            2324   0.179862   0         1   0.384155   0.147575   3.779116   1.667068    0          0          0          1

                       dummy variable for the district of
Funa                   Funa                                       2324    0.16136   0         1   0.367942   0.135381    4.38974   1.841125    0          0          0          1
                       dummy variable for the district of
Lukunga                Lukunga                                    2324   0.259036   0         1     0.4382   0.192019   2.210059   1.100027    0          0          0          1
                       dummy variable for the district of
Mont_Amba              Mont                                       2324   0.222031   0         1   0.415701   0.172808   2.789274   1.337638    0          0          0          1
                       dummy variable for the district of
Tshangu                Tshangu                                    2324   0.233219   0         1   0.422971   0.178905   2.591976   1.261735    0          0          0          1
Other_Cities           dummy variable for other cities            2324   0.124355   0         1   0.330057   0.108937   6.183537   2.276738    0          0          0          1
                       dummy variable, indicates whether an
Commerce               agent's registered business is in retail   2324   0.763769   0         1   0.424857   0.180503   2.542447   -1.24195    0          1          1          1
                       dummy variable, indicates whether an
                       agent's registered business is in
Services               serivices                                  2324    0.21988   0         1   0.414254   0.171606   2.829798     1.3527    0          0          0          1

                       number of cash in transactions,
cashintx               monthly                                    2324   201.7818   0      2468   258.6658   66907.98   19.14416   3.335248    1         51        117       1304
                       volume of cash in transactions,
cashinvolume           monthly                                    2324   38138.16   0   2432694   119137.8   1.42E+10   223.0474    13.3504    1      4882.5     14297    296294.7
                       number of cash out transactions,
cashouttx              monthly                                    2324   130.8451   0      2421   215.0843   46261.25     35.334   4.799897    0         23         65       1086
                       volume of cash out transactions,
cashoutvolume          monthly                                    2324    15070.5   0   1404392   52359.43   2.74E+09   367.0128   16.69034    0        965    3741.865    155904
                       number of transfer transactions,
transfertx             monthly                                    2324   1.468158   0        85   4.999554   24.99554   98.05663   8.430969    0          0          0         25
                       volume of transfer transactions,
transfervolume         monthly                                    2324    521.076   0    101225   3337.408   1.11E+07   396.6339   16.27127    0          0          0      13620
totaltx                total number of transactions, monthly      2324   334.0951   1      4899   462.6272   214023.9    27.0213   4.062847    2         82        189       2346
totalvolume            total volume of transactions, monthly      2324   53729.69   0   3837106   165359.5   2.73E+10   256.5746    14.0736    5      6851.5   18917.75   450320.1


E-float                monitoring score, monthly average          964    3.004991   0      5.25   1.919025   3.682659   1.785648   -0.28777    0      1.4465       2.63       5.25
Cash float             monitoring score, monthly average          964    3.101465   0      5.69   1.932798   3.735709   1.794103    -0.3257    0    1.753333       2.63       5.25
Liquidity Total        monitoring score, monthly average          964     6.10159   0      10.5   3.123703   9.757518   2.219792   -0.31219    0        3.94   6.126667       10.5
Connectivity/Service
Availability           monitoring score, monthly average          964    1.840497   0         3   0.368283   0.135633   7.911087   -2.26064   0.5         2          2          2


                                                                                                                                                                                     44
State of shop           monitoring score, monthly average    964    1.723811     0          2     0.45339   0.205563   3.491746   -1.29915     0.5   1.366667         2     2
Operator availability   monitoring score, monthly average    960     1.66386     0    3.833333    0.50318    0.25319   3.751734   -1.09144      0          1          2     2
Client Service Total    monitoring score, monthly average    964    5.220825     0          6    0.894344   0.799851   5.533716    -1.3346    2.75         5    5.333333    6
Tenue du Registre des
transactions            monitoring score, monthly average    964    2.244285     0         2.5   0.636023   0.404526   8.680481   -2.59047      0         2.5        2.5   2.5
Soins Terminal POS      monitoring score, monthly average    964    2.346178     0         2.5   0.410989   0.168912   13.09179   -3.06288   0.625        2.5        2.5   2.5
Suivi du solde          monitoring score, monthly average    964    2.062023     0    4.791667   0.724041   0.524236   4.494072   -1.46622      0    1.666667        2.5   2.5
Performance total       monitoring score, monthly average    964    6.647085     0         7.5   1.238731   1.534456   8.037264   -1.96928     2.5       6.25        7.5   7.5
Agent Visibility        monitoring score, monthly average    964    1.871963     0          2    0.413219    0.17075   14.53503   -3.47651      0          2          2     2
FINCA images            monitoring score, monthly average    960    1.673878     0          2    0.550039   0.302543   4.929473   -1.65918      0    1.333333         2     2
FINCA sign              monitoring score, monthly average    964    1.718525     0          4    0.631125   0.398319   5.740557   -1.98233      0          2          2     2
Branding total          monitoring score, monthly average    964    5.267342     0    16.06417   1.275662   1.627313   12.22836    -1.3267      0          5          6     6
Total score             monitoring score, monthly average    961    23.26204     0         30    4.288883   18.39452   4.308764   -0.88681     11      20.875      23.76   30
                        number of quarters in existence as
quart                   FINCA agents                         2324   4.267857   0.25        11    2.309173   5.332279   3.007149   0.829085      1         2.5       3.75   11




                                                                                                                                                                                 45
