                                                WPS7963


Policy Research Working Paper                  7963




   The Impact of Mass Bed Net Distribution
            Programs on Politics
                      Evidence from Tanzania

                             Kevin Croke




Development Research Group
Impact Evaluation Team
February 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7963


  Abstract
  Functioning democracy requires that citizens reward pol-                           this program on the popularity of local politicians. Bed net
  iticians who deliver benefits, yet there is surprisingly little                    distribution results in large, statistically significant improve-
  causal evidence of changes in citizen views or behavior in                         ments in the approval levels of political leaders, especially
  response to specific government programs. This question                            in malaria endemic areas. Effects are largest shortly after
  is examined in Tanzania, which has recently implemented                            program implementation, but smaller effects persist for up
  large health programs targeting diseases such as HIV/AIDS                          to six months. These findings suggest that citizens update
  and malaria. Tanzania’s 2010–2011 national anti-malaria                            their evaluation of politicians in response to programs,
  campaign took place concurrently with a national house-                            especially when these services address important problems,
  hold survey, which enables a regression discontinuity                              and that the effects decay over time, but not completely.
  design based on interview date to estimate the effect of




  This paper is a product of the Impact Evaluation Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be
  contacted at kcroke@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
   The Impact of Mass Bed Net Distribution Programs on Politics:
                     Evidence from Tanzania

                                   Kevin Croke∗
              World Bank and Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health




                                   JEL codes: D72, F35, H43, I15, C21


       Keywords: health, malaria, insecticide-treated bed nets, political economy, regression
                                  discontinuity design, Tanzania




    ∗
      email: kcroke@worldbank.org. This article beneﬁted from helpful conversations and input from Jessica Cohen,
G¨unther Fink, Kristen Himelein, Jon Kastelic, John Marshall, Horacio Larreguy, Dan Rogger, and seminar audiences
at the Harvard School of Public Health, the Working Group on African Political Economy (WGAPE), APSA, the
African Studies Association, and the World Bank.
I. Introduction

Do well-delivered government programs change the way citizens evaluate their political leaders?
Despite the centrality of this question to the theory and practice of democracy, there is surprisingly
little causal identiﬁcation of links between government programs and citizen evaluation of political
leaders. There is a large literature in rich countries which seeks to demonstrate that voters reward
politicians for delivering economic growth (Key, 1966; Fiorina, 1981). A burgeoning literature in
Africa also tries to establish similar links between performance in ofﬁce and voting (Posner and
Simon, 2002; Weghorst and Lindberg, 2013). Much more common, especially in developing coun-
tries, is the assumption that voters support politicians not based on their ability to foster economic
growth or deliver effective social programs, but based on shared ethnic identity or in exchange for
material beneﬁts that they receive via patronage networks. Much of this literature assumes that the
distribution of public spending in Africa, and in developing countries more broadly, is predomi-
nantly driven by clientelist logic, rather than according to programmatic criteria, because clientelist
programs, while less effective at delivering goods and services to voters, are more likely to result in
beneﬁts to politicians. Wantchekon (2003), for example, shows that promising clientelist beneﬁts
is a more effective campaign strategy than committing to deliver public goods in Benin.
   But even in developing countries with weak governance, some fraction of public goods are
delivered on a programmatic basis. According to standard political economy models, politicians
make strategic choices about whether to pursue programmatic or clientelist strategies based on the
beneﬁts (net of costs) that they expect to receive from these choices. But this cost/beneﬁt cal-
culus is dependent on the reaction of citizens. A critical, unresolved question in the literature is
whether citizens in developing countries react to effective, programmatic policies by increasing
their support for politicians associated with these policies, or whether information deﬁcits, attribu-
tion problems, or even preferences for other styles of resource distribution prevent such reactions.
If good policy and effective programs are not rewarded even when delivered, it could help explain


                                                  2
perverse equilibria in which voters do not reward politicians who deliver public services, so politi-
cians in turn see no incentive to deliver these services. Voters are thus conditioned to not expect
such services and do not vote for politicians who promise them.
   I study the reaction of citizens to a programmatic and well-organized delivery of a social good
in Tanzania; the mass distribution of insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs) in 2008 and 2010-2011.1
Distribution of mosquito nets is a particularly interesting policy to study in this context because it
involves direct, highly visible and clearly attributable transfer of a good from the government to
individuals for free. This is quite different from other government actions such as management of
the economy or stewardship of a national health or education system, where the link from a given
politician’s effort to individual beneﬁt is more diffuse (Harding and Stasavage, 2014). Furthermore,
it is a universal program, in that all individuals (technically, all sleeping spaces) in the country were
targeted.2 Finally, it should be noted that these are potentially life saving products: a meta-analysis
of 6 RCTs estimates that distribution of ITNs results in an average reduction in all-cause mortality
in children under age 5 of 18% (Lengeler, 2004).
   Tanzania conducted two mass distributions of insecticide-treated bet nets, in 2008-2009 and
2010-2011. Fortuitously, these two bed net campaigns occurred at roughly the same time as the
ﬁrst two rounds of the Tanzania National Panel Survey (NPS)3 . The timing of National Panel
Survey interviews was randomized at the strata level in two groups (an early “cycle 1” and a later
“cycle 2” group), in order to accurately measure agricultural production and consumption, without
the distortion of seasonality effects. The result of this unusual cross-cutting of national surveys
and mass national health campaigns means that it is possible to exploit a regression discontinuity
   1  For detail on the relatively smooth implementation of Tanzania’s mass ITN distribution cam-
paigns see Bonner et al. (2011) and Renggli et al. (2013).
    2 Although there is good evidence that individuals in these settings are not willing to pay for

even highly subsidized ITNs (Cohen and Dupas, 2010), they clearly value them, as they have been
shown to use them once they have been given for free.
    3 The 2008-09 ITN campaign only partially overlapped with the National Panel Survey (13%

of interviews took place after the ITN campaign), compared to a much more substantial overlap in
2010-11 (53% of interviews took place after the ITN campaign.


                                                   3
design, by comparing households which were surveyed immediately before the ITN campaign to
those surveyed immediately after the campaign. This provides a unique opportunity to study the
reactions of citizens, in real time and in a nationally representative sample, to a large scale public
health campaign that involved direct distribution of well-known and valued items to individuals.
   I ﬁnd that citizens increase their approval of local politicians and government ofﬁcials signif-
icantly (village chairmen, ward councilors, ward executive ofﬁcers, and MPs) as a result of the
2010 net distribution campaign. Effects are notably stronger in districts which have higher under-
lying rates of malaria endemicity. The magnitude of effects fades sharply over time, but remain of
considerable magnitude as long as one year after the program.
   These ﬁndings are among the ﬁrst to empirically demonstrate that citizens in developing coun-
tries change their opinions about political leaders in response to speciﬁc health programs. While
changes in public support have been demonstrated (as discussed below) in some cases for cash
transfer programs in Latin America and Southeast Asia, similar dynamics have not been shown via
experimental or quasi-experimental design in sub-Saharan Africa, or for distribution of a health
product. Moreover, the bed nets studied here are worth just a few dollars, which is just a small
fraction of beneﬁciaries’ income, in contrast to the 25 to 50 percent of income that CCT programs
often represent (Labonne, 2013; Manacorda, Miguel and Vigorito, 2011).
   Second, in contrast to other contributions in the literature, these ﬁndings enable a clearer iso-
lation of voter response to government actions themselves, rather than the economic beneﬁts that
governments actions can produce. The emerging literature on conditional cash transfers has an
important weakness: because cash transfers represent both a program delivered by government
(which could produce a rational decision to credit the government) and an immediate increase in
income and living standards (which has been shown to increase approval of politicians even when
they are not directly responsible for the economic growth), these studies cannot credibly isolate the
mechanism at work. In other words, standard “pocketbook voting” cannot be separated from voter
evaluation of a speciﬁc government beneﬁt such as the CCT. This paper enables clearer isolation


                                                  4
of the mechanism by which programs translate into political support, since there is no possible
pocketbook effect from an item worth just $5.
   Third, by leveraging the substantial variation in malaria prevalence across Tanzania, the analy-
sis demonstrates that effects are larger when the problem addressed by the program is more salient,
by showing that voters reward politicians more in settings with high malaria prevalence.
   Fourth, contrary to some theories that voter responsiveness is a function of voter wealth or
education, there is limited and relatively inconsistent evidence of variation in effect according to
demographic characteristics such as gender, income, or education.
   Finally, I demonstrate a “decay” dimension to the effects, demonstrating that treatment effects
are very large in the immediate aftermath of the program, before fading notably over a 3 to 4
month period. This suggests that Tanzanian voters react quite similarly to voters in other settings
(such as the US) in overweighting the very recent past in evaluating politicians (Bartels, 2008;
Gerber et al., 2011; Healy and Lenz, 2014; Shaw and Gimpel, 2012). This temporal variation
adds another dimension to this study which has been largely missing from the literature to date,
and provides a relatively unique opportunity to examine the dynamic path of public opinion in
response to government actions. This ﬁnding is also consistent with the literature on political
budget cycles (Nordhaus, 1975; Tufte, 1978), and may also help explain some conﬂicting ﬁndings
in the literature between those who ﬁnd positive political beneﬁts to programs such as infrastructure
upgrading or CCTs and those who ﬁnd no effect. This apparent inconsistency could be reconciled
if heterogeneity in effect size is a function not just of the program’s effect, but when the effect was
measured.



II. Related Literature

There is a large literature in developed countries which tries to ascertain whether voters support
politicians based on evaluations of their overall performance (Key, 1966; Kinder and Kiewiet,


                                                  5
1979; Fiorina, 1981; Popkin, 1994), as a function of services or spending delivered to their commu-
nity (Mayhew, 2004; Levitt and Snyder, 1997), or whether they are more likely to vote according to
pre-existing loyalties, social groupings, or partisan attachments (Campbell et al., 1960; Achen and
Bartels, 2016). In developing countries, the literature has focused more on patterns of clientelist
distribution, with a great deal of effort devoted to establishing the ways in which public resources
are targeted towards co-ethnics or co-partisans.4 As Golden and Min (2013) note, the response
of voters to these strategies is a relatively small part of this literature. Yet they note that where
this has been successfully analyzed, “studies overwhelmingly ﬁnd that incumbent politicians are
rewarded by voters for distributive allocations, and in particular for those that are clientelistic and
from which recipients can be excluded.”
   A major challenge in identifying the response of citizens to speciﬁc policies in developing
countries is likely endogeneity of program targeting. However, the advent of large scale condi-
tional cash transfers (CCTs) which either were initially randomized, or which have sharp eligi-
bility thresholds, has led to important opportunities for causal inference and learning about the
political effects of these programs. De La O (2013) shows that in Mexico, longer exposure to the
Progresa CCT program increased voter turnout and vote share for incumbents, while Imai, King
and Velasco Rivera (2016) reanalyze De La O (2013) and contest the results, ﬁnding no beneﬁt
to incumbents from Progresa or Mexico’s universal health insurance program, Seguro Popular. In
Brazil, Zucco (2013) estimates positive impacts, using matching, on incumbent politicians from
the Bolsa Familia CCT. Labonne (2013) provides evidence that incumbents beneﬁted from a CCT
program in the Philippines in municipalities where all villages received the program, compared
to municipalities where only half of villages beneﬁted, but only in competitive political environ-
ments.5 Baez et al. (2012) show that in Colombia, the Familias en Accion CCT also increased
political participation and support for the incumbent party; Nupia (2012) also shows beneﬁt for
   4See Stokes et al. (2013) for an overview.
   5However when a political dynasty dominates local politics, the program has no effect on vote
share.


                                                  6
incumbents from this program. Manacorda, Miguel and Vigorito (2011) also ﬁnd that recipients
of Uruguay’s unconditional transfer program (PANES) increased their support for the incumbent.
Galiani et al. (2016) ﬁnd no electoral effect from a relatively small cash transfer program in Hon-
duras in 2000-2001, but ﬁnd clear evidence of impact from a larger transfer program that took
place a decade later.
   Moving away from cash transfers to distribution or subsidy of other goods, Pop-Eleches and
Pop-Eleches (2012) ﬁnd that a Romanian computer subsidy voucher program also generated sup-
port for local governments. In African contexts, Dionne and Horowitz (2016) show that Malawi’s
agricultural input subsidies beneﬁted the ruling party. In the infrastructure sectors, Harding (2015)
demonstrates that in Ghana, voters reward improved road maintenance. In Bangladesh, Guiteras
and Mobarak (2015) show that citizens reward leaders in response to a (randomly assigned) sani-
tation promotion program, except when they were informed that local leaders were not responsible
for their receipt of the program. By contrast, De Kadt and Lieberman (2015) show that provision
of government services (water, sanitation, refuse collection) actually reduced government support
in South Africa between 2000-2011. Similarly, de Janvry, Gonzalez-Navarro and Sadoulet (2014)
show that provision of agricultural land titles actually hurt the incumbent party in Mexico, as it
led to a shift in vote share to the more free-market party (which was not the party that provided
the land titles), and Larreguy, Marshall and Trucco (2015) ﬁnd that urban land titles helped federal
ofﬁcials, who were credited with the program, but harmed local ofﬁcials, who lost clientelistic
opportunities. In an experimental framework, Bobonis et al. (2016) show that provision of a cis-
tern, which reduced households’ vulnerability to drought and reduced the frequency of clientelist
requests made to politicians, also reduced the vote share of incumbent mayors.
   The overall literature therefore is somewhat mixed on voter responsiveness to direct govern-
ment provision of goods and beneﬁts: high quality studies with credible research designs showing
both evidence of large beneﬁt and no beneﬁt to politicians. Levels of political competition, par-
tisan alignment between local and central government, gender of recipient, and the visibility and


                                                 7
attributability of the beneﬁt have all been identiﬁed as links in the causal chain from service provi-
sion to voter reaction. We return to these potential effect modiﬁers in section VI.



III. Politics in Tanzania

Tanzania is an interesting setting in which to study the relationship between health programs and
politician approval, as it has been one of the largest recipients of health sector aid in the world in
recent years, and it has been among the leading countries in sub-Saharan Africa in implementation
of malaria control programs. This inﬂux of health sector aid has been facilitated in part by an
unusual level of political stability. Since gaining independence in 1964, Tanzania has been ruled by
a single party, Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM). After founding president Julius Nyerere’s retirement
in 1985, politics began to open up and in 1995, Tanzania had its ﬁrst multi-party election. Yet
despite having multiparty elections, CCM has never won less than 60% of the presidential vote
or 70% of the seats in Parliament. Tanzania was in effect a single party state for much of the
post-independence period, and the legacy of the single party state is still present in the way that
CCM manipulates formal rules and distributes state resources to entrench its dominance (Hoffman
and Robinson, 2009). But as CCM’s inherited historical legitimacy as the party of independence
and Julius Nyerere fades, national politics is growing more competitive, and CCM is increasingly
eager to demonstrate that it is delivering services to voters to justify its continued rule. This desire
has intensiﬁed since CCM’s legitimacy has been called into question due to a number of high-level
corruption scandals involving senior party cadres.
   Since approval ratings of various political ﬁgures are key outcome variables, in this section
I describe their roles in the Tanzanian political system. It is a centralized, strongly executive-
dominated system. The President and members of parliament are both directly elected every 5
years.6 At the subnational level, regional and district commissioners are centrally appointed, while
   6   A separate, smaller group of MPs are appointed.


                                                   8
the district council is comprised of elected representatives (known as ward councillors) from each
ward. Below the district, ward executive ofﬁcers are civil servants, while ward councillors are
elected politicians. Similarly at the village level, there is an elected village chairman, and an
appointed village executive ofﬁcer, who is effectively a civil servant (Lierl, 2014). Below the
village level, there are semi-ofﬁcial party structures known as ten cells, which are formally separate
from, but in practice often closely intertwined with, the state apparatus.7



IV. Malaria Control Programs in Tanzania

Malaria is a major contributor to ill health in sub-Saharan Africa, which accounts for 70 percent
of total global malaria morbidity. Malaria control efforts have been progressively scaled up across
Africa over the past 10 years, with particularly large increases in funding following the creation of
the Global Fund for AIDS, TB, and Malaria and the US President’s Malaria Initiative. One critical
intervention that has been scaled up widely is the distribution of insecticide treated bed nets (ITNs)
for prevention of malaria. ITNs have been well documented as a highly efﬁcacious intervention
in a number of clinical trials (Lengeler, 2004), leading Ministries of Health and donor partners
to collaborate in scaling up coverage for the most at risk groups, mainly children under 5 and
pregnant women. Large scale ITN distribution programs have been associated with reductions in
mortality and morbidity in a number of settings (Pathania, 2014; Lengeler, 2004). ITN distribution
programs in Tanzania started out with relatively small-scale pilots in the late 1990s in several
districts, which were seen as highly effective in reducing malaria-related mortality and morbidity
   7Despite these formal structures, the state is quite weak at lower levels in Tanzania. Tucker et al.
(2010) observe that while “In theory, government in Tanzania extends down to the mtaa (neigh-
borhood) in urban areas and kitongoji (village) in rural areas. These lowest rungs of government
connect to the district through division and ward levels. In practice, organized local government
tends not to exist below the district level. Rather, while local government ofﬁcials, such as Ward
Executive Ofﬁcers and Village Executive Ofﬁcers exist, they are not integrated into the district
government, but are left to ﬁnd their own solutions to local problems with the resources they can
gather on their own initiative.”


                                                  9
(Schellenberg et al., 2001). In 2004, a national voucher scheme was created (Njau et al., 2009),
but comprehensive national coverage was not achieved until the mass free distribution campaigns
of 2008-2011.
   This paper focuses on one of these mass distribution campaigns: the 2010-11 Universal Cover-
age Campaign (UCC). After several years of a voucher program which enabled subsidized access
to nets for pregnant women and infants (the Tanzania National Voucher Scheme or TNVS), ITN
coverage was still not reaching the policy goal of universal access, leading policymakers to con-
sider free distribution, for which Tanzania won funding for from the Global Fund for AIDS, TB,
and Malaria. In the ﬁrst free distribution campaign, nets were given to all children under 5 (the
2008-09 under 5 catch up campaign). Subsequently, in 2010-2011, additional nets were distributed
to cover all household members, by giving one net to each household for every sleeping space not
already covered with an ITN.8 Demographic and Health Surveys show that these campaigns were
associated with increases in ITN coverage, as Tanzania reached over 80 percent ITN ownership by
2011.
   The procedures for national net distribution campaigns in Tanzania were ﬁrst established dur-
ing the 2008 under 5 “catch up” distribution campaign. Using donor funding, the Tanzanian gov-
ernment contracted NGOs to manage implementation. The NGOs trained local government of-
ﬁcials, who in turned supervised community volunteers, who registered all households and then
distributed the nets (Bonner et al., 2011). The nets themselves were manufactured by A to Z Tex-
tiles Ltd., a domestic Tanzanian manufacturing ﬁrm. The country was divided into zones, which
were covered progressively starting in regions with the highest malaria prevalence. The manufac-
turer, A to Z Textiles, distributed the nets to the village level, where they were stored temporarily.
Village Executive Ofﬁcers then were in charge of selecting, training, and managing four village
volunteers in identiﬁcation, registration, and distribution of free net vouchers for all under 5s in the
   8Technically the nets distributed in these campaigns are long lasting insecticidal nets, or LLINs,
rather than ITNs



                                                  10
community, and oversight of net storage and distribution from the storage space to the distribution
site. NGOs did social mobilization and information activities before and during the registration
(such as theater, videos, and public meetings). Distribution took place over weekends, and care-
givers were instructed to bring their vouchers to the distribution site, where they were exchanged
for nets. One month after distribution, the Red Cross (or district health staff in areas where the
Red Cross was not active) followed up at households with a campaign to encourage correct bed net
use. Over 8.7 million nets were issued, and the total program cost was $63 million (Bonner et al.,
2011).
   The modality of the Universal Coverage Campaign, which lasted from July 2010 to October
2011, was quite similar. Distribution and logistics were handled by the manufacturer and NGOs.
Ward executives and village executives were again were charged with identifying and supervising
in each village four community volunteers, who over a ﬁve day period visited each home and
registered each sleeping space9 . The volunteers issued coupons for each space that warranted a
net, which were redeemable at the distribution point during the three day campaign period. The
Tanzanian Red Cross again conducted a hang up encouragement campaign approximately one
week after distribution. In total, over 17 million nets were distributed. The total cost of the 2010
campaign was $96.4 million, ﬁnanced primarily by the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria. (Renggli et al., 2013)



V. Research Design

Here I describe the data, the identiﬁcation strategy, and estimation approaches that I use to iden-
tify the causal effects of national ITN distribution on citizens’ views of their political leaders in
Tanzania.
   9According to Renggli et al. (2013), “A sleeping space was deﬁned as any bed, sleeping mat or
ﬂoor space that could be potentially covered by a net.”



                                                 11
Data

The main data sources are the 2008-09 and 2010-2011 rounds of the National Panel Survey, a large
multi-topic household survey conducted in Tanzania by the National Bureau of Statistics with sup-
port from the World Bank. 3,200 households were interviewed in 2008-09, and these households,
plus any new households that split off from the original sample, were re-interviewed in 2010-2011.
The main focus of the survey was household consumption, poverty, and agricultural production,
but there was also a governance module, which was asked of one single randomly selected adult
household member. Helpfully for this paper’s identiﬁcation strategy, the timing of survey visits
were randomized. The 2008-2009 LSMS survey documentation notes that “within each zone, each
district and each region were visited at 3 separate (randomly assigned) points during the year, so
as to account for seasonal ﬂuctuations.” Communication with LSMS survey staff conﬁrms that
this randomization into early or later survey dates was maintained as much as possible in the
2010/2011 follow up survey.10 This randomization, combined with the staggered roll out of the
bed net campaigns, enables an “as-if” random RD design. Dates of the ITN distribution campaigns
in each zone are obtained from program documents provided by one of the implementing NGOs,
Mennnonite Economic Development Associates, and from Bonner et al. (2011) and Renggli et al.
(2013).11
   I use outcome variables from this governance survey module, which asked voters for their
level of approval of 8 public ofﬁcials: village chairman, village executive ofﬁcer, ward executive
ofﬁcer, ward councilor, headmaster, extension ofﬁcer, police ofﬁcer, and member of Parliament.
I create binary outcome variables for each political leader, excluding the sectoral functionaries
(extension ofﬁcer, headmaster and policeman), and create standardized versions of the continuous
  10  The “cycle” variable, which denotes whether a respondent was interviewed in the earlier or
later survey cycle, correlates at 0.83 across the two rounds.
   11 It is worth noting that randomization of survey dates is not required for the validity of the RD

identiﬁcation strategy, which is speciﬁcally designed to recover causal estimates of the effect of
endogenous independent variables.


                                                 12
outcome variables (scale 1-4) for ease of interpretation. Politician approval, the principal concep-
tual outcome, is measured for ﬁve different leaders: village chairman, village executive ofﬁcer,
ward executive ofﬁcer, ward councillor, and member of parliament.12 Between 70 and 80 percent
of respondents report that they either approve or strongly approve of these leaders in the 2010-2011
round of the NPS. The key independent variable is whether respondents or anyone in their house-
hold slept under a free net in the night before the survey (“any free net”). Variable deﬁnitions for
the various measures of bed net ownership and use are provided in the appendix.


Variation in Access to ITNs

I exploit the variation in possession of a free bed net driven by whether the 2010-11 ITN distri-
bution campaign happened before or after an individual was surveyed by the NPS. Thanks to the
randomized roll out of the survey, in conjunction with the phased introduction of the ITN distribu-
tion campaign, I can compare citizens who were surveyed just prior to receiving a net with those
who were surveyed just after receiving a net.
   One data issue is that although we know the month and year of all survey interviews, we do not
know the exact day on which the survey was conducted. The month and year is recorded but the
survey day is erased for anonymity. Therefore I impute a date of the 15th day of the month to all
observations. I deﬁne respondents as treated if the survey team arrived within 3 months (90 days)
after the mass bed net distribution campaign (such that the post variable = 1), omitting the 15 days
before and 15 days after the survey date to account for uncertainty about the exact survey day of
the month13 . Respondents who were surveyed within the 90 days before the ITN campaign arrived
in their village are control (post = 0).14 Later I relax this assumption to test multiple deﬁnitions of
  12  The question is: “Overall, would you say you approve or disapprove of the job your [ofﬁcial]
is doing?” (Possible responses are: Strongly approve, approve, disapprove, strongly disapprove,
or don’t know). In the main speciﬁcation I create a binary outcome variable by coding strongly
approve and approve as 1, and strongly disapprove and disapprove as 0.
   13 In later robustness checks I include these 15 days before and after the inputed survey date.
   14 This bandwidth was chosen to maximize comparability with estimates from the 2008 National




                                                  13
the treatment variable (including with bandwidths of 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 and 180 days). A second
data issue is that since the ITN campaign started in the southern portion of the country, taking the
better part of a year to cover the whole country, there is, by construction, a higher percentage of
“post” observations in southern and southern highlands zones. Therefore the main estimates are
presented both with and without zone ﬁxed effects.
   Figure 1 demonstrates that the 2010 universal coverage campaign dramatically increased ITN
ownership. Individuals surveyed after the campaign occurred in their community have dramatically
higher rates of net ownership and use and are much more likely to report that a member of their
household received a free net (or free ITN) than those interviewed before the campaign occurred.
   I can identify the causal impact of the bed net distribution campaign under the assumption that
respondents just before or just after the campaign are comparable in expectation. However, it is
reasonable to think that individuals surveyed quite a long time before or long after the campaign
might be different. To address such concerns, I only compare treated cohorts surveyed shortly
before the campaign to control cohorts surveyed just after. Our main analysis focuses on a “band-
width” of 90 days on either side of the campaign period, but results are highly robust to windows
of as little as 30 days on either side of the campaign. Given the plausibly exogenous timing of the
campaign’s arrival in a given district combined with the survey’s randomized timing, this allows
us to recover causal estimates.


Estimation Strategies

In this section, I provide estimates of the effect of bed net distribution on the main outcome variable
of interest: approval ratings of local government ofﬁcials and political leaders. I ﬁrst present results
graphically, and then with reduced form and instrumental variables speciﬁcations. Figure 2 shows
the graphical representation of the impact of ITN distribution on approval ratings for 5 political
leaders: village executive ofﬁcer, village chairman, ward executive ofﬁcer, ward chairman, and
Panel Survey and ITN campaign, which are discussed further below.

                                                  14
MP. In regression form, I use two approaches to estimate the effect of receiving on bed net on
approval of local politicians. I ﬁrst estimate the reduced form effects of the bed net distribution
campaign by estimating the following OLS model:




                        Politician approvalic = δ post campaignc + ξic ,                          (1)


   This model is analogous to the intent-to-treat (ITT) analysis of a randomized experiment.15 .
However, simply being surveyed after the ITN campaign does not predict perfectly receipt of a
net. Therefore in a separate set of estimates, I use a post-campaign survey date as an instrument
for receipt of a net. In this model, I estimate the effect of post-campaign survey date on net receipt
in a ﬁrst stage regression:


                              any free netic = δ post campaignc + ξic ,                           (2)


   Then we estimate a structural model using two-stage least squares (2SLS):


                                    Yic = β any free netic + ςic .                                (3)


   For the IV estimation to be valid, several conditions must hold. First, there must be a strong and
highly signiﬁcant relationship between the instrument (post campaign survey date, post) and the
endogenous variable (any free net). As Figure 1 shows, being surveyed after the ITN campaign
took place (post=1) increases net ownership by 30 to 40 percentage points for any deﬁnition of
net ownership, receipt, or use. The resultant ﬁrst stage F statistic, ranging from 19 to over 100,
in all cases comfortably exceeding the threshold value of 10 (Staiger and Stock 1997). Second,
  15Robust standard errors are clustered at the district level. In additional models we add zonal
ﬁxed effects, and a linear time trend and the time trend interacted with the post variable.



                                                   15
the exclusion restriction requires that our instrument only affects political opinions through the
mechanism of exposure to the bed net campaign, which seems quite plausible given the role of
survey date randomization in generating the discontinuity.



VI. Results

In this section I present the main ﬁnding: that malaria control efforts in Tanzania have resulted in
substantial public opinion gains for local politicians. Graphical evidence and regression estimates
are provided for each outcome of interest. The regression tables provide our reduced form and IV
estimates. I then conﬁrm the robustness of these estimates.


Main Estimates

The main results are that, in the reduced form speciﬁcations, village chairman, the ward councilor,
ward executive, and MP all see signiﬁcant, substantive increases in their approval ratings. The
approval increase they all receive is on the order of 7 to 13 percentage points, from base approval
rates of 70 to 80 percent. The effects are substantively large and highly signiﬁcant: for village
chairman, for example, I can reject that the coefﬁcient equals zero with 99% conﬁdence. With zone
ﬁxed effects, results are of the same magnitude for village chair and councillor, but are smaller and
not signiﬁcant for the village and ward executives, and the MP.
   Panel C shows the continuous measure of approval (1-4, with 1 representing strong disapproval
and 4 strong approval), for which I create a standardized measure of approval for ease of interpre-
tation. Using this measure, there are large and highly signiﬁcant increases in approval for all
outcomes in the main speciﬁcation (between 0.24 and 0.39 standard deviation increases). Panel D
uses the panel dimension of the data and controls for the respondent’s approval of the same leader
in the 2008 survey. In the IV speciﬁcations (Panel E), the same patterns of signiﬁcance are present
(for all except the village executive ofﬁcer there is a signiﬁcant treatment effect), and the effect


                                                 16
sizes are 2 to 3 times larger. The positive estimates for village chairmen and councillor are the
most robust results; they are signiﬁcant at virtually all bandwidths, and in models which include
zonal ﬁxed effects, and in models which control for the running variable (“time since campaign”)
and the interaction of this variable with the “post” (treatment) variable. These two positions are
also elected political leaders, unlike the village and ward executives, which are appointed positions.
Therefore I focus on these results in the discussion that follows.


Robustness Checks

This section relaxes several model assumptions to test the robustness of the ﬁndings presented
above. Figure 3 shows balance graphically on pre-treatment variables (household consumption,
age, gender, and urban residence), and appendix table A2 presents regressions showing that none
of these are statistically signiﬁcant differences at the discontinuity.
   Next I present a series of placebo tests to ensure that the discontinuity does not reﬂect an
artifact of survey timing. There is a natural placebo test which is generated by the structure of
the distribution campaign. In each zone, there was a process of household registration which
took place between two and eight months before the actual ITN distribution. We can also use
the registration household visits as a “placebo” campaign to test whether the change in views
represents the effect of contact with state ofﬁcials or a generic signal that the state was taking some
action (as in the registration campaign), versus the actual effect of bed net receipt. In contrast to
the bed net distribution, we ﬁnd no positive treatment effect of the registration campaign. In fact
there is if anything a slightly negative effect of visits which do not result in a tangible beneﬁt,
although this is not signiﬁcantly negative except for the ward executive ofﬁcer (see Table A4.) I
also generate placebo campaigns 100 and 200 days before the real campaign and 100 and 200 days
after. In 25 total placebo tests (5 outcomes x 5 placebos) only two coefﬁcients are statistically
signiﬁcant at p < 0.05.
   Results are also robust to changing the bandwidth to 60 or 120 days (rather than 90) or to a

                                                  17
full year (see Table 4). Controlling for pre-treatment characteristics (gender, age, consumption
quintiles, and urban residence), all results come through in reduced form and IV. Finally, although
Figure 2 shows no apparent trend on either side of the discontinuity, I also control for the value of
the running variable and its interaction with the treatment for village chair approval at a range of
bandwidths (see Figure 6).



Heterogeneous Effects

In this section, I focus on heterogeneous effects according to issue salience, aspects of the political
environment, demographic characteristics, and conclude with heterogeneity by time of follow up.
The implications of these patterns of heterogeneity are then considered in light of unresolved issues
in the existing literature in section VII.


Heterogeneity by issue salience

An important dimension that would be likely to interact with treatment if citizens were indeed
evaluating politicians and updating their views of them based on the bed net program would be
the salience of the issue of malaria control to them personally or to their family. A clear potential
driver of salience is the severity of malaria infection or frequency of transmission at the time of
net distribution. There is notable variation in transmission of malaria intensity across the country,
ranging from relatively limited transmission in highland areas to extreme year-round endemicity
in other zones. Using district level measures of malaria intensity created by Chaki et al. (2013),
I create an indicator variable for whether a district is above or below median malaria intensity,
and interact the “above median” intensity indicator with treatment. In Table 5 we see evidence
that the treatment effect is markedly larger when malaria is a salient problem. The interaction
is highly signiﬁcant in the main speciﬁcation, and somewhat attenuated in the zonal ﬁxed effects
model, although the effect is still signiﬁcant (p< 0.05) for MP and close to signiﬁcant (p< 0.12)


                                                  18
for village chair. Perhaps more strikingly, districts can be divided further by malaria prevalence,
into samples where the malaria prevalence measure is less than 10, between 10 and 20, between
20 and 30, and above 40. Divided up in this way, and including zonal ﬁxed effects, the pattern
of increasingly large treatment effects as malaria incidence increases is clearly visible in Figure 4.
For all ofﬁcials except the ward councillor, a sharp upward trend in treatment effects is visible
for the 30-40% prevalence and above 40% prevalence districts, while treatment effects are zero or
even negative in the 0-10% prevalence districts.


Heterogeneity by time of follow up

The durability of politician gains resulting from program implementation is a key question. On one
hand, if large and persistent gains result from programs such as this one, it raises the question as to
why such systematic delivery of such items or services on a frequent basis is not particularly com-
mon in developing country settings which are democratic and where politicians are very focused
on winning elections. On the other hand, if beneﬁts fade over time, then the lack of consistent
delivery of programs to voters make sense. What would be expected instead would be a pattern
of energetic service delivery in the immediate runup to elections, coupled with lackluster services
in most normal non-election periods. While all results in this paper are short run (in the sense
that over the course of approximately one year the ITN distribution campaign visited all zones of
Tanzania), we can still leverage variation in the time elapsed between the ITN campaign and the
survey interview to see if there is any fadeout pattern visible in the data, or whether effects are
roughly constant over time.
   If we simply examine effects starting at 30 days post-campaign and expand the bandwidth in
15 days increments until we reach the main speciﬁcation bandwidth of 90 days, it becomes clear
that the effect fades over time. As ﬁgure 5 demonstrates, the effect sizes are quite large at 30 days
(reaching 15 pp for the village chairman and 31 pp for councillor). Yet the magnitude of the effect
has decayed notably by 90 days: the effect of the campaign on councillor approval, for example,

                                                   19
has decreased from 31 percentage points at 30 days to 13 percentage points at 90 days. This pattern
is also present with zonal ﬁxed effects, where all ofﬁcials see large and highly signiﬁcant at 30 days
which are attenuated over time. Yet while the effects diminish, the effects on the ward councillor
and MP are still signiﬁcant at 180 days (see Appendix Figure 7).
   While such dynamic effects of voter responsiveness have not been well-studied in developing
country contexts, this pattern is quite consistent with the literature on the short run impact of
campaign ads in American politics (Gerber et al., 2011), and with broader “myopic retrospection”
ﬁndings, again from the US, which show that voters judge politicians only on economic growth in
election years, rather than by averaging over the four years of a presidential term (Bartels, 2008;
Huber, Hill and Lenz, 2012; Healy and Lenz, 2014).16 It is also consistent with Galiani et al.
(2016), who ﬁnd that in Honduras, the electoral effects of a cash transfer program are larger for the
group that received a larger fraction of their payments closer to an election, holding total transfer
amount constant.


Heterogeneity by socioeconomic status and demographics

This section considers theoretical predictions and empirical ﬁndings which suggest that citizen
responsiveness to government actions is likely to vary by individual characteristics such as educa-
tion, income, or gender. For example, Wantchekon (2003) ﬁnds that women are less susceptible
to clientelist appeals and Baez et al. (2012) ﬁnd that they respond more positively than men to
Colombia’s CCT program. Stokes et al. (2013) ﬁnd that increasing education, industrialization and
economic growth undermined clientelism and vote buying in the United States and Great Britain,
while Weghorst and Lindberg (2013) ﬁnd that education is associated with being a swing voter
in Ghana. Despite theoretical predictions that wealthier or more educated citizens would be more
likely to reward politicians for speciﬁc actions (such as vote buying, clientelism, or programmatic
  16See also Bechtel and Hainmueller (2011) who ﬁnd that voter gratitude in Germany erodes over
time; as well as Zucco (2013). This literature is reviewed in Healy and Malhotra (2013).


                                                 20
policies) we see no evidence of treatment interaction by per capita consumption levels, education,
or gender (Table A5).17


Heterogeneity by partisan alignment of central and local government

A ﬁnal dimension of heterogeneity relates to voters’ ability to correctly attribute credit for policies
and programs in contexts of divided government and/or federalism. Following an earlier literature
on retrospective voting (Powell and Whitten, 1993), several studies have focused on the partisan-
ship of elected ofﬁcials at central and regional or local levels as a potential modiﬁer of citizen
responsiveness to government actions. Divided control of government between different parties
can affect citizen response, because citizens may not completely understand which party deserves
credit for the program, either because of they have limited information levels about policy details
in general, or because policy responsibility is genuinely shared by multiple actors in a political
system. For example, in Pop-Eleches and Pop-Eleches (2012), voters changed their opinion of lo-
cal government (which implemented the program) but not of the responsible national politicians or
the central government (which started and funded the program).18 The opposite pattern is present
in Brazil, where Zucco (2013) ﬁnds that voters rewarded the president, but not legislative candi-
  17  We can also compare the effect of the 2008 Under 5 catch up ITN campaign to the 2010 uni-
versal coverage campaign. Like the 2010 campaign, the 2008 net distribution campaign also was
contemporaneous with the a round of the National Panel Survey (the 2008-2009 round), meaning
that the same RD identiﬁcation strategy can be implemented, although the ﬁrst stage treatment is
notably smaller. The increase in respondents living in a household where someone used a free net
the previous night increases by 13 percentage points rather than 44 percentage points in 2010.The
increase is 22 percentage points when restricting analysis to households with children under 5,
who were the target of the campaign. Interestingly, however, there is no political beneﬁt to politi-
cians in the aftermath of this campaign. There is no treatment effect whether we test this for the
whole sample, or when we restrict the regression to households that had at least one child under
5 in 2008, or with a continuous measure of approval as the outcome variable, or when including
controls or varying the bandwidth. However in addition to the weaker ﬁrst stage, this comparison
is not as well powered as that of 2010, since only 13 percent of respondents were interviewed after
the campaign, compared to 49 percent after the 2010 campaign.
   18 Note however that the effect was driven by local governments who were aligned with the

coalition in power at the national level.

                                                  21
dates, for Bolsa Familia, and in Uruguay, where voters do not reward parliament or local councils,
just the President and the incumbent government. A different dimension of heterogeneity is high-
lighted by Larreguy, Marshall and Trucco (2015), who ﬁnd that central government leaders gained
in popularity from a land titling program, but local leaders lost support, since it undermined clien-
telist strategies. Partisan differences are also important to the theoretical framework of Imai, King
and Velasco Rivera (2016), who argue that in cases where programs are supported by both (or all)
relevant parties, such as Mexico’s Seguro Popular health reform and Progresa CCT program, there
is no logical reason why voters would reward speciﬁc politicians (i.e. incumbents) rather than
out-of-power parties who also support the program.
   In Tanzania, the ruling party, CCM, has held power at the central level continuously since
independence, and the vast majority of local (village-level) governments are also controlled by
CCM. The ITN distribution was predominantly an initiative of the central government and interna-
tional donors (although local leaders participated in implementation), so if voters are “correctly”
attributing credit where it is due, there should be a reduced treatment effect in opposition controlled
localities, since the opposition had no power in the central government or the Ministry of Health,
and an increased treatment effect in CCM-controlled settings.
   The National Panel Survey collected information on local political leaders, such as their bureau-
cratic or elected post and their partisan afﬁliation. This enables an examination of the interaction
of treatment with villages where a) all recorded village level ofﬁcials are from the ruling party (this
represents 43% of villages), and b) villages where more than 50 percent of village ofﬁcials listed
on the community leader roster are from opposition parties (14% of villages). For these models,
attention is restricted to village level leaders, since information about the partisan composition of
higher levels of the political system (i.e. ward councils) is not available in the dataset. There
is no evidence that citizens boost approval of CCM ofﬁcials more than opposition, and similarly
no evidence that they credit opposition leaders any less, even though the opposition had no clear
responsibility for the program at higher policy levels (Table A6).


                                                  22
VII. Discussion and Conclusion

The question of whether voters change their views of political leaders in response to government
programs is a central question in political science, and despite a growing literature, it remains an
unresolved one. Similarly, the question of whether there are political ramiﬁcations to the large scale
global health programs which have massively increased in scale over the past decade is largely
unexamined in the public health literature. This paper demonstrates large effects to the delivery
of a life-saving health intervention. It also identiﬁes patterns of differential responsiveness which
shed light on ongoing debates in the literature about the nature of this response. A ﬁrst point
of note is the substantively large political beneﬁts for politicians as a result of the provision of a
relatively low value preventive health product. Ex ante one might have expected that since the bed
nets distributed cost less than $10 (while the CCTs in question give transfers of between 25 and
50 percent of annual income), there would be no detectable treatment effect, or comparably much
smaller effects, of net distribution.
   A number of factors, identiﬁed in the literature as important modiﬁers of such effects, might
contribute to this unexpected effect. Analysts such as Harding (2015), Harding and Stasavage
(2014) and Mani and Mukand (2007) have argued that the tangibility or visibility of a beneﬁt
is a key factor enabling citizens to give credit to politicians. Mosquito nets are both visible on
a daily basis (one sleeps under a net every night) and tangible.19 A related point may be the
universality of the program. Because the epidemiological logic of the program required targeting
every household in the country, Tanzania’s 2010-11 bed net campaign can be thought of as a high
“treatment dose” compared to other programs such as CCTs which by design only reach the poor.
A further contributing factor could be the ease of attribution in Tanzania, given the uniﬁed control
of central and local government by CCM. Especially in the case of a program which is ﬁnanced
  19Another potential factor, suggested by the literature, is reversibility: unlike ﬁxed infrastructure
such as roads or buildings, ITNs are a good that could be taken away, and so may engender greater
loyalty from voters in order to forestall this (Stokes et al., 2013).

                                                  23
and planned centrally, but for which local ofﬁcials are active in the front line operation, credit
allocation could be difﬁcult for voters if partisan control was divided between central and local
government. This is rarely the case in Tanzania, which is strongly dominated by the ruling party at
all levels of government.
   Finally we document a signiﬁcant fading of the effect over time. This is an intrinsically im-
portant pattern, since such dynamic effects, if clearly understood, must shape the calculations of
politicians about the timing or frequency of such programs. But it may also help explain variation
in the effects identiﬁed in this literature. This suggests that handouts to voters, whether clientelistic
or as part of organized programmatic policies, are not an all purpose strategy for politicians. De-
livered far in advance of elections, their effect could wear off completely and result in no particular
beneﬁt at election time. For example, an explanation for the null response to Progresa found by
Imai, King and Velasco Rivera (2016) could be that effects are large in the short run but weaker in
the long run. If this were true, comparison of a group that recently got the program to one that got
it longer ago could produce a null result, not because the program did not affect voters, but rather
because the group that got it longer ago (notwithstanding that they have received a higher “dose”)
has already had some fadeout, while the newly treated group is in the middle of their bounce in
approval rating for politicians.20 Similarly, the apparent unresponsiveness of South African voters
to infrastructure and sanitation improvements (De Kadt and Lieberman, 2015) could be because
of the time dimension, since that analysis examines changes in infrastructure and service delivery
over a 10 year period.21
   To conclude, we note that it is commonly understood that governments do not deliver services
effectively in developing countries because there are powerful political forces pushing politicians
  20  This does not apply for the null result that they ﬁnd for the Seguro Popular health program,
which compared a treatment group to a completely untreated control group.
   21 However we note that Pop-Eleches and Pop-Eleches (2012) ﬁnd signiﬁcant results two years

after the program, and Manacorda, Miguel and Vigorito (2011) ﬁnd relatively small decrease in ef-
fect size between surveys conducted during the PANES cash transfer program and those conducted
several months after the program was largely completed.


                                                   24
and bureaucrats to use resources for their personal gain, their political survival, or both. But what
if there were also large political rewards to effective service delivery, at least for some classes of
goods, or types of public services? Different political equilibria could emerge. The apparent in-
centive compatibility that is identiﬁed here between the interests of large, life saving global health
programs and local politicians offers hope that under certain conditions, other paths are possible.
Uncertainty about the nature and the magnitude of citizen reaction to effective programs may be
one barrier to efforts in support of such programs on the part of political leaders. This paper quanti-
ﬁes the beneﬁts to one such program in Tanzania, and in doing so may point to the way to a broader
research agenda on the political returns to delivering critical life saving interventions. More work
is needed to estimate the political beneﬁts of other critical interventions, such as antiretroviral
treatment for HIV/AIDS, that are high on the global health agenda but are too often underprovided
in developing countries.




                                                  25
                                          Table 1: Summary statistics
                                                     Obs.        Mean       Std. dev.    Min.       Max.
       Dependent variables
       Village chair approval                        757          0.82        0.38         0         1
       Village executive ofﬁcer approval             569          0.83        0.37         0         1
       Councillor approval                           553          0.81        0.39         0         1
       Ward executive approval                       418          0.80        0.40         0         1
       MP approval                                   551          0.75        0.44         0         1
       Control variables
       female                                        757       0.58           0.49          0          1
       age                                           749       40.0           15.2         16         95
       urban                                         757       0.29           0.45          0          1
       consumption per capita (Tsh)                  745     809,007        704,072      72,744   6,960,015




                              Table 2: impact of campaign on net ownership

                (1)       (2)                    (3)                (4)          (5)         (6)       (7)
             any ITN slept w/ITN               ITN pct            any net     free net    free ITN any free net
post         0.361*** 0.363***                0.320***           0.188***    0.406***     0.439*** 0.406***
             (0.0387)  (0.0432)               (0.0489)           (0.0449)    (0.0488)     (0.0449)  (0.0409)
constant     0.430*** 0.348***                0.335***           0.714***    0.253***     0.163*** 0.373***
             (0.0258)  (0.0256)               (0.0262)           (0.0422)    (0.0287)     (0.0217)  (0.0276)
N              1345      1345                   1345               1345         1345        1345      1345
Robust standard errors clustered at district level
* p< .1, ** p< .05, *** p< .01




                                                            26
        Table 3: impact of campaign on politician approval, 2010 survey

                   (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)
             village chair village exec councillor ward exec       MP
Panel A: Reduced form, binary approval (0-1)
post           0.116***      0.0677*      0.132**    0.0827     0.132**
               (0.0308)      (0.0363)    (0.0566)   (0.0534) (0.0559)
constant       0.760***     0.797***     0.740*** 0.749*** 0.677***
               (0.0283)      (0.0310)    (0.0508)   (0.0502) (0.0454)
N                 757            569         553       418         551
Panel B: Reduced form with zone ﬁxed effects
post            0.101**        0.0201   0.0995*** 0.00211        0.0149
               (0.0386)      (0.0513)    (0.0329)   (0.0476) (0.0325)
constant       0.757***     0.858***     0.809*** 0.866*** 0.815***
               (0.0488)      (0.0575)    (0.0347)   (0.0467) (0.0372)
N                 757            569         553       418         551
Panel C: Reduced form, continuous approval (standardized)
post           0.336***      0.241**      0.355**   0.389*** 0.340**
               (0.0817)      (0.0963)     (0.142)    (0.131)    (0.163)
constant       -0.153**       -0.0688      -0.163     -0.172     -0.181
               (0.0668)      (0.0788)     (0.115)    (0.121)    (0.114)
N                 757            569         553       418         551
Panel D: Reduced form controlling for 2008 approval, binary approval
post          0.0943***        0.0575      0.0803    0.107**    0.115**
               (0.0287)      (0.0364)    (0.0495)   (0.0482) (0.0473)
constant       0.663***     0.771***     0.742*** 0.646*** 0.605***
               (0.0426)      (0.0334)    (0.0629)   (0.0549) (0.0547)
N                 755            567         418       553         551
Panel E: IV estimates (binary)
any free net   0.267***      0.145**      0.301**     0.181    0.271***
               (0.0687)      (0.0733)     (0.122)    (0.116)    (0.104)
constant       0.663***     0.745***     0.627*** 0.677*** 0.586***
               (0.0517)      (0.0546)    (0.0950)   (0.0934) (0.0759)
N                 757            569         553       418         551
Standard errors in parentheses
* p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01




                                      27
                                    Table 4: Robustness checks

                       (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)                           (5)
                  village chair village exec councillor ward exec                        MP
        Panel A: Reduced form with controls
        post        0.111***       0.0443     0.109**    0.0723                       0.125**
                    (0.0287)      (0.0320)    (0.0472)  (0.0473)                     (0.0483)
        constant    0.660***     0.787***    0.831*** 0.811***                       0.708***
                    (0.0451)      (0.0527)    (0.0598)  (0.0970)                     (0.0625)
        N              737           554        540        404                          531
        Panel B: Reduced form with no 30 day omitted period
        post        0.104***     0.0793**     0.106**   0.0930**                      0.120**
                    (0.0283)      (0.0321)    (0.0509)  (0.0460)                     (0.0494)
        Constant    0.761***     0.797***    0.754*** 0.742***                       0.694***
                    (0.0260)      (0.0282)    (0.0480)  (0.0446)                     (0.0444)
        N              972           755        719        534                          698
        Panel C: 60 day bandwidth
        post        0.107***       0.0121     0.153**    0.0739                       0.0923
                    (0.0390)      (0.0363)    (0.0569)  (0.0515)                     (0.0567)
        constant    0.767***     0.832***    0.760*** 0.767***                       0.711***
                    (0.0353)      (0.0298)    (0.0491)  (0.0406)                     (0.0390)
        N              497           363        347        258                          355
        Panel D: 120 day bandwidth
        post        0.105***       0.0503     0.133**    0.100*                       0.123**
                    (0.0312)      (0.0384)    (0.0557)  (0.0520)                     (0.0508)
        constant    0.770***     0.787***    0.739*** 0.737***                       0.680***
                    (0.0282)      (0.0334)    (0.0536)  (0.0499)                     (0.0425)
        N             1125           849        831        618                          819
   Notes: Controls in Panel A include age, gender, per capita consumption and urban residence. Robust standard
errors are clustered at district level                   * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01




                                                   28
Table 5: Impact of the ITN campaign on politician approval by district level malaria prevalence

                            (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)
                      village chair village exec councillor ward exec         mp
Panel A: effect in higher malaria prevalence districts
post x high malaria    0.149***       0.235***     0.177*       0.0817     0.256***
                        (0.0553)      (0.0603)    (0.0890)     (0.0958)    (0.0698)
high malaria            -0.134**     -0.181***    -0.181**      -0.160* -0.236***
                        (0.0505)      (0.0454)    (0.0833)     (0.0888)    (0.0585)
post                     0.0399        -0.0536     0.0612       0.0691     -0.00841
                        (0.0448)      (0.0472)    (0.0538)     (0.0582)    (0.0610)
constant               0.823***       0.875***   0.820*** 0.822*** 0.797***
                        (0.0371)      (0.0261)    (0.0395)     (0.0473)    (0.0278)
N                          741           560         540          412         536
Panel B: effect in higher malaria prevalence districts, zonal ﬁxed effects
post x high malaria       0.107         0.132      0.0404       0.0965     0.240***
                        (0.0692)      (0.0964)    (0.0887)     (0.0943)    (0.0889)
high malaria             -0.0691       -0.0401     -0.0399     -0.201** -0.238***
                        (0.0655)      (0.0800)    (0.0543)     (0.0882)    (0.0874)
post                     0.0378        -0.0676     0.101*       -0.0290    -0.130**
                        (0.0699)      (0.0858)    (0.0582)     (0.0712)    (0.0603)
constant               0.782***       0.862***   0.808*** 0.967*** 0.940***
                        (0.0774)      (0.0696)    (0.0335)     (0.0893)    (0.0622)
N                          741           560         540          412         536
Robust standard errors clustered at district level in parentheses
* p < .1, ** p< .05, *** p< .01




                                                         29
                                                              Figure 1: ITN access by survey date

   any hh member slept under ITN




                                                                                     % hh members slept under ITN
                                   1




                                                                                                                    1
                                   .8




                                                                                                                    .8
                                   .6




                                                                                                                    .6
                                   .4




                                                                                                                    .4
                                   .2




                                                                                                                    .2
                                        -365 -265 -165 -65   35   135 235 335                                            -365 -265 -165 -65   35   135 235 335
                                              days since ITN distribution                                                      days since ITN distribution
   any hh member has free ITN




                                                                                     any hh member has free net
                                   1




                                                                                                                    1
                                   .8




                                                                                                                    .8
                                   .6




                                                                                                                    .6
                                   .4




                                                                                                                    .4
                                   .2




                                                                                                                    .2
                                   0




                                        -365 -265 -165 -65   35   135 235 335                                            -365 -265 -165 -65   35   135 235 335
                                              days since ITN distribution                                                      days since ITN distribution



Notes: Each gray dot represents average ITN ownership or use for a given value of the “days since ITN
distribution” variable (survey date minus campaign date). Black lines are local polynomials ﬁtted either
side of the survey date (indicated by the vertical dashed line). The vertical gray dashed lines indicate
the bandwidth used for the main analysis. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in the appendix. The x-axis
shows the number of days elapsed between respondent’s interview date and the date of ITN campaign
in the respondent’s zone.




                                                                                30
                                                                       Figure 2: Politician approval by survey date
  % approve village_chair




                                                                                                      % approve village_exec
                            0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                                                               0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                              -365   -265    -165   -65   35   135   235   335                                                   -365   -265    -165   -65   35   135   235   335
                                                            days since ITN distribution                                                                        days since ITN distribution
  % approve ward_exec




                                                                                                      % approve councillor
                            0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                                                               0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                              -365   -265    -165   -65   35   135   235   335                                                   -365   -265    -165   -65   35   135   235   335
                                                            days since ITN distribution                                                                        days since ITN distribution
                            0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
  % approve mp




                                              -365   -265    -165   -65   35   135   235   335
                                                            days since ITN distribution




Notes: See Figure 1.




                                                                                                 31
                                                                       Figure 3: Covariate value by survey date
                       500000 100000015000002000000




                                                                                                            .7
      consumption_pc




                                                                                                            .6
                                                                                                   female
                                                                                                            .5
                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                            .3


                                                      -365 -265 -165 -65   35   135 235 335                      -365 -265 -165 -65   35   135 235 335
                                                               time since distribution                                    time since distribution
                       30




                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                            .8
                       25




                                                                                                            .6
                                                                                                   urban
      age
                       20




                                                                                                            .4
                       15




                                                                                                            .2
                       10




                                                                                                            0




                                                      -365 -265 -165 -65   35   135 235 335                      -365 -265 -165 -65   35   135 235 335
                                                               time since distribution                                    time since distribution



Notes: See Figure 1.




                                                                                              32
                             Figure 4: Treatment effects by malaria prevalence

                    VC approval                            VEO approval                      Councillor approval
       .8




                                              .8




                                                                                      .8
       .6




                                              .6




                                                                                      .6
       .4




                                              .4




                                                                                      .4
       .2




                                              .2




                                                                                      .2
       0




                                              0




                                                                                      0
       -.2




                                              -.2




                                                                                      -.2
              <10   10-20 20-30 30-40   >40          <10    10-20 20-30 30-40   >40          <10   10-20 20-30 30-40   >40
              Prevalence category                    Prevalence category                    Prevalence category (%)


                WEO approval                               MP approval
       .8




                                              .8
                                              .6
       .6




                                              .4
       .4




                                              .2
       .2




                                              0
       0




                                              -.2
       -.2




              <10   10-20 20-30 30-40   >40          <10    10-20 20-30 30-40   >40
             Prevalence category (%)                Prevalence category (%)




Notes: Plots represent treatment effects for each of the ofﬁcials, by category of malaria prevalence (0-
10%, 10-20%, 20-30%, 30-40%, and >40% prevalence), based on district level malaria prevalence in
Chaki et al. (2013). Zonal ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions.




                                                                33
                   Figure 5: Politician approval by time since campaign date

                VC approval                      VEO approval                Councillor approval
     .8




                                      .8




                                                                       .8
     .6




                                      .6




                                                                       .6
     .4




                                      .4




                                                                       .4
     .2




                                      .2




                                                                       .2
     0




                                      0




                                                                       0
     -.2




                                      -.2




                                                                       -.2
           30    45   60   75    90         30    45    60   75   90         30    45   60   75    90
                Number of days                   Number of days                   Number of days


            WEO approval                         MP approval
     .8




                                      .8
     .6




                                      .6
     .4




                                      .4
     .2




                                      .2
     0




                                      0
     -.2




                                      -.2




           30    45   60   75    90         30    45    60   75   90
                Number of days                   Number of days



Notes: Unadjusted treatment effects. No time trends, controls or ﬁxed effects included in
                                      regressions.




                                                       34
                     Figure 6: Politician approval with time trend, by bandwidth

                   VC approval                    VC approval               Councillor approval
        .8




                                       .8




                                                                      .8
                                       .6
        .6




                                                                      .6
                                       .4
        .4




                                                                      .4
                                       .2
        .2




                                                                      .2
                                       0
        0




                                                                      0
                                       -.2
        -.2




                                                                      -.2
              60    90   120 150 180         60    90   120 150 180         60    90   120 150 180
                   Number of days                 Number of days                 Number of days


               WEO approval                       MP approval
        .8




                                       .8
        .6




                                       .6
        .4




                                       .4
        .2




                                       .2
        0




                                       0
        -.2




                                       -.2




              60    90   120 150 180         60    90   120 150 180
                   Number of days                 Number of days



Notes: Regressions include linear time trend and linear time trend interacted with the variable
                           indicating post campaign survey date.




                                                        35
      Figure 7: Politician approval with zonal ﬁxed effects, by bandwidth

           VC approval                    VEO approval              Councillor approval
.8




                               .8




                                                              .8
.6




                               .6




                                                              .6
.4




                               .4




                                                              .4
.2




                               .2




                                                              .2
0




                               0




                                                              0
-.2




                               -.2




                                                              -.2
      60    90   120 150 180         60    90   120 150 180         60    90   120 150 180
           Number of days                 Number of days                 Number of days


       WEO approval                       MP approval
.8




                               .8
.6




                               .6
.4




                               .4
.2




                               .2
0




                               0
-.2




                               -.2




      60    90   120 150 180         60    90   120 150 180
           Number of days                 Number of days



 Notes: Regressions include zonal ﬁxed effects but are otherwise unadjusted.




                                                36
References

Achen, Christopher H. and Larry M. Bartels. 2016. Democracy for Realists: Why Elections Do
  Not Produce Responsive Government. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Baez, Javier, Adriana Camacho, Emily Conover and Ramon Zarate. 2012. “Conditional Cash
  Transfers, Political Participation, and Voting Behavior.” Working paper.

Bartels, Larry. 2008. Unequal Democracy: The political economy of the new gilded age. Princeton:
  Princeton University Press.

Bechtel, Michael M. and Jens Hainmueller. 2011. “How Lasting Is Voter Gratitude? An Analy-
  sis of the Short- and Long-Term Electoral Returns to Beneﬁcial Policy.” American Journal of
  Political Science 55(4):852–868.

Bobonis, Gustavo, Paul Gertler, Marcos Gonzalez-Navarro and Simeon Nichter. 2016. “Vulnera-
  bility and Clientelism.” Working paper.

Bonner, Kimberly, Alex Mwita, Peter McElroy, Susan Omari, Ally Mzava, Christian Lengeler,
  Naomi Kaspar, Rose Nathan, Joyce Ngegba, Romanus Mtung’e and Nick Brown. 2011. “De-
  sign, implementation and evaluation of a national campaign to distribute nine million free LLINs
  to children under ﬁve years of age in Tanzania.” Malaria Journal 10(1):73.

Campbell, Angus, Phillip E. Converse, Warren E. Miller and Donald E. Stokes. 1960. The Ameri-
  can Voter. John Wiley and Sons.

Chaki, Prosper, Renata Mandika, Ally Mohammed, Fabrizio Molteni, Clara Mundia, Ab-
  disalan Mohammed Noor, Ritha Njau, Fredros Okumu and Robert Snow. 2013.                     “An
  Epidemiological Proﬁle of Malaria and its Control in Mainland Tanzania.”.




                                               37
  URL:         http://www.inform-malaria.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Tanzania-Epi-Report-
  060214.pdf

Cohen, Jessica and Pascaline Dupas. 2010. “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence from a
  Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1):1–
  45.

de Janvry, Alain, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2014. “Are land reforms grant-
  ing complete property rights politically risky? Electoral outcomes of Mexico’s certiﬁcation pro-
  gram.” Journal of Development Economics 110:216 – 225.

De Kadt, Daniel and Evan Lieberman. 2015. “Do Citizens Reward Good Service? Voter Responses
  to Basic Service Provision in Southern Africa.” Afrobarometer Working Paper No. 161.

De La O, Ana L. 2013. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers Affect Electoral Behavior? Evidence from
  a Randomized Experiment in Mexico.” American Journal of Political Science 57(1):1–14.

Dionne, Kim Yi and Jeremy Horowitz. 2016. “The Political Effects of Agricultural Subsidies in
  Africa: Evidence from Malawi.” World Development 87:215 – 226.

Fiorina, Morris. 1981. Retrospective Voting in American National Elections. New Haven and
  London: Yale University Press.

Galiani, Sebastian, Nadya Hajj, Pablo Ibarraran, Nandita Krishnaswamy and Patrick J. McEwan.
  2016. “Electoral reciprocity in programmatic redistribution: Experimental Evidence.” NBER
  Working paper 22588.

Gerber, Alan S., James G. Gimpel, Donald P. Green and Daron R. Shaw. 2011. “How Large and
  Long-lasting Are the Persuasive Effects of Televised Campaign Ads? Results from a Random-
  ized Field Experiment.” American Political Science Review 105(1):135–150.



                                               38
Golden, Miriam and Brian Min. 2013. “Distributive Politics Around the World.” Annual Review
  of Political Science 16(1):73–99.

Guiteras, Raymond P. and Ahmed Mushﬁq Mobarak. 2015. “Does Development Aid Undermine
  Political Accountability? Leader and Constituent Responses to a Large Intervention.” NBER
  Working Paper.

Harding, Robin. 2015. “Attribution And Accountability: Voting for roads in Ghana.” World Politics
  67:656–689.

Harding, Robin and David Stasavage. 2014. “What Democracy Does (and Doesnt Do) for Basic
  Services: School Fees, School Inputs, and African Elections.” The Journal of Politics 76(1):229–
  245.

Healy, Andrew and Gabriel S. Lenz. 2014. “Substituting the End for the Whole: Why Vot-
  ers Respond Primarily to the Election-Year Economy.” American Journal of Political Science
  58(1):31–47.

Healy, Andrew and Neil Malhotra. 2013. “Retrospective Voting Reconsidered.” Annual Review of
  Political Science 16(1):285–306.

Hoffman, Barak and Lindsay Robinson. 2009. “Tanzania’s Missing Opposition.” Journal of
  Democracy (4):123–136.

Huber, Gregory A., Seth J. Hill and Gabriel S. Lenz. 2012. “Sources of Bias in Retrospective
  Decision Making: Experimental Evidence on Voters Limitations in Controlling Incumbents.”
  American Political Science Review 106(4):720–741.

Imai, Kosuke, Gary King and Carlos Velasco Rivera. 2016. “Do Nonpartisan Programmatic Poli-
  cies Have Partisan Electoral Effects? Evidence from Two Large Scale Randomized Experi-
  ments.” Working Paper.

                                               39
Key, V.O. 1966. The Responsible Electorate: Rationality in Presidential Voting, 1936-1960. Har-
  vard University Press/Belknap.

Kinder, Donald R and D. Roderick Kiewiet. 1979. “Economic Discontent and Political Behavior:
  The Role of Personal Grievances and Collective Economic Judgments in Congressional Voting.”
  American Journal of Political Science 23(3):495–527.

Labonne, Julien. 2013. “The local electoral impacts of conditional cash transfers: Evidence from
  a ﬁeld experiment.” Journal of Development Economics 104(0):73 – 88.

Larreguy, Horacio, John Marshall and Laura Trucco. 2015. “Breaking Clientelism or Rewarding
  Incumbents? Evidence From An urban Titling Program in Mexico.” Working Paper.

Law, Gwillim. 2012.
  URL: http://www.statoids.com/ytz.html

Lengeler, Christian. 2004. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2.
  URL: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD000363.pub2/full

Levitt, Steven D. and Jr. Snyder, James M. 1997. “The Impact of Federal Spending on House
  Election Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy 105(1):pp. 30–53.

Lierl, Malte. 2014. “Preferences or Incentives? Experimental Evidence on the Accountability of
  Village Leaders in Tanzania.” Working paper.
  URL: http://www.maltelierl.info/ﬁles/Lierl2014a.pdf

Manacorda, Marco, Edward Miguel and Andrea Vigorito. 2011. “Government Transfers and Po-
  litical Support.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(3):1–28.

Mani, Anandi and Sharun Mukand. 2007. “Democracy, visibility and public good provision.”
  Journal of Development Economics 83(2):506 – 529. Papers from a Symposium: The Social


                                              40
  Dimensions of Microeconomic Behaviour in Low-Income Communities.
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304387806000642

Mayhew, Phillip. 2004. Congress: The Electoral Connection. New Haven and London: Yale
  University Press.

Njau, Ritha, Don de Savigny, Lucy Gilson, Eleuther Mwageni and Franklin Mosha. 2009. “Im-
  plementation of an insecticide-treated net subsidy scheme under a public-private partnership for
  malaria control in Tanzania - challenges in implementation.” Malaria Journal 8(1):201.

Nordhaus, William D. 1975.       “The Political Business Cycle.” Review of Economic Studies
  42(2):169.

Nupia, Oskar. 2012. “Anti-Poverty Programs and Presidential Election Outcomes: Familias en
  Accion in Colombia.” Working Paper.

Pathania, Vikram. 2014. “The Impact of Malaria Control on Infant Mortality in Kenya.” Economic
  Development and Cultural Change 62(3):459–487.

Pop-Eleches, Cristian and Grigore Pop-Eleches. 2012. “Targeted Government Spending and Po-
  litical Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 7(3):285–320.

Popkin, Samuel L. 1994. The Reasoning Voter. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Posner, Daniel N. and David J. Simon. 2002. “Economic Conditions and Incumbent Support in
  Africa’s New Democracies: Evidence from Zambia.” Comparative Political Studies 35(3):313–
  336.

Powell, G. Bingham and Guy D. Whitten. 1993. “A Cross-National Analysis of Economic Voting:
  Taking Account of the Political Context.” American Journal of Political Science 37(2):391–414.




                                               41
Renggli, Sabine, Renata Mandike, Karen Kramer, Faith Patrick, Nick Brown, Peter McElroy,
  Wilhelmina Rimisho, Amina Msengwa, Ally Mnzava, Rose Nathan, Romanus Mtung’e, Rita
  Mgullo, Jane Lweikiza and Christian Lengeler. 2013. “Design, implementation and evaluation
  of a national campaign to deliver 18 million free long-lasting insecticidal nets to uncovered
  sleeping spaces in Tanzania.” Malaria Journal 12(1):85.

Schellenberg, Joanna RM Armstrong, Salim Abdulla, Rose Nathan, Oscar Mukasa, Tanya J
  Marchant, Nassor Kikumbih, Adiel K Mushi, Haji Mponda, Happiness Minja, Hassan Mshinda,
  Marcel Tanner and Christian Lengeler. 2001.         “Effect of large-scale social marketing of
  insecticide-treated nets on child survival in rural Tanzania.” The Lancet 357.

Shaw, Daron R. and James G. Gimpel. 2012. “What if We Randomize the Governor’s Schedule?
  Evidence on Campaign Appearance Effects From a Texas Field Experiment.” Political Commu-
  nication 29(2):137–159.

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock. 1997. “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instru-
  ments.” Econometrica 65(3):557–586.

Stokes, Susan C., Thad Dunning, Marcelo Nazareno and Valeria Brusco. 2013. Brokers, Voters,
  and Clientelism: The Puzzle of Distributive Politics. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press.

Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics. 2012.
  URL: https://data.humdata.org/dataset/2012-census-tanzania-wards-shapeﬁles

Tucker, Stevens, Barak Hoffman, Rwaweza Mukandala and Mark Billera. 2010. “Democracy and
  Governance Assessment of Tanzania.”. Burlington VT: ARD Inc.

Tufte, Edward. 1978. Political Control of the Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                                42
Wantchekon, Leonard. 2003. “Clientelism and voting behavior: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment
  in Benin.” World Politics 55(3):399–422.

Weghorst, Keith R. and Staffan I. Lindberg. 2013. “What Drives the Swing Voter in Africa?”
  American Journal of Political Science 57(3):717–734.

Zucco, Cesar. 2013. “When Payouts Pay Off: Conditional Cash Transfers and Voting Behavior in
  Brazil 2002 - 10.” American Journal of Political Science 57(4):810–822.




                                              43
Variable deﬁnitions

The following variables all come from the 2008-2009 and 2010-2011 National Panel Surveys,
Chaki et al. (2013), or Renggli et al. (2013).
   post. This is the main treatment variable. Coded 1 if the respondent was interviewed after the
bed net distribution campaign took place in the respondent’s zone of residence.
   any ITN. Coded as 1 if any household member slept under an ITN the previous night
   slept w/ITN. Coded as 1 if the respondent slept under an ITN the previous night
   ITN pct. Percentage of household members who slept under an insecticide treated net (ITN)
the previous night.
   any net. Coded as 1 if any household member slept under a bed net (ITN or untreated) the
previous night.
   free net. Coded as 1 if the respondent slept under a bed net (ITN or untreated) the previous
night that they had received for free.
   any free net. Coded as 1 if any member of the household slept under a bed net (ITN or un-
treated) the previous night that they had received for free.
   free ITN. Coded as 1 if any member of the household slept under an ITN the previous night
that they had received for free.
   Politician approval variables: village chair, village exec, weo, councillor, MP. The main ap-
proval variables are binary indicators; they are coded as 1 if the respondent reports that he or she
approves or strongly approves of the leader and 0 if the respondent disapproves or strongly disap-
proves. A continuous approval variable is also created, which is a standardized transformation of
the 1-4 (strongly approve, approve, disapprove, strongly disapprove) approval rating variable.
   opposition. Coded 1 if more than 50 percent of village level leaders listed on the village leaders
roster in 2010 were opposition party members (opposition parties are CHADEMA, CUF, or “other
party”).


                                                 44
   ruling party. Coded 1 if all village level leaders listed on the village leaders roster in 2010 were
CCM party members.
   high malaria. Indicator coded 1 if the predicted population-adjusted parasite prevalence in
children aged 2-10 years as of 2000 is above the median for all districts. (The median in 2000 was
23.15). Estimates of malaria prevalence by district are taken from Chaki et al. (2013). This source
provides malaria estimates for 102 districts (this incorporates urban councils and districts in 14
cases). In cases where an urban council is conﬂated with its rural “pair” district I follow the source
by assigning the same malaria prevalence to both entities. National Panel Survey enumeration
areas are plotted onto districts using the shape ﬁles obtained from Tanzania National Bureau of
Statistics (2012). In cases where districts have split between the publication of the shapeﬁle and
district classiﬁcation used by Chaki et al. (2013), districts are assigned the malaria prevalence of
their parent district as listed by Law (2012).
   consumption pc. Household consumption per capita, in 2010 Tanzanian Shillings.
   urban. Indicator coded 1 if respondent household is located in an urban area.
   female. Indicator coded 1 if respondent is female.




                                                 45
       Table A1: impact of campaign on politician approval, 2008 round

                   (1)          (2)                     (3)          (4)        (5)
             village chair village exec              councillor   ward exec     MP
Panel A: Reduced form
post            -0.0332       0.0110                  0.0428       0.0179      -0.0586
               (0.0413)      (0.0550)                (0.0497)     (0.0493)    (0.0580)
constant      0.787***      0.646***                 0.583***     0.525***    0.570***
               (0.0252)      (0.0414)                (0.0368)     (0.0382)    (0.0449)
N                 533           533                     533          533         533
Panel B: Reduced form with controls
post            -0.0206       0.0374                  0.0531       0.0403      -0.0647
               (0.0409)      (0.0531)                (0.0495)     (0.0485)    (0.0561)
constant      0.821***      0.731***                 0.586***     0.589***    0.489***
               (0.0516)      (0.0697)                (0.0597)     (0.0654)    (0.0818)
N                 533           533                     533          533         533
Panel C: IV estimates
ITN receipt      -0.111       0.0369                   0.143       0.0599       -0.196
                (0.140)       (0.182)                 (0.162)      (0.162)     (0.191)
constant      0.793***      0.644***                 0.575***     0.522***    0.581***
               (0.0304)      (0.0481)                (0.0432)     (0.0448)    (0.0524)
N                 533           533                     533          533         533
Robust standard errors clustered at district level
∗ p < 0.1, ∗ ∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01




                                               46
  Table A2: covariate balance between respondent pre and post campaign

                       (1)                       (2)            (3)         (4)
                 consumption pc                female           age       urban
        post        -60416.1                  -0.00233        0.0117      -0.157
                   (178707.2)                 (0.0382)        (1.765)    (0.114)
        constant  925771.5***                 0.588***       39.35***   0.419***
                   (151239.3)                 (0.0312)        (1.017)   (0.0985)
        N             894                        915            907        915
        robust standard errors clustered at district level
        * p< .1, ** p< .05, *** p< .01



    Table A3: impact of post-campaign survey date on missing response

               (1)                     (2)               (3)          (4)         (5)
         village chair           village exec        councillor   ward exec       MP
post        -0.0330                 -0.0252           0.00390      -0.108*    -0.000680
           (0.0691)                (0.0779)           (0.0635)    (0.0603)     (0.0485)
constant  0.190***                0.391***           0.394***     0.600***    0.398***
           (0.0385)                (0.0464)           (0.0382)    (0.0307)     (0.0318)
N             915                     915               915          915         915
robust standard errors clustered at district level
* p< .1, ** p< .05, *** p< .01




                                              47
                                      Table A4: Placebo campaigns

                              (1)                         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)
                        village chair                village exec   councillor   ward exec     MP
Panel A: registration event placebo
registration placebo       -0.0208                     -0.0152       -0.0445     -0.0927**    0.0521
                          (0.0312)                    (0.0474)      (0.0577)      (0.0456)   (0.0583)
Constant                 0.823***                     0.839***      0.792***     0.807***    0.681***
                          (0.0283)                    (0.0305)      (0.0375)      (0.0350)   (0.0550)
N                            624                         463           432          318         426
Panel B: 100 day placebo
100 days placebo           0.0163                      0.0229        0.0755       0.0493      0.0804*
                          (0.0299)                    (0.0360)      (0.0479)     (0.0390)    (0.0432)
constant                 0.812***                     0.821***      0.768***     0.774***    0.701***
                          (0.0203)                    (0.0258)      (0.0416)     (0.0324)    (0.0344)
N                           2135                        1633          1601         1159        1601
Panel C: 200 day placebo
200 days placebo         0.000328                      -0.0258       -0.0419      0.0364     -0.000432
                          (0.0400)                    (0.0429)      (0.0450)     (0.0346)     (0.0401)
constant                 0.820***                     0.838***      0.843***     0.824***    0.809***
                          (0.0258)                    (0.0278)      (0.0276)     (0.0264)     (0.0270)
N                            555                         476           474          362         481
Panel D: 100 day prior placebo
100 days prior placebo     -0.0394                     0.0444        0.0207       0.0443      0.0685
                          (0.0430)                    (0.0411)      (0.0714)     (0.0562)    (0.0569)
constant                 0.813***                     0.792***      0.758***     0.742***    0.649***
                          (0.0378)                    (0.0462)      (0.0664)     (0.0655)    (0.0516)
N                            632                         454           463          317         466
Panel E: 200 day prior placebo
200 days prior placebo     -0.0349                     -0.0472       -0.0451      -0.0717    -0.155***
                          (0.0277)                    (0.0356)      (0.0429)     (0.0608)     (0.0563)
constant                 0.843***                     0.836***      0.795***     0.812***    0.798***
                          (0.0312)                    (0.0430)      (0.0668)     (0.0513)     (0.0550)
N                            492                         353           374          242         371
robust standard errors clustered at district level
* p< .1, ** p< .05, *** p< .01




                                                        48
Table A5: impact of campaign on hhs by gender, education, and income, with zonal ﬁxed effects

                                (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)
                          village chair village exec councillor ward exec     MP
Panel A: post-campaign survey x gender
post x female                -0.0328         0.0106     0.0324    0.0246   -0.0748
                            (0.0496)       (0.0641)   (0.0598)   (0.0726) (0.0706)
post                         0.124**         0.0223    0.0852*   -0.00928   0.0567
                            (0.0498)       (0.0641)   (0.0462)   (0.0572) (0.0467)
female                      0.0991**         0.0689    0.00655    -0.0268   0.109*
                            (0.0445)       (0.0462)   (0.0496)   (0.0658) (0.0593)
constant                    0.700***       0.816***   0.804***   0.878*** 0.758***
                            (0.0572)       (0.0646)   (0.0431)   (0.0581) (0.0466)
N                              757             569        553       418      551
Panel B: post-campaign survey x years of school
post x years school         -0.00381      -0.0175** -0.0000406 0.000623 -0.00609
                           (0.00719)      (0.00804)  (0.00669) (0.00829) (0.00978)
post                         0.131**          0.107     0.101*    0.00499   0.0375
                            (0.0545)       (0.0654)   (0.0535)   (0.0667) (0.0640)
years school                -0.0101*        0.00548   -0.00128   -0.00342  0.00174
                           (0.00590)      (0.00593)  (0.00476) (0.00614) (0.00873)
constant                    0.807***       0.830***   0.813***   0.876*** 0.811***
                            (0.0560)       (0.0640)   (0.0493)   (0.0532) (0.0551)
N                              737             552        536       403      533
Panel C: post-campaign survey x above median per capita consumption
post x consumption           -0.0383       0.00573     -0.0441     0.118    -0.117
                            (0.0433)       (0.0599)   (0.0574)   (0.0962) (0.0715)
post                         0.114**         0.0171   0.116***    -0.0280 0.0837*
                            (0.0433)       (0.0562)   (0.0433)   (0.0557) (0.0440)
above median consumption    0.00211         -0.0461    -0.0148   -0.172**   0.0204
                            (0.0338)       (0.0524)   (0.0413)   (0.0749) (0.0617)
constant                    0.757***       0.874***   0.814***   0.906*** 0.810***
                            (0.0505)       (0.0613)   (0.0414)   (0.0577) (0.0432)
N                              745             561        546       410      538
Robust standard errors clustered at district level
* p< .1, ** p< .05, *** p< .01




                                                     49
        Table A6: impact of campaign in CCM vs opposition villages

                          (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
                    village chair   village chair   village exec   village exec
post x ruling party   0.00874          0.0148          -0.0391        -0.0446
                      (0.0689)        (0.0746)        (0.0661)       (0.0739)
post                  0.100**          0.127*           0.0832         0.0826
                      (0.0488)        (0.0672)        (0.0594)       (0.0731)
ruling party           -0.0182         -0.0449          0.0157         0.0338
                      (0.0612)        (0.0568)        (0.0592)       (0.0679)
constant             0.783***        0.732***        0.793***       0.828***
                      (0.0458)        (0.0638)        (0.0548)       (0.0722)
zonal ﬁxed effects        no             yes               no            yes
N                        624             624              485            485
post x opposition      0.0265        -0.000860           0.180          0.218
                      (0.0867)        (0.0808)         (0.176)        (0.157)
post                 0.107***           0.131           0.0557         0.0376
                      (0.0342)        (0.0784)        (0.0373)       (0.0804)
opposition             -0.0333        0.00403           -0.191         -0.229
                      (0.0801)        (0.0715)         (0.162)        (0.144)
constant             0.775***        0.728***        0.816***       0.880***
                      (0.0307)        (0.0736)        (0.0303)       (0.0844)
zonal ﬁxed effects        no             yes               no            yes
N                        624             624              485            485
Standard errors in parentheses
* p< .1, ** p< .05, *** p< .01




                                     50
