                                                WPS7996


Policy Research Working Paper                  7996




    Who Should Be at the Top of Bottom-Up
               Development?
  A Case Study of the National Rural Livelihoods Mission
                    in Rajasthan, India

                               Shareen Joshi
                              Vijayendra Rao




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7996


  Abstract
  It is widely acknowledged that top-down support is essen-                         to manage, while the Government of India centrally man-
  tial for bottom-up participatory projects to be effectively                       aged other sub-regions. The study finds that the nature of
  implemented at scale. However, which level of government,                         top-down management had a large bearing on the nature
  national or sub-national, should be given the responsibility                      and quality of local-level facilitation. Centrally and locally
  to implement such projects is an open question, with wide                         managed facilitators formed several groups with similar
  variations in practice. This paper analyzes qualitative and                       financial performance. But centrally managed facilitators
  quantitative data from a natural experiment in the state of                       formed groups that were less likely to engage in collective
  Rajasthan in India, where a large national flagship project                       action, be politically active, and engage with other civil
  that mobilized women into self-help groups for micro-credit                       society organizations. These results raise important ques-
  and created a women‚Äôs network for other development                               tions on how responsibilities for participatory development
  activities was implemented in two different ways. Some                            projects should be devolved, and how the nature of manage-
  sub-regions were given to the state government of Rajasthan                       ment affects the sustainability of bottom-up interventions.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may
  be contacted at vrao@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Who Should Be at the Top of Bottom-Up
Development? A Case Study of the National Rural
    Livelihoods Mission in Rajasthan, India

                       Shareen Joshi (Georgetown University)
                               Vijayendra Rao (World Bank)




                                  JEL Codes: D70, O10, D72
Keywords: Community Driven Development, Decentralization, Self-Help Groups, India
Acknowledgements: The authors are indebted to Radha Khan for supervising the qualitative
fieldwork, Ritwik Sircar and Anirvan Chowdhury for outstanding research assistance, SRI-
IMRB for collecting the quantitative data for this study, the Government of Rajasthan for sharing
valuable data, PRADAN for valuable initial conversations, and the staff of PRADAN, PEDO,
SERP and the Rajasthan SHG federations for their support. The authors are grateful to
Georgetown University and the South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative for their
financial support. For excellent comments and conversations we thank Radha Khan, Sanjay
Sharma, Irfan Nooruddin, Milan Vaishnav, Anders Olofsgard and participants of the India
Politics Workshop in Washington DC.
Introduction
Devolving funds and management functions to local communities is an important, and heavily
funded, tenet of development assistance (Mansuri and Rao 2012, Smoke, Loffler and Bossi,
2013).1 The practice relies heavily on the principle of subsidiarity, i.e., the idea that local
institutions are in the best position to meet community needs because they are close to the
people, have good knowledge about local preferences and have strong incentives to promote
accountability, reduce corruption and increase the efficiency of resource allocation within their
boundaries.

While the logic of this approach has broad appeal, one of the key findings of recent studies is
that community-level participatory processes function best when they have the active support of
the ‚Äútop‚Äù‚Äîproject implementers who provide technical advice and political support, and who
facilitate processes of mobilization, monitoring and adaptive learning (Fox 1993, Mansuri and
Rao 2012). In other words development, managed by and accountable to local citizens, works
best in a ‚Äúsandwich.‚Äù This however, raises the important question of exactly what constitutes the
‚Äútop‚Äù? Most large-scale community development projects are implemented by governments and
their partners. Governments, however, are usually structured into decentralized hierarchies
(Bardhan, 2002; Treisman, 2007). The development literature provides little insight into the level
of government‚Äîcentral, provincial or local‚Äîthat should be responsible for implementing such
projects at scale. The principles that should guide the devolution of the implementation of local
level participatory projects remain unclear.

The literature on devolution and subsidiarity would argue that the management of a community-
level project should, optimally, be the responsibility of the lowest level of government capable of
managing it. In large federal countries, this economic logic can be supplemented with a cultural
argument. Sub-national entities such as states and provinces have distinct cultures and notions of
sub-nationalism, and a sub-national identity. These constitute symbolic public goods than can
facilitate collective action, help build civic capacity and promote economic development (Rao,
2008; Singh, 2016). Sub-national governments are, thus, best suited to implement participatory
development projects because they are better able to culturally match (Cornell and Kalt, 2000)
the needs of local communities with the design of the intervention and the process of
implementation.

On the other hand, a counter-argument can be made that central management works best,
particularly in countries where provincial and local governments do not have the capacity to

1Devolution is typically defined as a process of transfer of political, administrative and fiscal management powers
between central government and lower levels of government, primarily operating at city and region levels (Potter,
2001).

                                                          2
implement community-based projects (Bardhan, 2002). Implementing complex projects in low-
capacity environments requires the establishment of effective support and management
information systems. The large cost of setting up such systems makes central management more
feasible than decentralized management. Central management can also help break through
cultural norms, such as extreme patriarchy, that are not conducive to development objectives, by
translating lessons from one part of the country to another.

This question of which level of government should manage community level projects hinges
largely on who is best suited to managing the complex task of facilitation. Facilitators are
arguably the most important agents of government in community development projects for they
are responsible for promoting participation as well as for implementing day-to-day management
at the community level: mobilizing citizens, informing them about the working of the program,
and facilitating the process of local implementation (Mansuri and Rao, 2012; Perry et al., 2014). 2
Since facilitators are almost always low-level salaried bureaucrats accountable to higher levels of
government, their deployment and management can be the key to an effective community-
development intervention (Barron, Woolcock and Diprose, 2011; Baiocci, Heller and Silva,
2011). Yet, the vast literature on decentralization and devolution is relatively silent on the
relationship between facilitators and governments.

This paper examines these issues by focusing on the case of the Indian National Rural
Livelihoods Mission (NRLM). This program builds networks of women‚Äôs self-help groups in
rural areas with the twin objectives of alleviating poverty and empowering women. The large $5
billion program was funded directly by the center with support from the World Bank. For the
most part state governments implemented it, but management of some blocks (administrative
areas below the district level) was with the center.3 In the state of Rajasthan, a natural experiment
in the implementation of the program provides an opportunity to understand how centrally
managed community development projects compare in their quality of implementation with
projects managed at the state level. We compare ‚ÄúResource Blocks‚Äù which are directly managed
by the center, with ‚ÄúIntensive Blocks‚Äù which are managed by the Rajasthan state government.
We examine the contrast, both in terms of processes and outcomes. We focus on comparing how
central and state management affects the work of local facilitators, their attributes, activities and
performance across the two types of management strategies, by using qualitative, survey and
administrative data collected from villages in the different blocks.




2 Mansuri and Rao (2012) review the literature on facilitation, documenting its central role in community driven
projects. Perry et al. (2014) review the history of community health care worker programs in low-, medium- and
high-income countries. They argue that in the past three decades, community health workers have played a critical
role in helping health systems achieve their potential, regardless of a country's level of development.
3 The program has been modified considerably over the last five years and now gives state s considerable leeway in

how it is managed.

                                                         3
The next section of the paper describes the NRLM in detail, which is followed by a context-
setting section on Rajasthan. We then describe our research methods, followed by a discussion of
our findings. We conclude the paper by examining the implications of our findings for policy.



The Context

National Rural Livelihoods Project
The National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM), launched in 2011, is one of the flagship
programs of the Ministry of Rural Development4 of the Government of India. Aiming to reach
350 million rural poor in 13 states of India, it is one of the largest community-based projects in
the world. The NRLM seeks to create and empower Self-Help Groups (SHGs). SHGs are
‚Äúmembership- based organizations‚Äù, i.e., organizations whose members provide each other with
mutual support while attempting to achieve collective objectives through community action
(Chen et al. 2008). A typical Indian SHG consists of 7-12 poor women from similar socio-
economic backgrounds who meet once a month to pool savings and discuss issues of mutual
importance. The government regards this program as not only an investment in extending credit
to impoverished rural populations, but also an investment into community empowerment. The
focus on women is a deliberate attempt to address the wide gender gap and provide resources
directly to women (Planning Commission, 2011). 5

The NRLM is modeled after the Andhra Pradesh District Poverty Initiatives Project, also known
as Velugu (light) (Galab and Rao 2003). Launched in 2000, Velugu was a joint initiative by the
State of Andhra Pradesh and the World Bank in six backward districts of Andhra Pradesh. The
program was run by the Society for the Elimination of Rural Poverty (SERP), an autonomous
state institute staffed by professionals from both public- and private-sector organizations. While
the program‚Äôs core involved microfinance and SHG-Bank linkages, it also included additional
features such as the establishment of grassroots institutions, the provision of community
investment funds, and the training of women‚Äôs SHGs to address social problems such as child
labor, dowry and gender inequality.

The NRLM is implemented at the grass-roots level by a network of community coordinators.
These individuals are generally professionals who are rigorously trained and required to live in a
village for a month prior to placement. The Andhra Pradesh program has been widely touted as

4 The National Rural Livelihoods Mission is funded from two sources, a $1 billion loan from the Government of
India, and a $4.1 billion budget from the Government of India. The World Bank funded component of the project is
focused on India‚Äôs poorest states (including Rajasthan) and is known as the National Rural Livelihoods Project
(NRLP). For the sake of brevity we will refer to project as the NRLM in this paper, though our focus is technically
on the NRLP.
5 See http://rural.nic.in/sites/downloads/latest/NRLM_23122010.pdf.


                                                         4
increasing incomes, reducing poverty and improving women‚Äôs participation in household
decisions and civic engagement (Aiyar et al, 2007), and there is some evidence to show that it
has been effective to some extent in achieving these goals (Deininger and Liu, 2009).6 SERP is
now a formal partner of the Government of India in implementing the NRLM program in
numerous states of India. SERP community coordinators travel to states all across the country
and mobilize women into SHGs.


Politics and Civil Society in Rajasthan
Implementation of large-scale poverty alleviation programs in the state of Rajasthan is affected
by the state‚Äôs distinctive and cohesive sub-national identity (Singh 2016). The landlocked, arid
and sparsely populated state has a long history of feudal rule, with rulers well-known for their
rivalry and competition.7 As a result, the state has remained quite isolated from the political,
economic and social forces at work in the rest of the country; it was a late democratizer and its
pace of development lagged behind other states for the first three decades of independence
(Tudor and Zeigfeld, 2014; Singh 2016). Rajasthan‚Äôs politics and culture coalesced during the
National Emergency of 1975-77 when the pre-colonial political structures were effectively
harnessed by local elites to generate new forms of political competition (Tudor and Zeigfeld,
2014). A new generation of citizens emerged and local parties were strengthened (Singh 2016).8
This contributed to the development of distinctive Rajasthani politics, civil society and cultural
identity.

One of the manifestations of this was the rise of new NGOs which emerged particularly in rural
areas. Sewa Mandir in Udaipur, Urmul in Bikaner, the Social Work Research Center in Ajmer,
and the Gramin Vigyan Vikas Samiti in Jodhpur are the most well-known examples. Most of
these NGOs were initially set up to complement the state in the delivery of public services
(Singh 2016). 9 In subsequent years, however, they broadened their focus and became important




6 Deininger and Liu (2009) use data from household surveys from 2004 and 2006 to document three main impacts:
increases in social capital and economic empowerment, nutritional improvement (despite persistent drought at the
time), and an increase in consumption for participants of new groups. The findings did not find increases in income
or assets. There was however, evidence of spillovers within the communities in which SHGs were formed.
7 Under British rule, the region was indirectly governed through the Rajputana Agency, a collection of 18 princely

states and 2 chiefdoms (Gupta and Bakshi 2008).
8 Singh (2016:104) describes many strategies used by the BJP government to promote the develo pment of a pan-

Rajasthani identity throughout the 1990s. She notes that the speeches of leaders were replete with references to
heroes of the past, highlighting the culture of valor and independence. The government also promoted tourism,
supported cultural fairs and events, and demanded constitutional recognition of the Rajasthani language.
9 Under the fifth five year plan (1980-85), the government provided Rs. 500 million to support NGOs. In 1980, an

important amendment to the Income Tax Act allowed corpo rations to deduct donations to NGOs from their taxable
income (Kudva, 2005).

                                                         5
project implementing partners for international aid organizations (Bhargava, 2007).10 These
efforts gained recognition as the pace of economic and social development in Rajasthan
intensified. Between 1991 and 2001 literacy rates for females doubled from 20% in 1991 to 44%,
and literacy rates for scheduled castes doubled from 26% to 52% (Census of India, 1991 and
2001). These achievements were met with national as well as international acclaim and insights
from several Rajasthani programs shaped national policies such as the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan at
the national level.

Over time, some NGOs expanded the scope of their activities even further to include political
mobilization of the rural poor (Bhargava, 2007). 11 A particularly notable NGO in this regard is
the Social Work and Research Center (SWRC) in Tilonia, Rajasthan (John, 2003).12 Offshoots of
this organization eventually spread all over the state of Rajasthan. PRADAN (Professional
Assistance for Development Action) was established in Alvar in 1987, and also noteworthy was
PEDO (People‚Äôs Education and Development Organization). A distinctive feature of PEDO and
its offshoots is the focus on promoting sangathan (organization), sangharsh (agitation) and
samrachna (constructive work) across the state (Rajvansi, 2007: 326). While the SWRC has
retained a broad focus on economic self-reliance and environmental issues at the local level,
some of the offshoots have addressed other issues. Both PRADAN and PEDO for example, have
focused on women. They favored the creation of new institutions and platforms such as women‚Äôs
self-help groups, cooperatives and collectives. 13 The efforts of these groups have been successful
enough to influence national legislation. The National Right to Information Act, passed in in
2005, makes it mandatory for the government to share information with any citizen of India who
requests it. The law was largely shaped by citizens‚Äô movements, particularly under the leadership
of Aruna Roy‚Äôs Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS), a spinoff of the SWRC in Southern
Rajasthan. Similarly, the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS) was also significantly influenced by citizens‚Äô movements in Rajasthan, as well as
NGOs that had considerable experience with drought-relief programs in the state (Menon, 2008).

The NRLM in Rajasthan

The NRLM operates in 17 of the poorest districts of Rajasthan and is locally known as the
Rajasthan Rural Livelihoods Project or RRLP. The program began in 2011. By 2013, delays in

10  The Shiksha Karmi program for example, featured the recruitment and training of local teachers by NGOs. The
Lok Jambish program scaled up community involvement in education through the process of mapping and micro-
planning at the village-level and was again led by NGOs.
11 Some prominent examples are the Jangle Jamin Jan Andolan led by Astha; Movement for Water Conservation by

Tarun Bharat Sangh; and Right to Food by Akal Sangharsh Samiti.
12 Headed by Bunker Roy, the SWRC was established in Rajasthan in 1972. It began with a focus on water and

irrigation but soon its mission expanded to empowerment and sustainability. It rose to prominence in the 1990s. Roy
has been named one of the 50 environmentalists who could save the planet by the Guardian and one of the 100 most
influential people in the world by TIME magazine.
13 As of March 2013, Pradan worked with 18,736 SHGs across 7 states, representing a total membership of 252,070

rural poor women. These SHGs have mobilized a total savings of 1230 million rupees.

                                                        6
project rollout and implementation had resulted in significant risks to the project (World Bank,
2013).14 To gain momentum, two strategies were simultaneously promoted. The two models
were as follows:
     ÔÇ∑   The centrally managed ‚ÄúResource Block Strategy‚Äù: External organizations fro m other
         parts of India were invited into the state to organize the poor. In February 2013, the
         program first signed an agreement with the Society for the Elimination of Rural Poverty
         (SERP) from the state of Andhra Pradesh to work intensively in 10 blocks for 3 years.
         Facilitators, or Community Resource Persons (CRP) in this arm of the RRLP were
         intended to be from outside the state. Teams were required to work for 2 years without
         interruption. Each external CRP team was to work for one month in one cluster and take
         one month gap/break after each round. The CRPs teams were to be fully supported by the
         Rajasthan government.15 For the rest of this paper, we refer to these facilitators as
         ‚ÄúExternal Facilitators‚Äù.

     ÔÇ∑   The locally managed ‚ÄúIntensive Block Strategy‚Äù: Experienced local SHG members, with
         significant experience of organizing in their communities, were invited to continue
         existing work in affiliation with the state and to scale up their work. These local CRPs
         were asked to form new SHGs, strengthen pre-existing SHGs, identify and train
         bookkeepers for SHGs, identify and train potential CRPs from the local area, etc. Many
         of these local CRPs were, and still are, in fact closely aligned with reputable NGOs. As a
         result, these NGOs provide considerable support to the RRLP, often providing staffing
         and assisting in trainings. They also provide important support to project facilitating
         teams in the intensive blocks. PRADAN and PEDO are particularly important since they
         have a long history of successfully organizing women in rural Rajasthan and constructing
         federations. In January 2013, the Government of Rajasthan formed an agreement with six
         federations to implement the RRLP program. Facilitators were invited to participate in a
         4-day long training workshop. By April 2013, 28 CRP teams were deployed in 7
         blocks.16 For the rest of this paper, we refer to these facilitators as ‚ÄúInternal Facilitators‚Äù.


These are two entirely different development strategies. In the resource blocks, the facilitator is
an ‚Äúoutsider‚Äù from Andhra Pradesh. In intensive blocks, on the other hand, the facilitator is a


14 The official Implementation Status and Results Report, written in Feb ruary 2013, classifies the ‚ÄúOverall Risk
Rating‚Äù of the project as ‚ÄúSubstantial‚Äù and mentions that the RRLP was at least a year behind schedule and had only
spent 0.54% of its allocated funds in the first 16 months of its operation (India - Rajasthan Rural Livelihoods Project
(RRLP): P102329 - Implementation Status Results Report: Sequence 05, World Bank, 2013).
15 In the 1st phase, SERP deployed 20 PRPs on 23 February, 2013 and 20 CRP teams on 9 March, 2013. These have

been deployed in 5 blocks of 5 RRLP districts, namely Baran, Churu, Jhalawar, Kota, Tonk. The rotation was to last
until April 7, 2013. The next batch of 22 teams of CRPs and PRPs was deployed by the SERP in the month of May
2013 and would include blocks in Dungarpur as well as Udaipur districts.
16 The blocks were Bari and Bashedi of Dholpur district, Dausa block of Dausa district, Taranagar of Churu district ,

Simalwada block of Dungarpur district, Kolayat of Bikaner district, and Sarada of Udaipur district.

                                                          7
local woman who has worked with local SHGs for a long time. In addition, the distinction
between these two types of facilitators goes far beyond the difference in facilitator appearance.
They represent different paradigms of state-backed community development programs. In the
resource blocks, a team of visitors from Andhra Pradesh is viewed as a representative of the
Government of India whose task is to link poorer women to the state. They are viewed as
bringing experience, training and services to the village with clear goals for the short- and long-
term.17 In Intensive Blocks however, a team of local women, provided with little visible support
from the government, are viewed as community members building on existing networks and
capacities for long-term change. Their relationship to the state is not obvious ‚Äì they are building
on the Rajasthani sub-national tradition of social mobilization through non-state actors. Their
goals, and their alignment with state development plans, are much less explicit.


The decision to have two separate development strategies within a single state was unexpected
and sudden. It emerged in January 2013, two years after the program began and when it was 18
months behind schedule. The initial plan, formulated in 2011, featured a phased rollout to
approximate a randomized control trial: All blocks in poorer districts in Rajasthan were ranked in
order of their Human Development Indices. Within each district certain blocks were randomly
assigned to the NRLM program for immediate rollout. All other blocks were supposed to serve
as controls until 2016. A baseline survey, conducted in 2011, ensured that the treatment and
control blocks were balanced along the lines of key indicators (as will be seen later in this paper).
However, when the program fell behind schedule and there were significant delays in
implementation the plan had to be modified. Resource Blocks and Intensive Blocks were
allocated randomly within the treatment group, and NGOs were then invited to submit
applications to partner with the government in the Intensive blocks. This was done through
announcements in newspapers and regional workshops in the summer of 2012. In early 2013, the
lists for Resource blocks and Intensive blocks were made public. The intervention started soon
afterwards -- SERP staff arrived in Rajasthan to implement programs within six weeks of this
announcement. Our surveys were conducted a year after these announcements giving the
program time to take effect.


Data and Research Methods
Our comparative mixed-methods approach gathered both qualitative and quantitative data from
Resource Blocks and Intensive Blocks. The qualitative data were gathered between July and


17 The National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) of the NRLM had planned in 2012 to create 100 community
managed and community driven intensive Resource Blocks across the country. The goal was to develop, through an
intensive social mobilization process, a few blocks (2-6 blocks in NRLP/NRLM states) as role models. In the design
of this strategy, it was emphasized that experienced project professionals , drawn from resource organizations , would
receive considerable support from the cluster, block, district and s tate level to spearhead social mobilization and
institution building.

                                                          8
October 2013. Field trips were made to Jaipur, as well as to districts where the RRLP program
was being actively scaled up during the months of our study: Dausa, Tonk, Alwar and
Dungarpur.18 A series of in-depth individual interviews were conducted with various
stakeholders including the facilitators from four organizations, facilitators who were working for
the RRLP under direct contracts, women participating in SHGs, and RRLP project staff who
were involved in all aspects of the program‚Äôs design. At RRLP headquarters, we interviewed the
project director, the deputy director, the monitoring and evaluation specialist, the Resource
Block coordinator and the Intensive Block coordinator. Within the Intensive Blocks, we
interviewed the senior staff of the NGOs who were present in the district offices. Within the
Resource Blocks, we interviewed the most senior project officer in the state of Rajasthan, who
was in charge of coordinating SERP activities along with the government. 19 Three facilitators at
each NGO were randomly selected from project rosters to be privately interviewed. All
interviews were conducted in a secluded area, respondents were assured that all information
would remain confidential, and they had the opportunity to terminate the interview at any time.
The open-ended interviews were subsequently recorded (in audio files), then transcribed and
translated.
The insights achieved during the qualitative analysis were then used to design a quantitative
survey of facilitators.20 In May 2014, we interviewed 349 RRLP facilitators from the same four
districts studied in the qualitative phase. Within the blocks we aimed to interview all active PRPs
in the month of our survey. Interviews were conducted by the Indian Marketing Research Bureau
(IMRB) at the RRLP field offices. The study was intentionally designed as a comparison of
CRPs from SERP versus local NGOs, (PRADAN, PEDO and federations of SHGs).


In Dungarpur, we interviewed 120 CRPs from PEDO. In the three districts of Dausa, Alwar and
Dholpur, we interviewed CRPs from PRADAN as well as local federations. In each of these
cases, as an incentive to complete our survey, we provided PRPs a small remuneration (Rs. 100)
for travel costs. Despite these efforts however, we were unable to interview approximately 10-15

18 We chose the four blocks in our survey because this is where the key organizations were scaling up their efforts at
that particular time. Balance tests of these areas suggest that they were similar to each other, and also similar to
other RRLP districts of the state. This was checked extensively prior to launching the survey in May 2014.
19 We originally planned to interview the SERP workers back in their home state of Andhra Pradesh, after they

returned from deployment. An entire research team at IMRB was hired and trained to make this possible. On the
Friday evening before the interviews began, however, we were informed that the senior officials of SERP had
decided against conducting the survey. Since the study was already underway, we decided to wait till the next cohort
of facilitators arrived in Rajasthan and interview them there. We received permission from the Government of
Rajasthan for our study, but given the late hours kept by the facilitators we had to conduct man y of our interviews
by phone.
20 This was done in a two-step process. In July 2013, the authors and the research team prepared preliminary

questions in a structured questionnaire for facilitators with open -ended responses possible for many questions. The
interview transcripts were read, analyzed and compiled into a report that was circulated for deliberation within the
research team. This was then used to refine and revise the survey questionnaire, which was then translated into
Hindi and Telugu by the survey firm. In March 2014, the questionnaire was pretested by the authors on facilitators
from SERP as well as PRADAN. Further edits were made prior to training the survey enumerators.

                                                          9
CRPs in each of these districts, primarily due to idiosyncrasies in schedules and other obligations
on the day of the survey. We interviewed 40 CRPs from SERP out of a total of 120 who were
actively working in Rajasthan at the time of the survey.21
We supplement this qualitative and quantitative data with two other sources of secondary data
that are intended to provide perspectives on the operational aspects of the program as well as its
impact.
A survey of RRLP districts: A baseline survey of RRLP districts was conducted in early 2012
with the intention of evaluating the impact of the program. For the purposes of this paper we
focus on the ‚Äútreatment‚Äù areas where RRLP was scheduled to work in order to check if Intensive
and Resource blocks had statistically similar characteristics prior to the entry of NRLM
facilitators. This sub-sample consists of 3,852 households with 6 villages sampled per block in
each of the 32 RRLP treatment blocks, scattered across 17 districts.22
Administrative data: Aggregate block-level outcomes are obtained from the Rajasthan
government‚Äôs online progress report. We examine block-level outcomes of SHG performance as
well as outcomes of individual SHG members to compare the performance of Intensive and
Resource blocks. A comparison of individual SHG members in Intensive and Resource blocks is
done using a survey of 302 women, split across the two types of blocks in October 2014.


Analysis
We should first note that the two types of blocks were largely well matched prior to the start of
the project. Using the baseline household survey data, we can compare pre-program differences
between the Resource Blocks and Intensive Blocks. These results are presented in Table 1. The
Resource Blocks appear to have fewer SC/ST (Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribe) members and
slightly higher rates of home ownership, but most differences between the two groups are small
and not statistically significant, particularly when it comes to existing levels of SHG
membership.
Our qualitative research suggests that RRLP staff and program directors had some knowledge
and familiarity with NGOs that were working in at least two of the intensive blocks. However,
the operational scale of these institutions was small, and since the selection of blocks for the two

21 We originally sent survey enumerators to Andhra Pradesh to interview th e SERP facilitators while they were
home and taking a break from their rotations in Rajasthan. The head of the organization however, denied our
surveyors access and refused to allow any surveys in the state of Andhra Pradesh. We were able to complete our
surveys with tremendous difficulty only when the women went back to Rajasthan. The Government of Rajasthan
allowed the surveys and overruled the NGO‚Äôs directives. The busy schedules of the SERP facilitators however,
made it impossible to interview all women on a particular day ‚Äì the division of labor between the women required
some women to be constantly working on either cooking, cleaning, washing clothes, going out into the village to
conduct mobilizations, and/or record key data and report this to headqua rters.

22 2,914 control households in 6 villages sampled per block in each of the 19 non-RRLP blocks in the same districts
as the treatment villages were also surveyed, but we do not analyze the control data in this paper.

                                                        10
types of programs was done randomly, they were quite comparable. In our conversations with
the director of the SERP program as well as with the SERP facilitators, we found that they were
keen to work on their own, but did not always speak the local language fluently.23 As a result,
they were generally given strictly defined and narrow tasks to perform in a specific amount of
time, with clear deliverables.


A Comparison of Facilitators ‚Äô Characteristics
We consistently find a distinct difference between the observable characteristics of external and
internal facilitators. External facilitators were younger and more educated than local facilitators
(Table 3, Panel A). They had fewer children, were less likely to own land and were less reliant
on agriculture as a source of income (Table 3, Panel A). Our qualitative observations of these
facilitators confirmed these patterns. We observed that the facilitators from Andhra Pradesh
spoke up to three languages (Hindi, Telugu and English) and talked, freely and unprompted,
about their own personal path out of poverty and their professional experiences. They presented
themselves as a group of disciplined anti-poverty professionals whose best qualifications were
their own personal journeys of transformation. In rural Rajasthan they stood out for their
distinctive way of talking and dressing as well as for their confident demeanor. This was not seen
in the case of the local facilitators, who appeared to fit in much more easily with the prevailing
norms.
In our survey data, however, we do not find an ‚Äúexperience gap‚Äù: both external and internal
facilitators seemed to have similar number of years of experience (Table 3, Panel A). There were
however, significant differences in reported income (Table 3, Panel A). According to official
policy, external facilitators were paid Rs. 1,000 per day, and worked for 30 - 45 days at a stretch,
earning more than Rs. 30,000 - Rs. 45,000 in a single rotation with the RRLP. They completed 4
rotations in a year, thus earned up to Rs. 180,000 annually (approximately $3,000, using market
exchange rates at the time). Internal CRPs on the other hand, were paid Rs. 750 per day and
worked for about 90 days in a year, earning approximately Rs. 68,000 (approximately $1,133,
using market exchange rates at the time). In other words, internal CRPs earned about a third of
the earnings of the external CRPs. In our conversations, SERP management and government
officials justified the higher salaries of the external facilitators on the grounds that they had more
experience and were leaving their homes and communities to come and work in another state.
To test this assumption, we perform a Mincerian regression of monthly earnings, (i.e., a
regression of earnings on education, experience and observable attributes [Table 4]). This
specification, widely used by labor economists, allows us to examine whether the income
‚Äúpremium‚Äù observed among SERP staff in the descriptive statistics may be driven by their
observable professional attributes. In the results in Table 4, we find no evidence that the monthly


23In these instances, they were paired with individuals from within the SERP team who had a stronger grasp of
Hindi.

                                                       11
earnings of the external facilitators are explained by their education, experience or stated
responsibilities: the coefficient for ‚ÄúSERP‚Äù is positive and statistically significant. The
magnitude of the coefficient is consistent with the higher income we observe in the descriptive
statistics, suggesting that the income advantage of this group is attributable to unobserved
characteristics and attributes. Interviews with field workers, RRLP staff and senior
administrators of the program suggested that the higher salaries were intended to compensate
‚Äúoutsiders‚Äù for the inconvenience of traveling very far from their home state to live in the
difficult conditions of Rajasthan. The wage premium can also be explained as a ‚Äúreward‚Äù to the
external facilitators for being success stories and role models who escaped poverty through SHG
participation.


Comparing Cultures of Program Implementation

Training and Responsibilities

Both sets of facilitators had the same job requirements. All facilitators were required to mobilize
village women, establish and co-opt SHGs, train them, hold meetings, follow-up with group
members, maintain records, and provide advice wherever needed. The training processes for the
two types of facilitators were, however, very different. External facilitators came into the project
with a high degree of disciplined training. In most cases, they had been taught professional
methods of mobilization and had applied these methods in areas other than their own state of
Andhra Pradesh.24 The external CRPs were also provided training by the Rajasthan government
prior to taking their field appointments. As illustrated in Table 3, Panel B, they were well versed
in mobilization methods such as social mapping and participatory rural appraisals. They also
worked in much smaller groups, conducting mobilization with a total staff of approximately six
people, while others local facilitators used double that number. When we visited the external
CRPs, we observed stacks of manuals and guide-books in their living quarters. We also noted
that they had a kind of cadre-like discipline, with coordinated responses to our questions, using
almost identical language to describe their activities and life stories.

Training for internal facilitators was much more variable. Our interviews with the staff of the
local NGOs suggested that the quality of training was largely dependent on the relationship
between the state and the particular NGO with which the facilitator was aligned. One NGO in
our sample, PRADAN, took a leadership role in the training and their facilitators were taught
resource mapping as well as PRA and other mobilization techniques. Another NGO in our
sample, PEDO, had a very different working relationship with the project and a different



24In our interactions with SERP facilitators we directly observed that they had access to a set training materials and
methods, which they brought with them from Andhra Pradesh.

                                                          12
methodology of work. Consequently, it did not adopt the PRA techniques or use resource
mapping exercises.25

Interestingly, there was a bigger difference between insiders and outsiders in the knowledge of
methods rather than the actual use of methods. In our fieldwork we noted that the external
facilitators did not always use the methods that they were trained in. Rather they used
discretionary logic to identify the marginal and excluded, drawing on their personal experience
of poverty in their home state of Andhra Pradesh. This was because the SERP facilitators
believed that they were intrinsically better equipped to identify the poor due to their high level of
empathy. Table 3, Panel C confirms this: outside facilitators are more likely to have knowledge
of methods such as wealth ranking, poverty mapping and PRA analysis, but the difference in the
use of such methods is much narrower.

Strategies of Mobilization

Mobilizing the poor in rural Rajasthan is a challenging task. Villages are often far apart and the
hot desert climate limits intra-village movement, particularly during the warmest hours of the
day. Mobilization involves many conversations with locals, both in groups and individually.
Women need to be convinced to set aside their time to participate in-group activities and step out
of their homes.

Local facilitators were able to use their personal networks, their personal stories and their past
experience of working in rural Rajasthan to create interest in the SHG program. However, since
they were working from within the system, they needed to be careful to respect local norms.
They did not, for example, work at night or travel unescorted. They were very conscious of
Rajasthan‚Äôs feudal culture, as well as the risks they would face as women working in villages
other than their own. Given that they were familiar with the places where they were working, the
Rajasthan government expected them to make their own arrangements for food and
accommodation. The government largely took a back seat to their operations and did not actively
prepare the village or the community for their visits.

External facilitators operated very differently. The full force of the machine of government was
mobilized to assist their work. Their visits were announced ahead of time, and powerful elites in
the village prepared for their arrival. As shown in Table 3, Panel C, the external facilitators were
40% more likely to report that the village was prepared for their arrival, almost 70% more likely
to report that the local Panchayat announced their visit ahead of time, and 30% more likely to
hold their meetings in a public location. As a result, they were able to form groups more quickly
than their local counterparts. They were 7% more likely to report having targets for the number


25Compared to all other facilitators, PEDO facilitators are 17-30% less likely to report either familiarity with
professional methods or use of such methods.

                                                          13
of people they had to mobilize, and the number of groups that they had to create. They also
achieved these targets more quickly than their local counterparts (Table 3, Panel C).

In our fieldwork, we found that external facilitators used their status as ‚Äúoutsiders‚Äù to create new
systems of working. A salient aspect of this is that they often chose to work late at night,
sometimes holding meetings until 2AM, almost unaware of the dangers of doing so.26 We
observed that the Rajasthani culture of hospitality towards outsiders often served to benefit the
external facilitators. There was a great deal of curiosity about them, and their distinctive
language, appearance and diet, made them highly visible in a way that local women were not. In
our qualitative work, we found mixed opinions about whether this was an advantage or
disadvantage, but most agreed that external facilitators found it easier to get the attention of
villagers and develop an initial interest in the SHG program.

Differences in Impact

Self-Reported Measures of Impact

In our facilitator survey, we asked respondents to provide examples of the impact of their
mobilization. Specifically, we asked them to describe an example of collective action the women
had taken that made them most proud (as mobilizers). 27 The response was left open-ended and
we post-coded the responses into the following groups: woman-specific issues (dowry, domestic
violence, women‚Äôs credit groups, child -care issues, etc.), political issues and issues related to
public service delivery. To test the hypothesis that external facilitators induce collective action
differently than internal facilitators, we ran the following regression:

                                Ì†µÌ±êÌ†µÌ±ìÌ†µÌ±è = Ì†µÌªΩ0 + Ì†µÌªΩ1 Ì†µÌ∞∏Ì†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±áÌ†µÌ∞∏Ì†µÌ±ÖÌ†µÌ±ÅÌ†µÌ∞¥Ì†µÌ∞ø Ì†µÌ±è + Ì†µÌªΩ2 Ì†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±ì + Ì†µÌºÄÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±è

where Ì†µÌ±êÌ†µÌ±ìÌ†µÌ±è is a measure of collective-action outcomes reported by facilitator f in block b,
Ì†µÌ∞∏Ì†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±áÌ†µÌ∞∏Ì†µÌ±ÖÌ†µÌ±ÅÌ†µÌ∞¥Ì†µÌ∞ø Ì†µÌ±è is a dummy variable that takes value 1 if the SHGs in the block are being
facilitated by external facilitators, Ì†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±ì is a vector of controls for facilitator f (this includes her age,
education, experience, job-description and salary), and Ì†µÌºÄÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±è is the error term. We used the logit
model to estimate this question, with local facilitators as the base (excluded) group.

Given the results of our qualitative fieldwork, we expected external facilitators to report more
examples of female empowerment as defined by individual stories about women using the SHG
platform to secure financial independence, gain bargaining power in their households and

26 Their supervisors told them that this was ‚Äòfree‚Äô time, and that village women would u nderstand that these
meetings were for their benefit and so would be willing to temporary relax prevailing social norms. A Rajasthan
government official told us that he once had a 2AM call from a SERP facilitator asking for transportation because
she was standing alone at a bus stop and needed to get back to her lodging site.
27 The question was worded as follows: ‚ÄúProvide any example of an SHG woman engaging in collective action?‚Äù


                                                           14
improve their voices in the community by taking a stand against alcoholism, domestic violence,
etc. However, given the close working relationship with the government, and the time pressure to
meet narrow NRLM goals while in Rajasthan, we expected fewer examples of collective action
on political issues or public service delivery‚Äîthose take longer to develop. Previous work on
SHGs in Rajasthan found that it took more than two years to see improvements in water and
village infrastructure (Deininger and Liu, 2009; Desai and Joshi, 2013).

Results of logit regressions are presented in Table 5. This table presents the odds ratios of the
coefficients from each of the individual regressions. We note that‚Äîas predicted‚Äîexternal
facilitators are considerably less likely in their responses to provide examples of collective action
related to politics or the delivery of public services, and these estimates are statistically
significant at the 1% level. Specifically, once the other variables in the model are held constant,
the relative odds of external facilitators witnessing collective action on issues related to politics
and public service delivery are lower by a factor of 0.05 and 0.02 respectively. The relative odds
of collective action on women-specific issues is higher for external facilitators, but the
coefficient is not statistically significant at the 1% level.

We can conclude from this that even though external facilitators are quite successful in
mobilizing women and forming groups, their alignment with the priorities of the state and their
narrow focus on group formation may limit their effectiveness in mobilizing women toward
deeper political and social change. Local facilitators were better able to connect women to other
political organizations and enable them to achieve broader goals.

Differences in Outcomes

One of the most basic questions facing the RRLP is whether the strategy used to mobilize the
poor has an impact on the women who were targeted by the program. Moreover, it is important
to know whether the differences in the types of facilitators actually translated into differences in
outcomes. To answer this question, we examine two types of data: block-level outcomes reported
by the project, and results of a small survey of SHG women in the two types of areas. Given that
the two areas were for the most part identical prior to the rollout of the RRLP, and that the
program was rolled out in the two areas with almost the same intensity, we can, to some extent,
interpret these estimates as causally related to the mobilization effort.28

We present two sets of results for the block-level outcomes. The first is aggregate data taken
from the website of the RRLP program. (The raw data are reported in the Appendix.) Analysis of
these data suggests that Intensive and Resource blocks performed very similarly along a number
of different metrics: both types of facilitators were able to set up approximately 4-5 SHGs per

28 Official data are collected by a strong team led by a statistician, Mr. Hardeep Chopra, who has no vested interest
in either block. He was brought into the project right at the time that the Resource and Intensive blocks were being
decided in 2012.

                                                         15
village, and reach about 53 households per village. In both cases, fewer than 2% of SHGs had
bank accounts, were credit-linked, had a prioritization plan, and had received two tranches of
money.

Next, we examine outcomes reported by SHG women using data from an ‚ÄúIntermediate Outcome
Survey‚Äù conducted by the Government of Rajasthan for 302 women from 150 SHGs from 6
blocks of 4 districts in October 2014. The sample included 102 women in Resource Blocks (i.e.,
external facilitators) and 200 women in Intensive Blocks (i.e., internal facilitators). The survey
asked them about their SHG participation, financial transactions and participation in other
community activities. The survey is admittedly imperfect for measuring program impact because
of its small size, its lack of a comparable baseline and possible Hawthorne effects,29 but our
focus is on comparing differences between the two types of blocks. We have already established
that the two types of blocks were similar prior to the introduction of RRLP. Therefore, even if
women participating in the survey were screened or pre-selected based on their good standing in
the program, and may have provided answers that would resonate positively with the
enumerators, both types of blocks would be similarly affected by these limitations. Therefore we
can, cautiously, infer differences about the program‚Äôs implementation in the two types of blocks
from the differences in their response.

To test the hypothesis that differences in the style of facilitation led to differences in women‚Äôs
benefits from the RRLP program, we run the following regression model:

                             Ì†µÌ±¶Ì†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±è = Ì†µÌªΩ0 + Ì†µÌªΩ1 Ì†µÌ∞∏Ì†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±áÌ†µÌ∞∏Ì†µÌ±ÖÌ†µÌ±ÅÌ†µÌ∞¥Ì†µÌ∞ø Ì†µÌ±è + Ì†µÌªΩ2 Ì†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±ñ + Ì†µÌªæÌ†µÌ±è + Ì†µÌºÄÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±è

Where Ì†µÌ±¶Ì†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±èis a measure of an outcome of SHG participant i in block b, Ì†µÌ∞∏Ì†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±áÌ†µÌ∞∏Ì†µÌ±ÖÌ†µÌ±ÅÌ†µÌ∞¥Ì†µÌ∞ø Ì†µÌ±è is a dummy
variable that takes value 1 if the SHGs in the block are being facilitated by external facilitators,
Ì†µÌ±ãÌ†µÌ±ñ is a vector of controls for woman i (this includes age of her SHG, her self-reported pre-
program income and whether or not she had an income source prior to the program), Ì†µÌªæÌ†µÌ±è is a
block fixed-effect and Ì†µÌºÄÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±è is the error term. We examine several outcome variables, each
considered in a separate regression:

     ÔÇ∑   Following RRLP rules: This is a dummy variable that takes value 1 if a woman reports
         that she follows the standard RRLP rules and codes for SHGs,30 and 0 otherwise.
     ÔÇ∑   Total individual savings: Measured in rupees, this is the amount of money that an
         individual reports having saved within the SHG.



29 The survey was conducted by the same government officials who manage the pro ject within the blocks. It is thus
entirely possible that SHG women gave biased responses, in favor of showing that the program was working (in
anticipation of further opportunities for financial or other benefits).
30 This is known as the panchsutra in the RRLP manual.


                                                           16
      ÔÇ∑    Interest rate: Measured in percent, this is the rate of interest that an individual reports on
           her largest loan.
      ÔÇ∑    SHG member is linked to a higher level institution (example: federation): This is a
           dummy variable that takes value 1 if a woman reports participating in a higher level
           community organization than her SHG, for example, a federation of SHGs, and 0
           otherwise.
      ÔÇ∑    Number of GS meetings: This is the number of gram sabha (village group) meetings that
           the SHG member reports having participated in during the past year.
      ÔÇ∑    Access to MGNREGS: This variable takes value 1 if the woman reports that she has
           access to the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, a
           program that provides rural Indians who are eligible with 100 paid days of employment a
           year.31
      ÔÇ∑    Access to PDS: This variable takes value 1 if the woman reports that she has access to the
           Public Distribution System, a program that provides rural Indians who are eligible with
           subsidized access to basic food items such as wheat, rice and sugar.
      ÔÇ∑    Access to scholarships for household members: This variable takes value 1 if the woman
           reports that she has access to the scholarship facility, a program that provides rural
           Indians who are eligible with free access to educational services.
      ÔÇ∑    Number of CDO meetings: The number of community development organization
           meetings attended by a woman or her SHG representative.

The results of these regressions are presented in Table 7. We note several interesting patterns.
First, women who are in SHGs facilitated by outsiders are 4% more likely to be following exact
RRLP rules and protocols (Table 7, column 1). However, they achieved approximately Rs. 500
less in savings, which is 25% of the average of Rs. 1958 for the whole sample (Table 7, column
2). They are more likely to have taken out informal loans, which include internal loans from the
SHG itself (Table 7, column 7). Thus, local facilitators seem to have been more effective than
SERP facilitators in achieving a financial impact.

However, externally facilitated SHG women attend two more Gram Sabha meetings than their
counterparts who are facilitated by local women, and are 65% more likely to participate in the
MRNREGS program. These are significant effects, both in magnitude and in their statistical
power. We infer from these results that women who are led by external facilitators are able to
effectively access some very basic opportunities offered by the state. Our qualitative data suggest
that this is largely because the external facilitators leverage their status as ‚Äúoutsiders‚Äù and their
strong backing from the state to insist upon new opportunities for women in Rajasthani villages.
While there are concerns about the sustainability of these effects, it is noteworthy that we see



31   Both the MGNREGS and the RRLP programs are largely targeted to women below the poverty line.

                                                       17
such pronounced effects can be seen within just a few months from the start of the program‚Äôs
operations.

Interestingly however, SHG women who are led by local facilitators are much more likely to
report an awareness of their other entitlements: they are 18% more likely to participate in, or
send an SHG representative to, participate in local community meetings, particularly on issues of
livelihoods and economic issues. They are also 20% more likely to be aware of opportunities for
scholarships for household members. They are also 18% more likely to be linked, either directly
or indirectly (via an SHG representative) to community institutions such as SHG federations.

In summary, our results suggest that central and state-led implementation of the NRLM had
different effects. External facilitation was much more expensive for the state, since professional
outside facilitators require higher levels of compensation and incur significant travel costs. But,
external facilitators were able to use their position as community outsiders to form new groups,
and implement the program closer to the manner envisioned by NRLM‚Äôs central management.
Local facilitators were much less expensive to hire and required less state coordination, and their
main role was to link existing groups and networks to the operations of the state. They were,
however, much more likely to have an economic impact, and were better able to link
participating women to local political, economic and social opportunities in their communities.
In sum, therefore, there is no question that local facilitation offered more value for money than
external facilitation.



CONCLUSION

This paper discusses an important but under-appreciated topic in participatory development:
which level of government is best suited to manage large-scale participatory projects. The
subject is important because the success of participatory projects hinges on the effectiveness of
implementation by facilitators at the level of neighborhoods and villages. Both central, and
decentralized management have arguments that can be made in their favor. Centralized
implementation allows for greater control over management and information systems, and allows
experienced facilitators from one part of the country to transfer knowledge and capacity to
another, less experienced, part of the country. And centralized implementation can help shift
persistent norms, creating disruptive social change by transmitting ideas from part of the country
to another.

The arguments for decentralized implementation are similar to those made more generally for
decentralized government: local facilitation is best supported by the level of government that is
most proximate to local conditions in order to minimize information asymmetries, allow better
monitoring, and hold facilitators more accountable for their actions. The level of the state that

                                                18
implements local development should also be able to manage implementation that fits the local
culture. Sub-national governments are more likely to have a cultural match with the ‚Äúsymbolic
public goods‚Äù (Rao, 2008) being created at the local level by facilitators and thus mobilize
collective identities with greater ease.

To test these ideas we use a natural experiment from the National Rural Livelihoods Mission in
India that separated blocks in each state into centrally or sub-nationally managed blocks known
as Resource Blocks and Intensive Blocks. One method featured external facilitators who were
actively backed by the state. The other featured local women who were actively backed by local
civil society. Both arms of the program aimed to organize women into SHGs that would then
link to the state to receive credit.

We examine this in the state of Rajasthan using mixed methods to contrast two approaches of
organizing poor rural women within the confines of a single poverty alleviation program. At first
glance, the two strategies seem to accomplish similar goals in that they are both able to form a
comparable number of groups with similar financial performance. But there are some important
differences in what the groups actually do. Groups formed by outsider facilitators are better
linked to the state through participation in the local Gram Sabha and other poverty alleviation
programs. But they are less likely to engage in collective action on issues related to public
service delivery, less likely to actually engage with local politics and less likely to be connected
to other civil society organizations. These differences have important long-term implications for
the groups themselves as well as for the overall success of the program. In addition, central
management with external facilitators is extremely expensive. Given all these reasons, in the
case of Rajasthan, local, sub-nationally managed facilitation would have been optimal for the
project.

Finally, central management is particularly inappropriate for the state of Rajasthan, which has a
long history of civic activism having nurtured important national initiatives such as the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, and the Right to Information Act.
Particularly relevant to the NRLM‚Äôs mandate, it has several NGOs with long histories of
facilitating the formation and functioning of women‚Äôs Self-Help Groups. Thus, sending SHG
facilitators from the far-away state of Andhra Pradesh, who were not native speakers of the local
language, to form women‚Äôs SHGs seems a particularly egregious case of central overreach and
cultural mismatch. Centrally managed Resource Blocks may make more sense in states that lack
Rajasthan‚Äôs civic history where they could, indeed, be a resource for building internal capacity in
the state. But, in Rajasthan, it makes little sense.




                                                19
REFERENCES
Aiyar, S. A., Narayan, D., and Raju, K. (2007). Empowerment through self-help groups. Ending
poverty in south Asia: Ideas that work , 104-135.
Bardhan, P. (2002). Decentralization of governance and development. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 185-205.
Bardhan, P., and Mookherjee, D. (2006). Decentralization and local governance in developing
countries: a comparative perspective (Vol. 1). The MIT Press.

Bhargava, P. (2007) ‚ÄúCivil Society in Rajasthan‚Äù, in V.S. Vyas (et.al), Rajasthan: The Quest for
Sustainable Development. New Delhi: Academic Foundation, 257-81.

Chen, Martha, Renana Jhabvala, Ravi Kanbur, and Carol Richards, (2008) ‚ÄúMembership Based
Organizations of the Poor: Concepts, Experience and Policy,‚Äù Chapter 1 in M. Chen, R.
Jhabvala, R. Kanbur and C. Richards (editors), Membership Based Organizations of the Poor.
Routledge Publishers.
Cornell, Stephen and Joseph P. Kalt, (2000) ‚ÄúWhere‚Äôs the Glue: Institutional and Cultural
Foundations of American Indian Economic Development,‚Äù Journal of Socio-Economics, 29,
443-470.
Deininger, K., and Y. Liu. (2009). ‚ÄúLonger-term economic impacts of Self-Help Groups in
India.‚Äù World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4885.
Deshmukh-Ranadive, J. (2004). ‚ÄúWomen's self-help groups in Andhra Pradesh: participatory
poverty alleviation in action.‚Äù In A case study from Reducing Poverty, Sustaining Growth‚ÄìWhat
Works, What Doesn‚Äôt and Why-A Global Exchange for Scaling Up Success, Scaling Up Poverty
Reduction: A Global Learning Process and Conference, Shanghai, May, 25-27.
Desai, R. M., and Joshi, S. (2013). ‚ÄúCollective action and community development: evidence
from self-help groups in rural India.‚Äù The World Bank Economic Review , lht024.
Dreze, J., and Sen, A. (2002). India: Development and participation. Oxford University Press,
USA.
Evans, P. (1996). ‚ÄúGovernment Action, Social Capital and Development: Reviewing the
Evidence on Synergy.‚Äù World Development 24, 6: 1119‚Äì32.
Evans, P. (1995). Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation . Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.
Fox, J. (1993), The Politics of Food in Mexico, Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Galab, S., and N. Chandrasekhara Rao. (2003). ‚ÄúWomen's Self-Help Groups, Poverty Alleviation
and Empowerment. ‚Äù Economic and Political Weekly 38 (12/13): 1274-83.
Gupta, R. K., and Bakshi, S. R. (2008). Studies In Indian History: Rajasthan Through The Ages
The Heritage Of Rajputs. New Delhi: Sarup & Sons.

                                               20
Haines, A., Sanders, D., Lehmann, U., Rowe, A.K., Lawn, J.E., Jan, S., Walker, D.G. and
Bhutta, Z., 2007. Achieving child survival goals: potential contribution of community health
workers. The Lancet , 369 (9579), 2121-2131.
Linn, J. F. (Ed.). (2012). Scaling up in agriculture, rural development, and nutrition (Vol. 19).
Intl Food Policy Res Inst.
Jain, P. S. (1994). Managing for success: Lessons from Asian development programs. World
Development , 22(9), 1363-1377.

Kamat, S. (2002) Development Hegemony: NGOs and the State in India. Delhi: Oxford
University Press.

Kaner, S. with Lind, L., Toldi, C., Fisk, S., and Berger, D. (2014). Facilitator's guide to
participatory decision-making. John Wiley and Sons.

Lessmann, C., & Markwardt, G. (2016). ‚ÄúAid, Growth, and Devolution: Considering Aid
Modality and Different Types of Decentralization. ‚Äù World Development , 84, 118-130.
Mansuri, G., and Rao, V. (2012). Localizing development: does participation work? World Bank
Publications.

Menon, S.V. (2008). ‚ÄúRight to Information Act and NREGA: Reflections on Rajasthan‚Äù, Munich
Personal RePEc Archive Paper, No. 7351, February, pp. 1-13

Mukherji, A. (2013). ‚ÄúEvidence on Community-Driven Development                 from an     Indian
Village. ‚Äù Journal of Development Studies, 49(11): 1548-1563.
National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). (2013). Status of Micro-
credit in India 2012-13. SAGE Publications India.
Ostrom, E. (1996). ‚ÄúCrossing the Great Divide: Coproduction, Synergy, and Development.‚Äù
World Development , 24(6): 1073-1087.
Nugent, Jeffrey B. (1993). ‚ÄúBetween State, Market and Households: A Neoinstitutional Analysis
of Local Organizations and Institutions.‚Äù World Development 21, 4: 623‚Äì32.
Perry, H. B., Zulliger, R., & Rogers, M. M. (2014). ‚ÄúCommunity health workers in low-, middle-
, and high-income countries: an overview of their history, recent evolution, and current
effectiveness. ‚Äù Annual review of public health,35, 399-421.
Planning Commission, Government of India. (2011). NRLM: Framework for Implementation.
Available at: http://rural.nic.in/sites/downloads/latest/NRLM_23122010.pdf. Accessed on 13th
Feb, 2015.
Potter, J. G. (Ed.). (2001). Devolution and globalisation: implications for local decision-makers
(Vol. 498). OECD Publishing.



                                               21
Rajvansi, J. (2007). ‚ÄúNGOs and Academics‚Äù, in V.S. Vyas (et.al) Rajasthan: The Quest for
Sustainable Development, New Delhi: Academic Foundation, 325-46.
Rao, Vijayendra (2008). ‚ÄúSymbolic Public Goods and the Coordination of Collective Action: A
Comparison of Local Development in India and Indonesia,‚Äù Chapter 10 in Pranab Bardhan and
Ray, Isha (editors), The Contested Commons: Conversations Between Economists and
Anthropologists, Wiley-Blackwell.
Singh, Prerna (2016). How Solidarity Works for Welfare: Subnationalism and Social
Development in India. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Smoke, P., Loffler, G., & Bosi, G. (2013). The role of decentralization/devolution in improving
development outcomes at the local level: Review of the literature and selected cases. DFID&
Local Development International LLC.

Takasaki, Y. (2011). ‚ÄúDo local elites capture natural disaster reconstruction funds?‚Äù Journal of
Development Studies, 47(9), 1281-1298.
Treisman, D. (2007). The architecture of government: Rethinking political decentralization .
Cambridge University Press.
Ziegfeld, A. and Tudor, M. 2015. ‚ÄúHow opposition parties sustain single-party dominance
Lessons from India.‚Äù Party Politics, p.1354068815593455.




                                              22
TABLES



Type of Block             Organization                         N                Percent

Resource Block            SERP                                 49               13.80

Intensive Blocks          PRADAN                               38               10.70

                          PEDO                                 130              36.62

                          Saheli Samity (Federation)           101              28.45

                          Sangharsh Mahila          Manch 37                    10.42
                          (Federation)

Total                                                          355
Table 1: The sample of facilitators



                                            Resource Blocks           Intensive Blocks
                                            N       Mean              N         Mean           Difference        Std. err.
Household size                              1560    5.141             4400      5.060          0.0808            0.0589
Males in household                          1560         2.754        4400        2.705        0.0497            0.0371
Females in household                        1560         2.387        4400        2.355        0.0311            0.0384
BPL                                         1560         0.0526       4400        0.0695       -0.0170           0.00727
SCST                                        1560         0.362        4400        0.457        -0.0951***        0.0145
SC                                          1560         13310.3      4400        12860.8      449.5             421.1
ST
Labor Income
Own Home                                    1560         0.991        4400        0.985        0.00557*          0.00335
Electricity                                 1560         0.777        4400        0.736        0.0408            0.0328
Toilet                                      1560         0.168        4400        0.122        0.0464            0.0290
Have own bank account                       1560         1.436        4400        1.481        -0.0455           0.0347
Ever taken an SHG loan                      1560         1.992        4400        1.994        -0.00156          0.00277
Table 2: Pre-program differences between Resource Blocks and Intensive Blocks, as measured by the baseline survey of 2012.




                                                             23
                                                        External     Internal     Difference
                                                        Facilitators Facilitators (std err)
Panel (A): Facilitator Characteristics
Age                                                     32.53       36.40        -3.865**
                                                                                 (1.329)
Married                                                 0.878       0.971        -0.0930**
                                                                                 (0.0306)
Number of living children                               1.592       3.023        -1.431***
                                                                                 (0.214)
Number of children residing at home                     2.286       3.052        -0.767***
                                                                                 (0.205)
Completed primary school                                1           0.500        0.500***
                                                                                 (0.0716)
Completed secondary school                              0.673       0.124        0.549***
                                                                                 (0.0544)
Husband completed secondary school                      0.694       0.830        -0.136*
                                                                                 (0.0599)
Head completed secondary school                         0.469       0.144        0.326***
                                                                                 (0.0578)
Agriculture main source of hhd income                   0.571       0.627        -0.0560
                                                                                 (0.0748)
Has previous work experience                            0.102       0.124        -0.0221
                                                                                 (0.0503)
Years of work experience                                2.184       1.951        0.233
                                                                                 (0.399)
Household owns land                                     0.490       0.846        -0.357***
                                                                                 (0.0591)
Own income (past month)                                 31469.6     2151.6       29318.0***
                                                                                 (660.8)
Household income (past month)                           30644.9     7838.6       22806.3***
                                                                                 (1054.4)
Have other occupation?                                  0.388       0.794        -0.406***
                                                                                 (0.0643)
Days in a month on other occupation (when not a CRP/PRP) 8.653      11.93        -3.275**
                                                                                 (1.239)
Income from secondary occupation                        1553.1      1663.7       -110.7
                                                                                 (332.1)

Panel (B): Training and responsibilities
Number of responsibilities listed in job                4.612       4.082        0.531
                                                                                 (0.271)
Job description requires mobilization                   0.98        0.941        0.0384
                                                                                 (0.0347)
Job description requires training                       0.735       0.761        -0.0267
                                                                                 (0.0661)

                                               24
Job description requires holding meetings               0.673   0.784     -0.111
                                                                          (0.0648)
Job description requires monitoring                     0.551   0.281     0.270***
                                                                          (0.0704)
Job description requires follow-up                      0.469   0.34      0.13
                                                                          (0.0736)
Job description requires bank linkage                   0.51    0.261     0.249***
                                                                          (0.0692)
Job description requires advice on agriculture          0       0.00327   -0.00327
                                                                          (0.00818)

Panel (C): Strategies of mobilization
Taught how to identify target population                0.918   0.621     0.297***
                                                                          (0.0713)
Taught wealth ranking                                   0.653   0.526     0.127
                                                                          (0.0766)
Taught social mapping                                   0.735   0.497     0.238**
                                                                          (0.0760)
Taught PRA methods                                      0.796   0.144     0.652***
                                                                          (0.0553)
Used wealth ranking                                     0.612   0.480     0.132
                                                                          (0.0768)
Used social mapping                                     0.653   0.461     0.192*
                                                                          (0.0764)
Used PRA methods                                        0.673   0.118     0.556***
                                                                          (0.0534)
Size of group that conducts mobilization                6.898   11.88     -4.984***
                                                                          (0.774)
Favor groups that are from the same religion            0.143   0.216     -0.0728
                                                                          (0.0622)
Favor groups that have the same caste                   0.122   0.186     -0.0638
                                                                          (0.0589)
Favor groups that have the same economic background     0.449   0.203     0.246***
                                                                          (0.0643)
Favor groups that have the same source of income        0.490   0.157     0.333***
                                                                          (0.0595)
Favor assigning specific functions                      0.776   0.944     -0.169***
                                                                          (0.0406)
Group positions determined by elections                 0.204   0.461     -0.257***
                                                                          (0.0751)
Days spent maintaining records                          12.35   7.18      5.167**
                                                                          (1.601)
Days spent establishing new groups                      36.59   10.08     26.51***
                                                                          (1.987)
Number of new groups formed in own village              2.143   3.353     -1.21

                                                   25
                                                                                                    (0.73)
Number of new groups formed outside village                           47.98          4.016          43.96***
                                                                                                    (2.24)
Time each day spent on chores                                         88.78          142.3          -53.54***
                                                                                                    (11.57)
Time each day spent traveling                                         111.8          108.3          3.483
                                                                                                    (13.23)
Time each day spent in the field                                      424.5          329.4          95.06***
                                                                                                    (26.16)
Time each day spent on record keeping                                 122.3          108.8          13.58
                                                                                                    (11.79)
Time each day spent on filling forms                                  96.67          81.19          15.48*
                                                                                                    (7.798)
Time each day spent on other activities                               75.61          92.17          -16.56
                                                                                                    (12.43)
Village was prepared for visit                                        0.959          0.552          0.407***
                                                                                                    (0.0721)
Panchayat announces program to village                                0.939          0.248          0.690***
                                                                                                    (0.0634)
Mobilization begins with women only                                   0.51           0.804          -0.294***
                                                                                                    (0.0637)
Village picks the time of the mobilization meeting                    0.939          0.369          0.569***
                                                                                                    (0.0705)
Number of SHG meetings in last village                                13.37          43.85          -30.48
                                                                                                    (25.26)
Number of SHGs in last village                                        10.8           41.14          -30.34
                                                                                                    (25.29)
Number of women met to set up SHGs in the last village                34.04          124.7          -90.63**
                                                                                                    (29.97)
Number of days taken to set up SHGs in the last village               6.592          13.19          -6.598*
                                                                                                    (2.615)
Submit records within the organization                                1              0.922          0.0784*
                                                                                                    (0.0385)
Last village had a target population                                  0.878          0.641          0.237***
                                                                                                    (0.0713)
Table 3: A comparison external and internal facilitators. Notes: (i) * denotes significance at the 10% level, ** denotes
significance at the 5% level and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.




                                                          26
                                                         Monthly      salary
                                                         (Total)
    SERP                                                 29209.065***
                                                         (983.735)
    Age                                                  111.036
                                                         (193.697)
    Age squared                                          -1.148
                                                         (2.487)
    Completed primary school                             -95.648
                                                         (424.368)
    Years of work experience                             -34.852
                                                         (21.921)
    Married                                              511.692
                                                         (844.381)
    Number of living children                            185.006
                                                         (231.583)
    Number of responsibilities listed in                 330.710
    job
                                                         (197.145)
    Constant                                             -2551.349
                                                         (3648.750)
    R-squared                                            0.855
    N                                                    355
Table 4: Mincerian Regressions for monthly earnings of facilitators. Notes: (i) Standard
errors are clustered at the block level; (ii) * denotes significance at the 10% level, **
denotes significance at the 5% level and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.




                                          27
                                                                 (1)                    (2)                 (3)
                                                             Collective             Collective          Collective
                                                              Action on             Action on            Action on
                                                               women-                political         public service
                                                            specific issues           issues             delivery
SERP                                                            1.700                0.054***            0.025***
                                                               (1.312)                (0.005)             (0.004)
Age                                                             1.003                  1.010              1.023*
                                                               (0.049)                (0.023)             (0.013)
Completed primary school                                        1.258                0.380***              0.736
                                                               (0.455)                (0.124)             (0.165)
Married                                                         0.633                0.439***              0.960
                                                               (0.549)                (0.075)             (0.258)
Number of living children                                       0.935                0.776***             0.870*
                                                               (0.127)                (0.067)             (0.063)
Has other occupation                                            1.506                 0.572**              0.650
                                                               (0.622)                (0.132)             (0.189)
Household owns land                                             1.556                  0.513               0.529
                                                               (1.785)                (0.311)             (0.478)
Agriculture main source of household income                     0.922                  0.772               1.077
                                                               (0.709)                (0.260)             (0.451)
Years of work experience                                      1.122***                 0.975              1.046**
                                                               (0.049)                (0.020)             (0.023)
Household income                                                1.000                1.000***             1.000*
                                                               (0.000)                (0.000)             (0.000)
Constant                                                      0.039***               2.970***              0.556
                                                               (0.047)                (1.229)             (0.318)
N                                                                355                    355                 355
Table 5: Examples of collective action. Notes: (i) Standard errors are clustered at the block level; (ii) * denotes significance at
the 10% level, ** denotes significance at the 5% level and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.




                                                               28
                                              Resource        Intensive
                                              Blocks          Blocks
                                              (External       (Internal
                                              facilitators)   Facilitators)
SHGs per village                              4.655           4.467
Households per village                        53.834          52.900
Fraction of SHGs with S/B Account
Opened                                        2.969           2.408
Fraction of SHGs credit linked                0.184           0.585
Fraction of SHGs with priority plan           2.025           2.223
Fraction of SHGs Tranche 1                    1.490           1.945
Fraction of SHGs with MCLP                    1.058           1.035
Fraction of SHGs Tranche 2                    1.338           0.938
 Table 6: Average block-level outcomes




                                         29
                     (1)           (2)               (3)                 (4)              (5)           (6)           (7)      (8) (9)                      (10)        (11)
                     Following     Total             Change in           Total            Interest      SHG           Number NREGA PDS                      Scholarship Number
                     RRLP          individual        income              informal         rate          member is     of GS                                             of CDO
                     rules         savings                               credit                         linked to a   meetings                                          meetings
                                                                         received                       higher
                                                                                                        level
                                                                                                        institution
                                                                                                        (example:
                                                                                                        federation)
External             0.043*** -546.217** -10199.648*** 6558.384** -0.969                                -0.173***     2.692*** 0.653*** -0.041 -0.204**                    -0.179***
                     (0.005) (201.779) (1898.319)      (2537.433) (1.053)                               (0.026)       (0.085) (0.049) (0.021) (0.064)                      (0.024)

New group            -0.061        2897.667*         3347.159            14365.819* 0.195               0.017         -0.676       0.079       0.020        -0.021         -0.005
                     (0.068)       (1236.007)        (4589.614)          (6605.587) (0.191)             (0.018)       (0.488)      (0.182)     (0.024)      (0.082)        (0.006)

Initial income       0.000         0.005             0.007               0.176**          -0.000        0.000         0.000        -0.000      0.000        -0.000         0.000
                     (0.000)       (0.003)           (0.048)             (0.056)          (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)

Constant             0.950*** 1964.575*** 18110.520*** 12971.126** 25.630*** 0.956***                                 -0.020       0.258** 0.849*** 0.235*                 0.965***
                     (0.010)  (255.650)   (3129.701)   (3963.407) (1.770)    (0.043)                                  (0.157)      (0.077) (0.034) (0.095)                 (0.040)

Block FEs            Yes           Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes
R-squared            0.092         0.585             0.324               0.158            0.268         0.188         0.329        0.400       0.086        0.067          0.821
N                    302           302               302                 301              302           302           302          302         302          296            302

Table 7: Regression results from Intermediate Outcome Survey. Notes: (i) Standard errors are clustered at the block level; (ii) * denotes significance at the 10% level, ** denotes
significance at the 5% level and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                        30
APPENDIX

BLOCK        NO. OF      NO. OF SHGS   NO. OF     NO. OF      NO. OF SHGS   NO. OF SHGS   NO. OF SHGS   NO. OF SHGS NO. OF SHGS   NO. OF SHGS
             VILLA GES   NEWLY         RURAL      CDOS        WITH S/B      WITH          WITH          WITH        WITH MCLP     WITH
             ENTERED     FORMED/CO     HOUSEHOL   NEWLY       ACCOUNT       CREDIT        PRIORITY      TRANCHE I PREP-ARED       TRANCHE II
                         -OPTED        DS         FORMED OR   OPENED        LINKED        PLAN          RELEASED                  RELEASED
                                       COVERED    COOPTED                                 PREPARED



RESOURCE BLOCKS
Asind        54          306           4264       9           242           0             219           219         121           121
Churu        78          612           647        9           418           19            34            319         173           173
Sangod       126         518           5892       43          425           63            314           314         146           146
Deogarh      63          37            4037       10          268           30            190           190         158           158
Dungarpur    61          480           6498       1           350           104           267           24          105           101
Anandpuri    89          62            7203       17          524           7             393           362         25            203
Chipabarod   70          520           523        12          356           5             278           265         129           120
Newai        82          529           5674       1           318           3             202           202         120           94
Bakani       96          507           573        7           423           8             314           314         148           148
Kherwada     124         76            8698       19          673           39            403           40          301           301
Total        843         5287          60009      138         3997          278           2924          2829        1656          1565
INTENS IVE BLOCKS
Kolayat      87          471           502        46          471           36            381           31          209           16
Taranagar    39          23            2346       15          157           3             140           131         25            21
Simalwara    191         134           16871      82          974           501           873           836         646           635
Dausa        90          652           780        40          49            12            360           35          210           18
Jhadol       78          543           6284       32          479           62            278           257         20            173
Bari         144         739           9074       63          540           5             435           435         357           357
Baseri       112         585           7146       43          43            5             290           290         31            31
TOTAL        741         4347          54503      321         3553          734           2757          2635        1978          1871
                         9634          114512     459         7550          1012          5681          5464        3634          3436



                                                              31
