                                                 WPS7999


Policy Research Working Paper                   7999




      Effects of Public Policy on Child Labor
          Current Knowledge, Gaps, and Implications
                    for Program Design

                             Ana C. Dammert
                             Jacobus de Hoop
                              Eric Mvukiyehe
                              Furio C. Rosati




Development Research Group
Impact Evaluation Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7999


  Abstract
 Many policy instruments can be used to address or affect                           The study finds that although transfer programs generally
 child labor, even if they are implemented to achieve other                         tend to reduce child labor, other policies risk increasing
 objectives. From a theoretical point of view, however, the                         child labor, especially if they affect households’ produc-
 impact of these policies on child labor is undetermined.                           tive opportunities. The findings also point to knowledge
 This paper discusses the evidence generated by rigorous                            gaps that should be addressed in future evaluations. While
 evaluations on the impact on child labor of labor market                           progress has been made over the past decade, there is still
 programs, conditional and unconditional transfers, and                             much to learn about the effects of public policy on the labor
 microcredit, among other social programs and interventions.                        participation of many children in developing countries.




  This paper is a product of the Impact Evaluation Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the
  world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at emvukiyehe@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
       EFFECTS OF PUBLIC POLICY ON CHILD LABOR: CURRENT KNOWLEDGE, GAPS, AND
                          IMPLICATIONS FOR PROGRAM DESIGN*

                            Ana C. Dammert, Carleton University and IZA
                      Jacobus de Hoop, UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti
                     Eric Mvukiyehe, Development Research Group, World Bank
                      Furio C. Rosati, UCW and University of Rome Tor Vergata




JEL Codes: J08, J22, J24, O15
Keywords: child labor, education, international labor standards, human capital, public policy

_______________
* Funding for this paper was partially provided by the United States Department of Labor and DIME-World Bank.
This paper does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the United States Department of Labor, nor does
mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the United States
Government. We thank Marco Manacorda and seminar participants at the “Child Labor: Evidence and Action
Workshop” organized at the World Bank and “Closing the Evidence Gap on Interventions to Address Child Labor”
organized at IDRC-Canada for comments and suggestions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed
in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the ILO, UNICEF, or
the World Bank. A previous version of this paper, written by Jacobus de Hoop and Furio C. Rosati, was circulated
with the following title: The Complex Effects of Public Policy on Child Labor.
1. Introduction

According to the International Labor Organization (ILO), at least 264 million children ages 5 to 17
were engaged in an economic activity around the world in 2012, mostly in developing countries,
with over 85 million engaged in hazardous and exploitative forms of child labor (ILO 2013). Many
authors argue that child labor deserves attention because it has long-lasting consequences for
the economic development of countries through its interaction with education and productivity
later in life.

A common view is that most child laborers are engaged in work for pay in market activities,
however, most children are engaged in agricultural activities rather than manufacturing (ILO
2013). In addition, most children are employed by their parents on the family farm or enterprise
(Edmonds 2008). Thus, consumer boycotts and trade sanctions against products using child labor
may have limited impacts on reducing child labor in developing countries. Even if a ban on child
labor is successfully implemented and enforced, some children could be worse off if these
children work because of poverty constraints (Basu and Van 1998). Thus, additional policy
instruments are required to tackle the root causes of child labor directly.

Social protection and labor programs aim at reducing poverty, improving the wellbeing of the
poor, and protecting households from economic shocks. Previous meta-analyses of social
protection programs have captured evidence regarding the results of these programs on human
capital investment of children, in particular on schooling outcomes (see IEG 2011, Fiszbein and
Schady 2009, Snilstveit et al. 2016). However, very few examined the effects of these programs
beyond their immediate objectives on outcomes such as child labor. This review provides a
comprehensive look at pathways through which social protection (credit and microfinance, cash
transfers, vouchers, food programs), and labor programs could affect child labor and identifies
evidence across program types. Our goal is to obtain a broad understanding of how policies and
programs are likely to affect child labor as well as to point out the missing gaps and topics that
need further research, which could provide useful lessons for both policy makers and evaluators.

This review updates and extends the previous literature on the effects of public policy on child
labor. Since the publication of the chapter on child labor in the Handbook of Development
Economics (Edmonds 2008) and reviews by Basu and Tzannatos (2003) and Fors (2012), there has
been an increase in empirical research on the effects of social programs on child labor outcomes.
Child labor is a complex phenomenon, resulting from household decisions influenced by many
factors including income, uncertainty, and relative returns to work and education, among
others.1 The complexity of the phenomenon implies that a large set of policy instruments can be
used to address child labor or can affect child labor, even if designed to achieve other objectives.
It also implies that predicting the impact of different interventions on child labor is far from
straightforward. Within the household, changing circumstances can result in complex patterns of
substitution in the time allocation of its members. Policy interventions, therefore, might have

1
  See Cigno and Rosati (2005), Edmonds (2008), Basu and Tzannatos (2003), and Fors (2012) for a review of the
extensive literature on the determinants of child labor.

                                                                                                           2
effects that are not easy to foresee. For example, public works schemes, microcredit programs,
and business training interventions may affect the household’s income generating strategy.
While child labor may decrease due to the income effect, the return to children’s participation in
productive household activities might increase. Thus, theoretically is not clear the net effect of
these interventions on child labor. Even education interventions may have unexpected effects
and, in the limit, increase child labor. The difficult task is to find out what type of interventions
are likely to reduce child labor given context-specific constraints.

For this paper, an exhaustive search of the literature was conducted on impact evaluation papers
with social protection and labor focus, all of which applied rigorous methods to estimate the
impact of the program on child labor. We selected papers that use experimental or quasi-
experimental designs (propensity score matching, difference in difference, IV, and regression
discontinuity design) to construct the counterfactual. 2 Overall, we found 31 impact evaluations
that incorporate child labor as one of the outcomes of the intervention. This limited number
points to the need to focus more on child labor outcomes in the development evaluation agenda.

Some patterns emerge, despite the complexity of integrating the findings of impact evaluations
across different child labor definitions, implementation context, and policy instruments. Our
review suggests that interventions based on transfers of resources (whether unconditional or
conditional, in cash or in kind) generally tend to reduce child labor.3 However, there is extensive
evidence from the cash transfer literature suggesting that program impacts on child labor depend
on the integration of different interventions. Combining (conditional) cash transfers with supply-
side interventions such as the provision of health and education facilities and/or after school
education possibly increases the impact on child work. Interventions that positively affect
income-generating activities may reduce the impact of conditional cash transfers on child labor
by increasing the reliance on children’s activities within the household. Moreover, public works
schemes and programs that aim to encourage micro-entrepreneurial activity, such as microcredit
schemes and business training courses (possibly in combination with the provision of capital),
may increase children’s work either directly in the household business or in activities within the
household otherwise carried out by adults.

There are also several gaps in the literature, particularly gender dimensions of child labor are
often ignored, there is virtually no evidence on changes in the worst forms of child labor, and
evidence is lacking altogether for some important intervention categories. Towards the end of
this paper, we discuss these challenges and shortcomings in more detail, hopefully providing
guidance for the direction of future research.

2
  There is some evidence that bans and regulations against child labor are likely to backfire (e.g. Jafarey and Lahiri
2002) and theoretical models have shown that these types of policies may decrease household welfare (Basu and
Van 1998) and have negative distributional consequences (Baland and Duprez 2009; Dessy and Pallage 2005). This
review paper focuses on interventions that could affect the child labor decision at the household level and were not
applied at the national level to construct a counterfactual. Thus, macro level interventions are out of the scope of
this paper.
3
  See De Hoop and Rosati (2013) for an in-depth discussion of the impact of cash transfers on child labor, focusing
on issues such as heterogeneity, spillover effects, long-run effects, and protection from shocks,

                                                                                                                    3
2. Child Labor: Definition and Theoretical Framework

In this section, we discuss three key conceptual issues. First, we discuss the key empirical
challenges to define child labor in the empirical literature. Second, we present a simple
theoretical framework to help us understand the pathways through which the different programs
may affect children’s allocation of time within the household. Finally, we discuss the challenges
to identify the impacts of policies on child labor and the selection of studies summarized in this
paper.

2.1 What Is Child Labor and How Is It Measured?

Several widely adopted international conventions set the legal boundaries that define child labor,
including the ILO Convention No 138 on the legal minimum age, the ILO Convention No 182 on
the worst forms of child labor, and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. The
conventions, however, contain a few flexibility clauses left to the discretion of the competent
national authority. Thus, there is no single legal definition of child labor used across countries
and there is no single statistical measure of child labor.

The International Conference of Labour Statisticians (ICLS) is the authoritative body to set global
standards in labor statistics. The Resolution concerning statistics on child labor, adopted by the
18th ICLS in 2008, structures the measurement of child labor around two elements: age of the
child (includes all children in the 5 to 17 age group) and the type of activities performed by the
child. The resolution distinguishes between “children in productive activities” and “child labor”
as follows:

    -   “Children in productive activities” are comprised by

          i) “Children in employment” includes all types of paid and non-paid productive activities
             performed by the child.

          ii) “Children in other productive activities” includes children who perform unpaid
              household services, that is, the production of domestic and personal services by a
              household member for consumption within their own household or household
              chores.

    -   “Child labor” is more restrictive and excludes all children working legally in accordance
        with the ILO Conventions. A child laborer is defined as:

        i)    Any economically active child under the age of 12
        ii)   Children in the 12-14 age category engaged in productive activities that do not fall
              under permissible light work4

4
 Light work is defined as not likely to be harmful to the child’s health or development; and not affecting school
attendance, participation in vocational orientation or training program.

                                                                                                               4
       iii) Children aged 17 and younger engaged in activities that are designated as
            “hazardous” (affecting the child’s safety, physical and mental development) or the
            “worst forms of child labor” (e.g. children in bondage or forced labor, commercial
            sexual exploitation, illicit activities and armed conflict, among others).

Based on these definitions, ILO (2013) estimates that there were 264 million children ages 5 to
17 engaged in an economic activity in the world (16.7 percent), of which 168 million children
were involved in child labor. About 51 percent of child laborers (85.3 million) were engaged in
hazardous work.

Academic researchers, however, rarely measure child labor following the ICLS resolution outlined
above. The child labor literature often uses the terms “child labor” and “children engaged in
productive activities” interchangeably. Moreover, there is considerable heterogeneity in the
types of productive activities considered in this literature: some papers define children in wage
work as child laborers while others include children engaged in any economic activity for the
market (paid or unpaid) or even household chores. The challenge of using wage work as an
indicator for child labor is that many children working outside the household are not paid.
However, not all forms of unpaid activities are considered detrimental to children’s development.
For that reason, some studies apply an hour limit to the number of domestic hours a child works
to consider activities where children regularly participate (Edmonds 2008).

There is also variation in the reference period applied in these studies. Some studies look at work
in the 7 days prior to the household survey while other studies focus on work in the past one or
twelve months. This heterogeneity complicates the comparison of program effects across
studies. We report the definition and reference time used in each paper (when available) in our
review; we also use child labor and children engaged in an economic activity interchangeably
throughout the paper.

It is important to note that there could be unexplained inconsistency in child labor statistics even
when a single definition of child labor is used. Guarcello et al. (2010), for instance, documents
large discrepancies in child labor statistics between independent national surveys within the
same country that ranges from 20 to 30 percentage points, even after accounting for differences
in sample design. For instance, in Cameroon, a comparison between the Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey (MICS 2000) and a Priority Survey (2001) shows a decline in child labor from 64
percent in the MICS survey to 16 percent in the Priority Survey one year later. In Senegal, the
Demographic Health Survey (DHS 2005) reports 35.2 percent of children as engaged in an
economic activity while the Statistical Information and Monitoring Programme on Child Labour
(SIMPOC 2005) survey of the same year reports 22.3 percent of children as working.

Despite the increasing sources of information on child labor over the past decade, there is not
much evidence on the validity of data collection methods (Edmonds 2008). Child labor could be
affected by measurement error due to several factors, for example, the survey information is
collected primarily using standard household surveys that target adult work, i.e., formal jobs
rather than unpaid and family work/enterprise jobs. Likewise, due to budgetary constraints

                                                                                                  5
usually, the head of household provides the information on child labor. The advantages of using
proxy-based reports rather than child-based reports in the context of child labor are not clear.
On the one hand, child-reported information may be more accurate than proxy responses, given
that a child knows best how she allocates her time. On the other hand, the head of household
may be familiar with the children’s activities since many child laborers in developing countries
work on the family farm or enterprise, however, due to social normal and cultural values, a proxy
respondent may tend to underreport these activities (Dammert and Galdo 2013).

In order to understand the effects of survey design, experimental studies have randomized the
survey instrument to different households in Tanzania and Ethiopia (Dillon et al. 2012; Dammert,
et al. 2016). Both studies show that survey design matters for child labor outcomes, in particular
in contexts where a large share of children are working on the family farm or home enterprises
and respondents may provide the socially desirable response of not sending their children to
work. These results have important implications for the reliability of current household survey
instruments and published estimates of child labor for monitoring and guiding efforts towards
child labor elimination. More attention needs to go to the survey instrument when we measure
child labor. An area that deserves attention concerns the worst forms of child labor, which are
rarely considered in rigorous empirical research.

2.2 Theoretical Framework

In this section, we present a heuristic explanation to illustrate the different mechanisms through
which policies may have an impact on child labor. This discussion draws on the theoretical
framework presented in Cigno and Rosati (2005) and Edmonds (2008). Economic theory largely
focuses on child labor as labor supply. Consider a unitary household in which parents maximize
utility over current consumption, children’s education, and leisure. The parent's labor supply is
inelastic and yields an exogenous income, fertility is exogenous and fixed at one child, and school
participation is dichotomous (the child either attends school or not). Thus, the income constraint
faced by the household is composed of household income (adult income and income from child
labor) minus the direct schooling costs. Parents will invest in the child’s schooling up to the point
where the marginal costs of a child’s time in school (including foregone earnings from work) equal
the marginal benefits.

Within this simplified framework, several factors influence children’s time allocation. First,
optimal investment in child education may not be achieved in credit-constrained households,
since these households cannot borrow against future earnings to cover foregone earnings or
school related expenses. Poor, credit constrained households are more likely to resort to child
labor to meet subsistence needs, even if parents have preferences for schooling (Baland and
Robinson 2000; Basu and Van, 1998: Beegle, Dehejia and Gatti 2009; Ranjan 2001). These
households are particularly likely to rely on children for income generation in the face of
uncertainty. There is ample evidence that poor households often resort to child labor as a buffer
against negative shocks such as parental unemployment and loss of agricultural income due to
droughts or other natural disasters (Edmonds 2005; Beegle, Dehejia and Gatti 2006; Duryea et al
2007; Guarcello, Mealli and Rosati 2010).

                                                                                                   6
Child labor supply is related not only to poverty but also to the availability and quality of schools
and opportunities in the labor market. Households are more likely to rely on child labor if parents
perceive the returns to education as low, schools are not available nearby, or education is not
affordable. And, in situations where returns to unskilled work are relatively high, the household
could decide to involve children in economic activities.

This simple theoretical framework helps to understand how social protection and labor market
programs may affect child labor. While the objectives of social protection and labor programs are
to reduce poverty and improve the well-being of the poor, these programs may affect child labor
through a variety of channels. Positive income effects (e.g. because of direct transfers, short-
term employment, and income from productive activities) can increase levels of school
participation and lower levels of child labor if the income is raised above the subsistence
threshold (Basu and Van 1998). At the same time, some programs incorporate requirements,
such as explicit schooling conditions, that may lower the opportunity cost of schooling and hence
further increase school attendance and lower participation in child labor.5

On the other hand, some programs may produce indirect intra-household labor substitution
effects that could positively or negatively affect child labor. When labor market programs
increase the participation of adults in the labor market, children may take over some of the
economic activities (e.g. on the household farm) and household chores previously carried out by
these adults. Programs that encourage household engagement in micro-entrepreneurial
activities, may increase the returns to children’s work and hence lead to an increase in child labor.
Moreover, if the household is not unitary, children’s t ime allocation will also depend on the
balance of the decision-making power within the household. To give an example, if adult female
household members have a stronger preference for children’s schooling, then children’s school
participation may be affected positively by factors such as female empowerment and female
income generating capacity.

Our review highlights the potential channels through which diverse social programs may affect
child labor to guide the discussion of their impacts on children’s allocation of time. Our goal is to
understand the intended and unintended effects so that social programs can be designed to
increase their potential in improving the welfare of poor households.

2.3 Our Search and Presentation of Results

The literature search was carried out, covering EconLit, the World Bank Development Impact
Evaluation Initiative (DIME), the Poverty Action Lab, the Social Science Research Network (SSRN),
the Network of Networks for Impact Evaluation (NONIE), Google Scholar, and the International
Initiative for Impact evaluation (3IE). The research team also drew on the extensive network of


5
 In contexts of high rates of school enrollment prior to the intervention, requirements regarding school attendance
may not alter child labor participation but only the share of children combining both school and work.

                                                                                                                 7
the Understanding Children’s Work (UCW) project6 (in international partner organizations and
academic institutions) to obtain information on further relevant impact evaluations. We make
use of the UCW inventory and present the most relevant results of all peer-reviewed papers.
Non-reviewed studies were considered if they apply a plausible and rigorous strategy to identify
the impact of the program on child labor.7 The papers we discuss include randomized trials as
well as regression discontinuity designs, natural experiments, and propensity score matching
studies.8 Papers that do not explicitly evaluate the impacts of the intervention on child labor
outcomes were excluded.

As mentioned in the previous section, the concepts used to categorize children’s work and child
labor are at times inconsistent in published statistics and research reports. Similarly, there is
substantial variation in the productive activities covered by the impact evaluations discussed in
this review. To achieve consistency, our discussion primarily focuses on impact estimates for
children’s participation in economic activities conducted for pay and/or fo r the household (i.e.
excluding household chores) and discuss, when available, the program impacts for different
categories of economic activities or household chores. We present the impact on the extensive
margin of child labor (as this is the outcome that most studies examine) and on the intensive
margin of child labor. We focus on children aged 6 – 14 years, the cut-off is set as the minimum
working legal age set in most countries. We refer the reader to the extensive literature on youth
labor programs, defined as the population aged 15 to 24 (see Behrman 1999, Card et al. 2015,
Blattman and Ralston 2015, among others).

Our filters produce a final sample of 31 evaluations. It should be noted that impact evaluations
around child labor tend to suffer from two limitations: (i) seldom is child labor the main outcome
of interest of labor and social protections programs and (ii) the interventions for which they are
developed are not necessarily selected according to a consistent knowledge generating strategy.
What we know about what works in addressing child labor based on impact evaluations is defined
by these limitations.

3. Review of the Evidence

This section provides a systematic review of the evidence on different policy interventions
grouped into five areas relevant for child labor: labor-oriented programs, credit and
microfinance, cash transfers, schooling incentives (vouchers, food programs), and targeted child
labor programs. This review is based on 31 high-quality studies conducted until the end of 2015.


6
  The UCW project is an inter-agency research cooperation initiative involving the (ILO), UNICEF and the World Bank.
Through a variety of research activities, the UCW project supports the partner agencies in improving statistical
information on the child labor phenomenon in its various dimensions – its nature and extent, its causes and
consequences, and what policy approaches are most effective in addressing it.
7
  Sometimes doubts arise regarding the strategy used to deal with endogenous program placement and self-
selection in both peer reviewed and non-reviewed papers. In those cases, we discuss these doubts in the text.
8
  For readers requiring more background, we recommend the following references: Duflo, Glennerster, and Kremer
(2008), Gertler et al. (2011) and Khandker, Koolwal, and Samad (2010).

                                                                                                                  8
3.1 Labor Market Oriented Programs

Labor market oriented programs aim to increase household members’ access to the labor market
and participation in micro-entrepreneurial activity. Within the simple theoretical framework
introduced above, the effects of these programs on children are undetermined. Consider, for
example, public work programs aimed at increasing labor demand for unskilled workers, one of
the most common demand-side labor market programs. These programs act as a safety net by
offering temporary employment to the poor. The additional income they provide to the
household, particularly during periods of economic distress, may keep children from dropping
out of school and entering the labor market. At the same time, these programs may increase the
demand for household chores performed by children (such as caring for siblings) and/or their
involvement in the family business as the demand for adult time outside of the household
increases.

Likewise, supply-side programs that offer skills training or provide capital could affect child labor
through the increase in household income, but may at the same time result in an intra-household
substitution effect leading to an increase in child labor in household activities (depending on the
degree of complementarity between adult and child work). The net effect of labor market
oriented programs on child labor will depend on whether the income effect dominates the
substitution effect, which in turn is conditioned on many factors, among them the need of labor
required under the program, the opportunity cost of adult household member time,
requirements of the program, changes in income due to the program, opportunity cost of
schooling, and child’s productivity in household activities. A priori, it is not possible to determine
which effect will dominate.

3.1.1 Labor Demand-Side Programs: Public Works Programs

Public work programs are popular policy tools aimed at fighting poverty in developing countries.
These programs provide temporary employment opportunity boosting unskilled workers’ income
and providing new or improved infrastructure such as road construction and maintenance, water
conservation, among others (Subbarao et. al. 2013). These temporary programs are common in
post-conflict or post-disaster situations, to provide some of the poorest a basic income with a
potential multiplier effect on local economies and help address youth employment and ex-
combatant reintegration (Blattman and Ralston 2015). Public work programs are usually self-
targeting, that is: offered wages are low so that only poor people willing to work at that rate
participate in the program.

While public works programs do not target child labor directly, the temporary increase in demand
for unskilled labor may affect the allocation of children’s time . The results from the available
impact evaluations seem to indicate that public works programs do not generate any relevant
reduction in child labor. On the contrary, the evidence indicates that in some instances these
programs increase child labor. It should be noted that despite their widespread use, evidence on
the impacts of public work programs on child labor (and other outcomes) is limited due to the
challenges in establishing a counterfactual for these large-scale programs.

                                                                                                    9
Hoddinott, Giligan, and Taffesse (2009) estimate the effects of Ethiopia’s Public Safety Net
Program on child schooling and labor. This program provided transfers to individuals from
selected beneficiary households residing in chronically food insecure areas, where each working-
age household member was allocated a quota of up to 30 days of work in labor-intensive projects
(such as road and school construction). This program was complemented by other activities such
as access to credit, agricultural extension, irrigation and harvesting schemes, among others.
Given the non-random allocation of beneficiaries the authors compare beneficiary households in
intervention districts to non-beneficiary households using propensity score matching. The main
results show that, among children aged 6 to 10 years, boys experienced a reduction in child labor
which is driven by reductions in both household chores and agricultural activities. For older boys
and girls, the estimates are not statistically significant. However, once the public work transfers
are combined with food security transfers designed to increase agricultural productivity, young
girls (aged 6 to 10) experienced increases in weekly hours worked, in particular in domestic
chores. Quisumbing and Yohannes (2005) provide evidence suggesting that child care duties
affect women’s ability to participate in Ethiopia’s public works program and that women may
rely on their daughters for help with domestic chores if they take up paid employment.

Shah and Steinberg (2015) exploit the three-phase rollout of India’s National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (one of the largest public works programs globally) to analyze the effects of
the increased adult labor demand on children aged 5 - 16. The NREGS provided a guarantee of
up to 100 days of annual employment at the minimum wage rate in rural employment projects
(e.g. road construction, water conservation, among others) aimed at helping households to
smooth consumption during lean agricultural seasons. Individuals who apply but did not receive
work within a period of two weeks were entitled to unemployment compensation. The program
mandated one-third of program beneficiaries to be women. The main estimates suggest mixed
effects for younger children (5-12 years) but significant ones for adolescents (13-16 years) who
are old enough to substitute for adult labor but ineligible to participate in the program. In
particular, the paper finds that adolescent girls are more likely to substitute for their mothers in
domestic work, while boys are more likely to work outside the home for pay. Like the results for
Ethiopia, these findings are consistent with girls taking up home activities and boys spending
more time in economic activities, both activities displaced by the workfare program.

Similarly, Rosas and Sabarwal (2016) exploit a randomized rolled-out design to examine short-
term impacts (3-4 months) of the Youth Employment Support Project in Sierra Leone, which
include a labor‐intensive component known as the Cash for Work Program. The objective of the
program was to provide additional income and temporary employment opportunities to
vulnerable youth, where beneficiaries were entitled to a minimum of 50 days and a maximum of
75 days of work at a daily wage rate of Le 7,500 (or US$1.80 in 2012). The program rules included
a quota of at least 30 percent participation by women. The findings show that participant
households experienced an increase in income and invested part of it in productive assets and
existing businesses. The program appears to have generated an increase in school absenteeism
with no increases in paid activities among children aged 6 to 14 years. Given the increase in labor


                                                                                                 10
participation among eligible household members, the higher school absenteeism could be due
to higher needs for household chores, but this effect was not discussed in detail in the paper.

The Programa Jefes y Jefas de Hogar Desocupados (Program for Unemployed Male and Female
Head of Households) in Argentina was introduced in 2002 as a public safety net response to the
severe economic crisis. The program required eligible unemployed household heads with
dependents to work a minimum of 20 hours per week in training activities, basic community
work, school attendance or employment in a private company with a wage subsidy for six
months. Juras (2014) estimates impacts by comparing the outcomes for children in participant
households (i.e. households that had enrolled in the program and were receiving benefits in Oct.
2002) with the outcomes of children in a propensity-matched group of applicant households on
the waiting list as of October, 2002. The main results suggest that the program reduced the
percentage of children aged 10 and 14 working for pay by 0.6 percentage points, although the
effect is not statistically significant. It should be noted, however, that a small percentage of
children works for pay in Argentina and no information was provided on unpaid activities
performed by the child.

Overall, the findings above suggest that children may take over the activities of participating
parents, particularly household chores. It is not clear, however, how the design features of public
works programs affect the main results. Potentially, the temporary nature of the evaluated
employment programs explains why children’s time is spent on household chores or in activities
previously carried out by adults. Public work programs aim to provide short-term employment
to the poor; thus, they should be distinguished from other labor programs that are meant to have
a longer-term impact on adult employment. If beneficiaries of public work programs know that
the program will provide employment only for a short period (weeks or few months) they may
resort to child labor to substitute adult work temporarily while adults are engaged in public work
programs, then after the program ends parents and children return to their normal activities.
Complementary programs to support the need for household labor while the adult beneficiary is
employed and to support graduates’ transition into long-term employment could potentially
alleviate the reliance on children.

Another design feature of these programs that may affect child labor is the explicit targeting of
women. Women are often assumed to have a stronger preference for child wellbeing and
therefore more likely than men to invest their resources (and thus also the income generated by
participating in the program) in the human capital investment of their children. Also, by
encouraging women's participation in the labor market, public programs may enhance the
bargaining power of women within their household, potentially enabling them to channel
additional household resources to children. However, women are often more likely than men to
engage in caring for children, hence increasing their engagement in economic activities may
affect their children directly. Indeed, Shah and Steinberg (2015) estimate that between 1.2 and
4 adolescent girls may have dropped out of school to start full-time domestic work in their
parents' homes for every 20 women induced into the labor force by the public work program in
India (NREGS).


                                                                                                11
3.1.2 Labor Supply-Side Programs

In this section, we discuss supply interventions aimed at providing skills training or capital to
individuals, which are common interventions implemented in developing countries meant to
have a long-term effect on employment (Card et al. 2015). We focus on micro-enterprise
development programs that offer assistance to unemployed workers in the form of financial
support for start-up or operating costs of small business. As explained before, these programs
may lower child labor through an increase in household income, but may at the same time result
in an intra-household substitution effect leading to an increase in child labor in household
activities.

Several results emerge from our review. First, programs that provide only entrepreneurial
training tend to have limited effects on household productive activities and concurrently on
children’s time allocation. For instance, Karlan and Valdivia (2011) examine the effects of training
offered to Peruvian women participating in a microcredit program. The training consisted of
weekly business skills and strategy training sessions offered over a period of two years with the
aim to improve basic business practices. The authors exploit the randomization of village banks
to identify the impact of this training on a range of outcomes. There was little evidence that the
intervention improved key outcomes such as revenue, profits, or employment and hence there
was no statistically significant effect either on the extensive margin of child labor (not clearly
defined in their paper) or on the number of daily hours spent in work.

Similarly, the provision of more intensive business training to microfinance clients in Pakistan
appears to have had limited effects. Evidence from a cluster randomized experiment indicates
that the business training led to increased business knowledge and better business practices. The
training, however, did not affect business sales or profits. The effects of the business training
intervention on education and child labor (defined as paid labor) were not statistically significant
in the full sample. However, girls in this age range appeared to have increased their participation
in economic activities for pay by 4 percentage points (Giné and Mansuri 2011).9

Second, while the effect of business training combined with the provision of capital on household
business activities and income generation appears to be more pronounced, the effects on
children are still limited. For instance, Banerjee et al. (2011), study the effects of a program
targeting women in the poorest of the poor households in India and aiming to lift them out of
poverty by improving their income generating capacity.10 The Indian Targeting the Hardcore Poor
program consisted of a package of interventions, including asset transfers (such as livestock,

9
  In Karlan and Valdivia (2011), it is not clearly defined what child labor meant, while Giné and Mansuri (2011) only
considered children working for pay outside the household as child labor. These limitations reflect the fact that
neither of the two studies had the objective of analyzing potential effects on children’s allocation of time.
10
   To be considered “ultra-poor”, households must meet three of the following five criteria: the primary source of
income is informal labor or begging; land holdings are below 20 decimals (10 katthas, 0.2 acres); the household owns
no productive assets other than land; there are no able-bodied males in the household; school-aged children work
instead of attending school. In addition, households must meet two further requirements.

                                                                                                                  12
inventory, and fodder), provision of information and training related to the household’s
enterprise, and iii) savings requirement of Rs. 10 (approximately US$ 0.25) per week. At the end
of the 18-month period, the households were integrated into a microcredit program by means
of a mandatory 3-day orientation course. Although non-participation rates were relatively high
(12.5% of selected households turned out to be ineligible to participate and 35.6% of selected
households refused to participate), intent-to-treat estimates indicate that the intervention
improved indicators of household welfare, such as per capita household consumption, nutritional
intake, and perceived health. Children (age range not specified) of potential beneficiaries spent
an additional 38 minutes studying in the 24 hours prior to the follow-up interview compared to
the control group. However, they did not differ from children in the control group in terms of
time spent working11 in the 24 hours prior to the follow-up interview.

A comparable program (implemented by the same NGO) in Bangladesh had a somewhat different
impact on child labor. Bandiera et al. (2013) study the impact of this program in rural Bangladesh,
where selected communities were randomly divided into two groups: a treatment group where
the program was implemented in 2007 and a delayed treatment group which would receive the
program in 2011. The program resulted in substantial increases in self-employment, labor
productivity, and earnings of beneficiaries (especially eligible women). However, it also affected
annual hours worked by children in self-employment (i.e. the household enterprise). Children
residing in eligible households increased time spent yearly in self-employment by 57 hours 2
years after the start of the program and by 36 hours 4 years after the start of the program. Annual
hours devoted to wage labor by children in eligible households were not significantly affected by
the program.

Third, evidence from two programs in Central America suggests that programs that encourage
micro-entrepreneurial activity may increase child school participation while leaving child labor
supply unaffected through adjustments in intra-household decision-making and attitudes
towards schooling. The Nicaragua’s Results Based Initiative offered capital transfers in the form
of cash, seeds, or livestock and technical assistance and training to develop or expand small-scale
household enterprises, livestock or agricultural activities. De Hoop et al. (2015) exploit the
random assignment of communities to identify the effects of the program on applicant
households in treatment and control communities. The evidence shows that, among beneficiary
households in treatment communities, women were more likely to work in small-scale livestock
and non-agricultural self-employment activities. In these households, child labor (defined as
participation in any paid or unpaid economic activity) did not change among children aged 8 to
17 at baseline but their school attendance increased by 8 percentage points, which indicates that
more children are combining school and work.

Similarly, Kovrova and Rosati (2016) use a regression discontinuity to assess the impact of the ILO
project “Eliminating Child Labour in El Salvador through Economic Empowerment and Social
Inclusion”. The set of interventions evaluated consisted of support to mothers of child labo rers
to start a small enterprise as well as of so-called “flexible education interventions” to help their

11
     We were unable to identify a clear definition of work in the paper.

                                                                                                 13
children return to school at the appropriate level in case they have dropped out. The program
produced substantial changes in household behavior. The participation of women in economic
activities, and in own business increased substantially, but without generating relevant changes
in the labor supply of other members of the households. Children appear to have benefited from
the program since their school attendance increased significantly and household expenditures
on education showed signs (albeit not robust) of increase. Children were not driven to work in
the newly created or expanded household businesses, but they did not stop working either.
Rather, they experienced a marked reduction (by about one-half) of their weekly working hours,
making more than enough room for regular school attendance.

Neither the program in Nicaragua nor the program in El Salvador appears to have resulted in
substantively increased household income. However, there is evidence that these programs may
have affected children’s time allocation (increased schooling) through changes in household
decision making and values related to children. In Nicaragua, women’s influence on household
decisions related to children (e.g. regarding child schooling) increased substantively. In El
Salvador, household attitudes towards child employment had changed, with fewer households
mentioning positive aspects of child labor.

3.2 Credit and Microfinance

We now turn to impacts of credit and microfinance interventions on child labor outcomes.
Microfinance programs offer financial services such as credit, saving, and insurance to individuals
who would otherwise not have access to financial institutions. We identified several studies
reporting impacts of microcredit on beneficiaries’ children and one study examining the impact
of access to micro-insurance.

3.2.1 Microcredit

Lack of access to credit has been recognized as one of the causes of the inability of vulnerable
households to engage in profitable entrepreneurial activities (e.g. Eswaran and Kotwal, 1986).
Microcredit programs may increase household income and concomitantly lower child labor by
addressing the constraint to entrepreneurial activity. However, access to credit may also open
new opportunities for children to work in the household enterprise (depending on the degree of
complementarity between physical capital, adult, and child work) or to substitute for activities
otherwise carried out by adults in the household.

The reviewed papers show mixed effects, which could be explained by context specific
constraints, differences in child labor measures, and experimental design. Two studies analyzed
the impacts of microfinance on several socioeconomic outcomes in a context where microfinance
was not targeted towards women and was almost non‐existent in the village prior to the
intervention (no other microfinance institution was offering a product before or during the
duration of the study). In rural Morocco (Crepon et al 2015) and rural Ethiopia (Tarozzi et al 2015),
the intent-to-treat estimates show that there was an increase in borrowing mostly used for crop
cultivation and livestock-related activities.

                                                                                                  14
In rural Morocco, households that had access to microcredit increased self-employment and
profits, but the increase in self-employment profit was offset by a decrease in labor supplied
outside the farm or household’s business. Not only adults changed their labor supply; the
estimates show a statistically significant reduction in time spent on household chores and
activities outside the household among household members aged 6 - 15 years, respectively. On
the contrary in rural Ethiopia, there was no evidence of changes in the total number of hours
worked neither outside the household nor in self-employment activities12.The proportion of girls
for whom domestic chores was the primary activity increased by 5 percentage points relative to
control areas but the difference was not statistically significant.

Other studies examine the impacts of lending programs targeted specifically to women. Banerjee
et al (2015a) analyzed the introduction of a group lending program targeted to women residing
in neighborhoods where there was no pre-existing microfinance presence in Hyderabad, the
capital of Andhra Pradesh, India. The microfinance institution did not require its clients to start a
business in order to borrow, nor did it provide any complementary services such as business
training. The intent-to-treat estimates show that household business profits did not increase and
that there was no significant difference in monthly per capita consumption and monthly
nondurable consumption. Households mostly used the loan to acquire durable goods. The
estimates show a reduction in teenage girls’ labor supply but no changes in the probability that
children or teenagers are enrolled in school nor in the number of hours worked. Adult labor
increases but mostly on the time spent in the households’ own businesses with no increases in
the number of hours worked for wages.

Similarly, Angelucci et al (2015) find modest impacts on female decision making in a study on the
expansion of microcredit in north-central Sonora, Mexico, where self-reported female
entrepreneurs residing in randomly selected treatment clusters received access to credit by
means of door-to-door loan promotion. The intent-to-treat estimates show positive effects of
access to microcredit on revenues and expenses of some existing businesses, but no gain on
income. The estimates also show no effects on any labor supply outcomes measured as the
respondent’s participation in an economic activity, percentage of children aged 4-17 working,
and employment of family members in the respondent’s business. In both papers, child labor,
either measured in terms of working hours or participation in economic activity, did not change.
The latter may be explained by the small effect of the programs on household income.

It is possible that the mixed evidence found in the four studies mentioned in this section is due
to sample selection and low take-up rates as pointed out by Banerjee et al (2015b). Thus, an
alternative option is to randomize across villages where microcredit was already available and
among those who had already expressed explicit interest in microcredit during the initial

12
  Work is defined as an activity related to crop cultivation, care of livestock, fishing, mining, manufacture and
processing, retail and wholesale trade, finance, public administration, education, health, and social services or other
services). For everyone of age 10 and above, the survey recorded the two most important activities the individual
was involved in during the previous 12 months, the number of weeks spent in such activities, the number of days
usually spent per week as well as the number of hours spent per day.

                                                                                                                    15
information sessions instead of looking at the impacts of microfinance in areas with little or no
exposure to lending institutions. Attanasio et al. (2015) analyzed the impacts of two types of
contractual agreements (group-lending and individual-lending) offered to poor women in
randomly selected villages in rural Mongolia. While the individual liability microcredit program
did not yield significant impacts on socioeconomic outcomes, enterprise ownership and
consumption increased among those who were offered the group loan. Also, adults increased
their labor supply in the female-run household business while the number of hours worked by
teens (aged 16 – 20) declined. There are no clear effects on child labor (measured as hours
worked in self-employment, household business, and other activities). Estimations not displayed
but discussed in the text suggest that there were impacts among low-educated group borrowers,
who seem to substitute away from outside labor by children to help in the newly established
female-run enterprises.

3.2.2 Micro-insurance

Evidence on other types of micro-finance programs is limited. A study of Pakistan’s National
Rural Support Program suggests that insurance against health shocks has the potential to lower
child labor. The program provides eligible clients with microcredit accompanied with mandatory
health insurance for loan clients, their spouses, and their children under the age of 18. Landmann
and Frölich (2015) examine whether an extension of this mandatory insurance scheme offered
to clients in 9 microcredit branch offices, affected child labor. The randomized extension
consisted of two components offered in treatment branches only (i) voluntary insurance for
additional household members not belonging to the nuclear family (such as adult children of the
client, parents, cousins, etc.) and (ii) assistance with claim procedures. The clients in the control
branches (4 branches) were not aware of the treatment. The estimates show that the insurance
extension reduced participation in child labor (defined per ILO’s official legal definition) and
children’s engagement in hazardous work, hours worked by children and children’s earnings. The
exact magnitude of these effects differs by follow-up survey wave (four survey waves were
conducted at 6-month intervals after the baseline survey) and are particularly strong for boys.
Given that there is only one study, however, more is needed to establish the potential
effectiveness of micro-insurance programs on addressing child labor.

3.3 Cash Transfers

Unconditional cash transfer (UCT) programs provide income transfers to poor households
without strings attached. Conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs also provide income transfers
but require recipient households to comply with schooling (e.g. enrollment of their children) and
health (e.g. vaccination, health clinic visits etc.) requirements. As pointed out before, cash
transfer programs may have offsetting effects on child participation in work. Increases in income
available to the household will tend to lower child participation in work and this reduction in
work activities will tend to be stronger if the cash transfers are provided conditional on school
attendance, which lower the price of schooling. However, households may also invest the
transferred resources in productive assets (see for instance Gertler, Martinez, and Rubio-Codina,
2012; Sadoulet, de Janvry, and Davis, 2001), thus opening new opportunities for children either

                                                                                                  16
to participate directly in the households’ productive activities or to substitute for adu lt activities
in the household.

3.3.1 Unconditional Cash Transfers

The evidence on the effects of UCT programs is mixed. Examining what families do with the extra
money helps to understand these mixed impacts. We turn first to Ecuador’s Bono de Desarollo
Humano, an UCT of $15 per household per month (or 7 percent of monthly expenditures for
recipient households) independent of the number of children residing in the household. Using
randomly assigned eligibility status as an instrument, the estimates indicate that the program
lowered children’s participation in economic activities (Schady and Araujo 2006) and it resulted
in substantial reductions in work for pay particularly among children who were enrolled in school
at baseline (Edmonds and Schady 2012). Edmonds and Schady (2012) show that the effects are
mostly driven by households using the extra income to postpone the child's entry into the labor
force.

The increase in schooling inputs and reduction on child labor is present even if the UCT does not
target older children. Zambia’s Child Grant Programme is a UCT program targeted to households
with children aged under 3 years in three districts of the country. Recipient households received
a flat (i.e. irrespective of household size) US$12 transfer a month, an amount deemed sufficient
to purchase one meal a day for everyone in the household for one month. Handa et al (2015)
estimate the effects of the program using a randomized variation within villages. The estimates
show no impacts of the program on participation in any type of work (paid or unpaid) for children
aged 8-10. However, the program decreased paid work of children aged 11-14 at baseline, the
age at which significant drop-out begins to occur in Zambia. The transfer seems to have enabled
households to overcome some costs to school attendance since the transfer was at least in part
used to purchase school uniforms and shoes.

On the contrary, child labor tends to increase when the transfer is invested mostly in productive
assets. Malawi’s Social Cash Transfer Scheme offered a transfer that ranged from US$4 per
month for a household with one eligible member to US$13 per month for households with four
or more eligible members with no conditions attached to the transfer. In addition, the program
offered a schooling attendance bonus ranging from US$1.30 per month for primary school age
children to US$2.60 per month for secondary school age children. The target population was the
poorest 10 percent of households. Covarrubias et al. (2012) show that eligible households
increased their investment in productive agricultural assets (ownership of agricultural tools and
livestock) and reduced adult participation in labor activities outside the household. The estimates
show that children experience an increase in the probability of performing household chores and
an increase in hours worked on the family farm or family business, especially during harvest.

3.3.2 Conditional Cash Transfers

Randomized evaluations, mainly in Latin America, indicate that Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT)
programs tend to reduce child engagement in economic activities. For instance, the PROGRESA

                                                                                                    17
program in Mexico reduced economic activity by 3 - 5 percentage points among 12 to 17-year-
old boys and by 2 percentage points among girls (Skoufias and Parker 2001); the Red de
Proteccion Social program in Nicaragua reduced economic activity by 3 - 5 percentage points for
children aged 7 to 13 (Dammert 2009), and the Programa de Asignación Familiar (PRAF) in
Honduras decreased work outside the home by 3 percentage points for children aged 6 to 12
(Galiani and McEwan 2013).

De Hoop and Rosati (2014) reviewed evidence drawn from 23 evaluations of conditional cash
transfer schemes and conclude that CCTs tend to lower both the extensive and intensive margin
of child labor and to mitigate the effect of economic shocks that may push children into work.
Moreover, most impact evaluation studies show that boys and older children experience a
stronger impact of CCTs on work for pay and work outside the house while girls reduce household
chores due to the transfer. Since girls are more likely to be engaged in household chores, the
impact of policies on work performed by girls is likely to be underestimated if only work for pay
or work for the market is considered as indicators of child labor.

Yet, there are still knowledge gaps related to cash transfers that were not addressed in the
literature. First, there is scant evidence on whether cash transfer programs are effective at
tackling the worst forms of child labor, such as work under hazardous conditions and long
working hours. One exception is Edmonds and Shreshta (2014) who analyze a schooling
promotion project for children working in the handmade, export-oriented carpet sector in Nepal.
Estimates based on a randomized controlled trial show that conditional transfers covering school
expenses conditional on school attendance reduced child involvement in carpet weaving, in
particular for girls. The study, however, points out that the effects of the cash transfer dissipate
after the program ends. The effects on children’s time allocation tend to last only for the duration
of the program, there is no evidence of program effects on schooling or child labor outcomes
after the program ends. More evidence about the short and long-term effects of CCTs on the
worst forms of child labor is needed.

Moreover, there are indications of interaction effects between cash transfer programs and other
interventions. Cash transfer programs appear to have a stronger effect on child labor when they
are implemented in combination with supply-side interventions such as the provision of health
and education facilities such as PROGRESA in Mexico. Their effects, however, appear to be
weaker when cash transfers are combined with auxiliary interventions that affect households’
income generating strategies, as these investments may create opportunities for child labor in
family work. For instance, Del Carpio, Loayza, and Wada (2016) analyze a randomized CCT in
Nicaragua (Atencion a Crisis) where the transfer was complemented by a further wealth transfer
to start-up a non-agricultural business. The estimates show that the program reduced farm work
and household chores but increased activities related to commerce and retail among children
aged 8 to 15 years. More information about the interaction between cash transfers and other
interventions (including some of the interventions we discuss in this paper) would be beneficial.




                                                                                                 18
3.4 In-Kind Transfers

In-kind transfers are closely related to conditional cash transfer schemes, but their impacts on
child labor outcomes are not necessarily equivalent. To the extent that the goods and services
provided by these programs are not fungible, they result in a more limited expansion of the
consumption sets of the beneficiary households than (conditional) cash transfers. The impact of
conditional in-kind transfers might also differ from the impact of conditional cash transfers
because members of the household are forced to consume goods that potentially are
complements to (or inputs for) the outcome of interest. For example, by improving the nutrition
status of the child, school meals might have a stronger effect on education and child labor
outcomes than conditional cash transfers of equal monetary value.13 In this section, we examine
the impact of two types of in-kind transfers where child labor outcomes have been reported:
food for education programs and school vouchers.

We first analyze the effects of food for education programs on child labor. School-feeding
programs can work as an indirect income transfer to households and affect child labor by
reducing the cost of sending a child to school. Ravallion and Wodon (2010) analyze the Food
Education Program, which comprises of take-home rations given to poor households with
children in primary school in Bangladesh. To receive the ration, children must attend at least 85%
of all classes in a month. Using whether the program is present in a child’s village as an
instrument for receiving the program, the estimates show a reduction of child labor (measured
as engaged in an economic activity inside and outside the household). The observed decline in
participation in work, however, is markedly lower than the increases in education amounting to
19 and 18 percentage points respectively for boys and girls.

It appears to matter how meals are delivered to students. Kazianga, de Walque, and Alderman
(2012) exploit a cluster randomized trial in which schools in rural Burkina Faso were randomly
assigned to 1 of 3 groups: a group in which female pupils receive take-home rations, a group in
which all pupils receive school meals, and a control group. Among girls in schools assigned to the
take-home rations both farm and non-farm economic activities decreased significantly by 9
percentage points (respectively 57 and 16% among all girls in the control group at baseline).
School meals did not significantly affect either of these two activities for boys or girls. It is not
clear whether the value of the food disbursed through the school meals and take-home rations
programs was comparable. Hence, it is not possible to say whether the difference in the impact
of the interventions is due to the difference in the value of the transfer or to a differential impact
of school meals and take-home rations.

Second, we turn our focus into the provision of vouchers that lower the cost of attending private
schools. This intervention could affect child labor due to the income effect, reduction in the cost
of education, the incentives to spend time studying, and changes in the expected returns to
schooling given that the child is attending private school which is correlated with higher quality
of education in developing countries. Yet, missing from most studies on the effects of vouchers

13
     For a review of (the rationale behind) in-kind transfers we refer the reader to Currie and Gahvari (2008).

                                                                                                                  19
on children’s’ outcomes is an assessment of impacts on child labor.14 An exception is a study on
Colombia’s Programa de Ampliación de Cobertura de la Educación Secundaria (PACES), which
provided vouchers to children from families in the lowest income strata. The vouchers covered
slightly more than half of the cost of private secondary school fees and were renewable
conditional on satisfactory academic performance. Cities and towns used lotteries to allocate
vouchers when demand exceeded supply. Angrist et al. (2002) rely on these lotteries to identify
the impact of the program and find that the program had a substantial impact on education
outcomes: school attainment and performance on achievement tests improved. The program did
not affect the likelihood of engaging in work of either boys or girls. Point estimates for the
reduction in child labor are of the expected sign but not statistically significant. However, the
number of hours worked by girls decreased significantly by about 1.5 hours a week because of
the program (2.7 hours a week in the control group at follow-up).

3.5 Supply-Side Education Interventions

Evidence on the impact of the most relevant supply-side interventions (like better access to
schools or improved quality of education) on child labor is limited. This section discusses two
types of supply-side education interventions for which child labor outcomes were reported. It
should be noted that these interventions seem to affect child labor, but there are few studies in
the education literature that report child labor outcomes, thus further testing is needed.

First, pre-schools prepare young children for primary school attendance, by increasing children’s
opportunities to thrive in school, and by sensitizing parents to the importance of school
participation, pre-schools may affect school attendance and child work in the long run. Martinez,
Naudeau, and Pereira (2012) evaluate the impact of a pre-school program implemented in
Mozambique in 30 villages randomly selected from a larger group of 98 eligible villages. 15 The
program consisted of a range of interventions to introduce pre-school options in the selected
villages.16 Preschool participation increased substantially in the intervention villages (42% of the
3-9 year-old children, i.e. those who could have participated in the program’s preschools) vis -à-
vis the control villages (11.7%) and pre-schools appear to have affected subsequent primary
school participation. The program also affected child work. IV estimates indicate that hours
worked at the family plot in the week prior to the interview decreased by 1.3 hours among 5-9
year-old beneficiary children (2.9 hours on average in the control group). However, hours spent
on household chores and caring for children, elderly, and sick did not change significantly.




14
   See Glewwe and Muralidharan (2015).
15
   Villages in 5 areas were deemed eligible if they committed to providing extensive support to the program.
16
   Communities received technical assistance and materials for the construction of up to three classrooms with
capacity for 35 children each. In addition, each community received technical assistance and materials to build
playgrounds, child-sized latrines, and a washing station. Each class was staffed with two volunteer teachers selected
by the school management committee. Finally, parents and caregivers of preschoolers in the community had the
opportunity to participate in monthly parenting meetings focusing on thematic topics, including health, nutrition,
and literacy.

                                                                                                                  20
Second, interventions that reduce the cost of education and increase access to schools, are
generally assumed to lower the incidence of child labor. Along with the construction of girl-
friendly schools, the Burkinabé Response to Improve Girls’ Chances to Succeed (BRIGHT)
provided school kits, textbooks and school meals for all students in 132 rural villages in rural
Burkina Faso. Female pupils were also eligible for take-home rations on the condition that they
attended school regularly. Regression discontinuity estimates based on the assignment score for
village eligibility to participate in the program show that BRIGHT let to strong improvements in
school enrollment and children’s scores in mathematics and French tests (Kazianga et al 2014).
Kazianga et al (2014) and De Hoop and Rosati (2014) show that there was no effect of the
program on activities performed by the child outside the household17. When disaggregated by
gender, there is not much difference in the treatment effect (Kazianga et al 2014) but boys
without female siblings (who did not benefit indirectly from the take-home rations provided to
girls) appear to have increased their participation in work outside and inside their households,
possibly because the increased school access reduced the time they spent commuting to school
(De Hoop and Rosati 2014).

3.6 Targeted Child Labor Programs

In the previous sections, we have reviewed several policies that affect child indirectly but what
about programs and policies that target child labor directly? The International Labor Organization
(ILO), UNICEF, the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB), among
others have implemented a variety of policies and programs towards working children. While
these programs are informative and have been implemented all over the developing world, there
has been few rigorous evaluations of these programs. Thus, we will review them with caution
with the purpose of informing policy design and highlighting gaps in the literature. 18

One of the most common type of policies implemented to reduce child labor is advocacy. The
main idea is to inform parents, employers, children, and policy makers about the potential
negative effects of children’s engagement in some types of economic activities and household
chores. The assumption is that parents/employers may not have full information about the
harmful effects of some types of activities, in particular, the worst forms of child labor. The ILO's
International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC) has focused on raising
awareness on child labor and the implementation of legal and policy frameworks in more than
200 projects worldwide (ILO 2015). Examples include awareness campaigns on child labor in the
tourism sector in Cape Verde, cocoa farming in Ghana, and domestic work for pay outside the
household in Ecuador (ILO 2015). Similarly, UNICEF has worked to raise awareness about child
labor, for example through a Parenting Education Initiative in Nepal, where the goal is to increase
parents’ awareness of the harmful effects of child labor (UNICEF 2011).


17
   There is a discrepancy in the results in regards to household chores driven by different specifications of the
econometric model.
18
   In January of 2015, the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of International Labor Affairs awarded $11 million in
grants for monitoring and impact evaluation studies on child labor. Results will be available in 2019.
(http://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/ilab/ilab20150067 accessed on April 6th, 2016)

                                                                                                               21
ILO-IPEC and UNICEF, among other international NGOs, have focused on ending child recruitment
into armed forces during conflicts and on reintegration in post-conflict countries (IPEC 2007).
Unfortunately, there is very little evidence concerning the impact of these advocacy activities on
child labor outcomes. Moreover, our understanding of the different types of communication and
channels that are most effective in influencing behavior is limited. This is an important avenue of
research given the documented negative effects that child soldiering had on ex-combatants labor
and education outcomes (Blattman and Annan 2010).

Other programs have focused on providing an integrated set of interventions to children working
or at risk of working, usually conditioned on school attendance. In the Arab Republic of Egypt,
for example, a program called “Combating Worst Forms of Child Labor by Reinforcing Policy
Response and Promoting Sustainable Livelihoods and Educational Opportunities” (CWCLP)
consisted of integrated interventions targeted at out-of-school children aged 6 to 11 engaged in
or “at risk of” exploitative child work in agriculture (ICF 2013)19. Eligible children in treatment
villages were eligible to enroll in a new community school (providing non-formal education) and
to receive a take-home ration, conditional on school attendance. In addition, the program
comprised community awareness activities targeted at parents. The estimates show positive
effects of the CWCLP program on schooling outcomes, however, there was no effect on children’s
engagement in economic activities, exposure to workplace hazards, nor on the occurrence of
work-related injuries. These findings should be taken with caution since it is not possible to
disentangle the program effects from factors affecting the CWCLP program delivery and
implementation.20 21

4. Implications for Program Design and Research

Child labor is the outcome of a complex household decision-making process. Programs can alter
the household productive structure and incentives faced by different households in multiple
ways, often making it hard to predict their overall effect on child labor. The past decade has seen
an increase in the number of empirical studies reporting impacts of various policies on child labor
outcomes. Notwithstanding several limitations that we will discuss below, the literature review
allows us to shed light on the effect of social protection and labor programs on child labor and to
draw some general conclusions.

Overall, programs that aim to address child labor by reducing the vulnerability of the household
produce the desired effect (albeit with a variability that deserves further scrutiny). As we have

19
   Available at http://www.dol.gov/ilab/iclre/evaluations.htm (accessed on March 27, 2016).
20
   There are some issues of partial compliance since program staff move two villages from the control group to the
treatment group, and another two from the treatment group to the control group after randomization was done. In
addition, baseline information included children up to 13 years of age even though they were not eligible to
participate in the program, affecting sample size. Also, the baseline and follow-up surveys were administered in
different months where the needs for child labor differ which may explain the differences in child labor.
21
   Other programs aimed at making schooling and work more compatible, thus not considering schooling and work
as substitutes but complements. (Bolivia study, have not received the final report yet )


                                                                                                               22
seen, transfers (conditional or not, in cash or in kind) reduced child labor in most of the cases.
Similarly, programs that help the household to cope with exposure to risk, for example, health
insurance, do reduce household reliance on child labor. More can be done in this area to make
programs more effective to reduce child labor, but reducing household vulnerability appears to
be an important strategy.

The evidence presented also shows that policies that aim to increase adult household members’
participation in the labor market or the entrepreneurial capabilities of the households, can
generate an additional demand for adolescent and child work. Examples include microcredit
programs and interventions that provide physical and human capital. Of course, such programs
are an important component of anti-poverty strategies, but they could be modified and
integrated with additional interventions to ensure that they do not produce adverse effects on
child labor.

There are several important caveats that need to be considered when interpreting the evidence
presented. One concern is that rigorous evidence is available only for a limited subset of the
policies potentially relevant to address child labor. Obviously, the fact that there is no evidence
for some intervention categories does not imply that these interventions do not affect child labor
(possibly even more so than the interventions discussed in this review). Besides these more
general concerns, there are some more specific issues. A key issue, as can be inferred from the
results presented, is that most impact evaluations focus on the economic activity without
considering household chores. This potentially results in underreporting of program impact on
activities carried out by girls. Also, because of the focus on the broad category of economic
activities (or one of its subcomponents), we have little evidence on the extent to which the
interventions prevent and reduce the worst forms of child labor, including hazardous work.

In addition, the average effects of interventions typically mask considerable heterogeneity across
groups. Since child labor is not the outcome of interest, most studies only report the average
impact of the intervention on the main child labor outcome, however, it is critical to understand
the potential effects of the intervention for specific groups. For instance, households with
children currently combining school and work will respond very differently to school incentives
than households with children who only work and do not attend school. More research is needed
to understand whether the effects are driven by a specific group of children and the mechanisms
that explain why the intervention may or not have worked in the context where it was studied
not just whether the intervention worked or not.

Similarly, there is little evidence on the persistence of intervention effects after programs end. It
seems unlikely that interventions targeted at individual beneficiaries result in persistent
community-wide change (see Kremer and Miguel, 2007, for an example). But do programs that
explicitly aim to permanently change the dynamics in villages or industries through extensive
“integrated” packages of interventions and information campaigns effectively achieve sustained
change? In addition, there is little information on peer effects and local spillovers in child labor
demand, if markets are geographically segmented we would expect to see effects on non-
beneficiary children. This issue should be explored further.

                                                                                                  23
Moreover, the impact evaluations currently available focus, almost exclusively, on short-run
outcomes. Evidence on the long-run impact of programs aimed at addressing child labor is very
limited. Child labor potentially has negative effects on long-run outcomes in the labor market.
Moreover, mental and physical harm experienced because of child labor may manifest, persist
and severely affect children at later ages. Hence, information on long-run effects would help
generate a better understanding of child labor in general. Likewise, the cost-effectiveness of the
interventions discussed in this paper is seldom, if at all, addressed in the impact evaluations.
More information on the expenditure per child kept out of labor would make the comparison of
the different interventions more meaningful for policy makers. Detailed cost-effectiveness
estimates are available for interventions that aim to increase school participation. Unfortunately,
virtually none of the impact evaluations we discussed provides detailed information on the cost
of implementing the project under consideration and it is not possible to conduct a similar
exercise for child labor outcomes.

Finally, there are potentially important interventions for which there is scant or no evidence on
their impacts on child labor. Several review papers, on more than 100 interventions, on the
impacts of education programs on child schooling and learning, have shown ways in which the
barriers and constraints towards the accumulation of human capital could be alleviated (see
Glewwe and Muralidharan 2015, Snilstveit et al. 2016, Murnane and Ganimian 2014). Yet, few
papers report child labor outcomes. Given the close link between schooling and child labor,
providing information about child labor outcomes could provide useful lessons for both policy
makers and evaluators.




                                                                                                24
CITED REFERENCES

Angelucci, M., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015) “Microcredit Impacts: Evidence from a Randomized
       Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos Banco”, American
       Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 151–82.
Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, E. Bloom, E. King, and M. Kremer. (2002). “Vouchers for Private Schooling
       in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment.” American Economic
       Review, 92 (5): 1535-1558.
Attanasio, O., B. Augsburg, R. De Hass, E. Fitzsimons and H. Harmgart (2015) “The Impacts of
       Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in Mongolia” American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 90-122
Baland, J. and J. Robinson. (2000). “Is child labor efficient?” Journal of Political Economy,
       108(4):663–79.
Baland, J.M. and C. Duprez (2009) “Are labels effective against child labor?” Journal of Public
       Economics 93: 1125-1130.
Bandiera, O., R. Burgess, N. Das, S. Gulesci, I. Rasul, and M. Sulaiman. (2013). “Can Basic
       Entrepreneurship Transform the Lives of the Poor?” Working Paper.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Chattopadhyay, and J. Shapiro. (2011). “Targeting the Hard-Core Poor:
       An Impact Assessment.” Working paper.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2015a) “The Miracle of Microfinance?
       Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
       7(1): 22-53
Banerjee, A., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015b) “Six Randomized Evaluations of Microcredit:
       Introduction and Further Steps” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 1-
       21
Basu, K. and P. Van (1998) “The Economics of Child Labor” The American Economic Review, 88
       (3): 412-427
Basu, K. and Z. Tzannatos (2003) “The Global Child Labor Problem: What Do We Know and What
       Can We Do?” World Bank Economic Review, 17 (2): 147-173.
Beegle, K., R. H. Dehejia, and R. Gatti. (2006). “Child Labour and Agricultural Shocks.” Journal of
       Development Economics, 81 (1): 80-96.
Beegle, K., R. H. Dehejia, and R. Gatti. (2009). “Why Should We Care about Child Labor? The
       Education, Labor Market, and Health Consequences of Child Labor” The Journal of Human
       Resources, 44(4): 871-889
Behrman, J. (1999). Labor markets in developing countries. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.),
       Handbook of Labor Economics (1 ed.), 3: 2859- 2939. Elsevier.
Blattman, C. and J. Annan (2010) “The Consequences of Child Soldering” Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 92(4):882-898.
Blattman, C. and L. Ralston (2015) “Generating employment in poor and fragile states: Evidence
       from labor market and entrepreneurship programs” Mimeo.
Card, D., J. Kluve and A. Weber (2015) “What Works? A Meta-Analysis of Recent Active Labor
       Market Program Evaluations” NBER Working Paper No. 21431.
Cigno, A. and F. C. Rosati (2005). The Economics of Child Labour, Oxford University Press.


                                                                                                 25
Covarrubias, K., B. Davis, and P. Winters. (2012). “From Protection to Production: Productive
        Impacts of the Malawi Social Cash Transfer Scheme.” Journal of Development
        Effectiveness, 4 (1): 50–77.
Crepon, B., F. Devoto, E. Duflo, and W. Pariente (2015): “Estimating the Impact of Microcredit on
        Those Who Take It Up: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Morocco” American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7:123–50.
Currie, J. and F. Gahvari. (2008) “Transfers in Cash and In -Kind: Theory Meets the Data.” Journal
        of Economic Literature, 46 (2): 333-383.
Dammert, A. (2009) “Heterogeneous Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfers: Evidence from
        Nicaragua”, Economic Development and Cultural Change, 59(1):53-84.
Dammert, A. and J. Galdo (2013) “Child Labor Variation by Type of Respondent: Evidence from a
        Large-Scale Study”, World Development, 51(11):207-220.
Dammert, A., J. Galdo and D. Abebaw (2016) “How Well Do We Measure Child Labor? Evidence
        from Ethiopia” Working Paper.
De Hoop, J. and F. Rosati. (2014). “Does Promoting School Attendance Reduce Child Labour?
        Evidence from Burkina Faso’s BRIGHT Project.” Economics of Education Review 39: 78-96.
De Hoop, J. and F. Rosati (2014) “Cash transfers and child labor” The World Bank Research
        Observer, 29 (2): 1–33
De Hoop, J., P. Premand, F. Rosati and R. Vakis (2015) “Women's Economic Empowerment and
        Children’s Human Capital Accumulation”. UCW Working Paper
Del Carpio, X., N. Loayza and W. Tomoko, (2016). “The Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers on
        the Amount and Type of Child Labor,” World Development, 80(C): 33-47.
Dessy, S. and S. Pallage (2005) “A theory of the worst forms of child labour”, Economic Journal
        115: 68-87.
Dillon, A., Bardasi, E., Beegle, K., and Serneels, P. (2012). “Explaining variation in child labor
        statistics”. Journal of Development Economics. 98(1):136-147
Duflo, E., R. Glennerster, and M. Kremer. (2008). “Using Randomization in Development
        Economics: A Toolkit.” In Handbook of Development Economics, 4, Amsterdam, North-
        Holland.
Duryea, S., D. Lam, and D. Levison. (2007). “Effects of Economic Shocks on Children’s Employment
        and Schooling.” Journal of Development Economics, 84 (1): 188-214.
Edmonds, E. (2005). “Does Child Labor Decline with Improving Economic Status?” Journal of
        Human Resources, 40(1)
Edmonds, E. (2008) “Child Labour.” in T. P. Schultz and J. Strauss, eds., Handbook of Development
        Economics. Volume 4, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, North-Holland.
Edmonds, E. and N. Schady. (2012). “Poverty Alleviation and Child Labor.” American Economic
        Journal: Economic Policy, 4 (4): 100–24
Edmonds, E. and M. Shrestha (2014) “You get what you pay for: Schooling incentives and child
        labor” Journal of Development Economics, 111: 196–211.
Eswaran, M and A. Kotwal (1986) “Access to Capital and Agrarian Production
        Organisation.” Economic Journal, 96 (382), 482-498.
Filmer, D and N. Schady (2008) “Getting Girls into School: Evidence from a Scholarship Program
        in Cambodia,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 56: 581-617.


                                                                                               26
Filmer, D and N. Schady (2014) “The Medium-Term Effects of Scholarships in a Low-Income
        Country” Journal of Human Resources, 49(3): 663-694.
Fors, H. (2012) “Child Labour: A Review of Recent Theory and Evidence with Policy Implications.”
        Journal of Economic Surveys, 26(4): 570-593.
Galiani, S., and P. J. McEwan (2013). “The Heterogeneous Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers.”
        Journal of Public Economics 103: 85–96.
Gertler, P. J., S. Martinez, P. Premand, L. B. Rawlings, C. M. J. Vermeersch. (2011). Impact
        Evaluation in Practice, The World Bank, Washington DC.
Gertler, P. J., S. W. Martinez, and M. Rubio-Codina. (2012). “Investing Cash Transfers to Raise
        Long-term Living Standards.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(1): 164-
        192.
Giné, X. and G. Mansuri. (2011). “Money or Ideas? A Field Experiment on Constraints to
        Entrepreneurship in Rural Pakistan.” Working Paper.
Glewwe, P. and K. Muralidharan (2015) “Improving School Education Outcomes in Developing
        Countries: Evidence, Knowledge Gaps, and Policy Implications” Handbook of the
        Economics of Education, Volume 5 (forthcoming)
Guarcello, L., Kovrova, I., Lyon, S., Manacorda, M., and Rosati, F.C (2010). “Towards consistency
        in child labour measurement: assessing the comparability of estimates generated by
        different survey instruments” UCW Working Paper 54.
Guarcello. L, Mealli F., and F. C Rosati (2010) “Household vulnerability and child labor: the effect
        of shocks, credit rationing, and insurance” Journal of Population Economics January 2010,
        Volume 23, Issue 1, pp 169-198
Handa, S., Natali, L., Seidenfeld, D., Tembo, G. and the Zambia Cash Transfer Evaluation Team
        (2015). “The Impact of Zambia’s Unconditional Child Grant on Schoo ling and Work:
        Results from a large-scale social experiment”, Innocenti Working Paper No.2015-01,
        UNICEF Office of Research, Florence.
Hoddinott, J., D. O. Gilligan, and A. S. Taffesse. (2009). “The Impact of Ethiopia’s Productive Safety
        Net Program on Schooling and Child Labour.” Working Paper.
ICF (2013) “Impact Evaluation: Combating Worst Forms of Child Labor by Reinforcing Policy
        Response and Promoting Sustainable Livelihoods and Educational Opportunities in Egypt,
        2011–2012” Final Report (available at
        http://www.dol.gov/ilab/iclre/evaluations/egyptEval.htm)
International Labour Organization (2013) “Global Child Labour Trends 2008 to 2012”.
        International Labour Office, International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour
        (IPEC) – Geneva.
IEG (2011) “Evidence and Lessons Learned from Impact Evaluations on Social Safety Nets” The
        World Bank, Washington DC.
IPEC (2007) “Prevention of child recruitment and reintegration of children associated with
        armed forces and groups: Strategic framework for addressing the economic gap”
        Geneva, International Labour Office.
Jafarey, S. and Lahiri, S. (2002) “Will trade sanctions reduce child labour?: The role of credit
        markets” Journal of Development Economics 68(1): 137-156



                                                                                                   27
Juras, R (2014) “The effect of public employment on children’s work and school attendance:
        evidence from a social protection program in Argentina” IZA Journal of Labor and
        Development, 3(1):1-20
Karlan, D., and M. Valdivia. (2011). “Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact of Business Training on
        Microfinance Clients and Institutions.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (2): 510-
        527.
Kazianga, Harounan, Damien de Walque, and Harold Alderman (2012). “Educational and Child
        Labour Impacts of Two Food-for-Education Schemes: Evidence from a Randomised Trial
        in Rural Burkina Faso.” Journal of African Economies 21, 5:723-760.
Kazianga, H., D. Levy, L. L. Linden, and M. Sloan. (2013). “The Effects of ‘Girl-Friendly’ Schools:
        Evidence from the BRIGHT School Construction Program in Burkina Faso.” American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3 (5): 41-62.
Khandker, S. R., G. B. Koolwal, H. A. Samad. (2010). Handbook on Impact Evaluation: Quantitative
        Methods and Practices, The World Bank, Washington DC.
Kovrova, I and F.C. Rosati (2016) “Eliminating Child Labour in El Salvador through Economic
        Empowerment and Social Inclusion: Impact evaluation report”, UCW Working Paper
Kremer, M., E. Miguel and R. Thornton (2009) “Incentives to Learn” Review of Economics and
        Statistics, 91(3): 437-456
Landmann, A. and M. Frolich (2015). “Can Health-Insurance Help Prevent Child Labor? An Impact
        Evaluation from Pakistan.” Journal of Health Economics, 39(C): 51-59
Martinez, S., S. Naudeau, and V. Pereira. 2012. “The Promise of Preschool in Africa: A Randomized
        Impact Evaluation of Early Childhood Development in Rural Mozambique." Working
        Paper.
McCord, A. and R. Slater (2009). "Overview of Public Works Programmes in Sub-Saharan Africa."
        Report of the Overseas Development Institute.
Murnane, R. and A. Ganimian (2014). “Improving educational outcomes in developing countries:
        Lessons from rigorous evaluations. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Quisumbing, A.R., Yohannes, Y. 2005. “How fair is workfare? Gender, public works, and
        employment in rural Ethiopia.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
Ranjan, P. (2001) “Credit Constraints and the Phenomenon of Child Labor,” Journal of
        Development Economics, 64 (1): 81 – 102
Ravallion, M., and Q. Wodon. (2000). “Does Child Labour Displace Schooling? Evidence on
        Behavioural Responses to an Enrollment Subsidy.” Economic Journal, 110 (March): C158-
        C175.
Rosas, N. and S. Sabarwal (2016) “Public Works as a Productive Safety Net in a Post-Conflict
        Setting Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Sierra Leone” Policy Research Working
        Paper No 7580. World Bank.
Sadoulet, E., A. de Janvry, and B. Davis. 2001. “Cash Transfer Programs with Income Multipliers:
        PROCAMPO in Mexico.” World Development 29(6):1043-1056.
Schady, N. and M. C. Araujo. (2006). “Cash Transfers, Conditions, School Enrollment, and Child
        Work: Evidence from a Randomized Cash Transfer Experiment in Ecuador.” Policy
        Research Working Paper 3930. World Bank, Policy Research Department, Washington, DC
Shah, M. and B. Steinberg (2015) “Workfare and Human Capital Investment: Evidence from India”
        Mimeo

                                                                                                28
Skoufias, E. and S. Parker (2001) “Conditional Cash Transfers and Their Impact on Child Work and
        Schooling: Evidence from the PROGRESA Program in Mexico” Economia, 2(1):45-86.
Snilstveit, B., Stevenson, J., Menon, R., Phillips, D., Gallagher, E., Geleen, M., Jobse, H., Schmidt,
        T. and E. Jimenez (2016). “The impact of education programmes on learning and school
        participation in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review summary report”,
        3ie Systematic Review Summary 7. London: International Initiative for Impact Evaluation
        (3ie)
Subbarao, K., C. del Ninno, C. Andrews, and C. Rodríguez-Alas (2013). “Public Works as a Safety
        Net Design, Evidence, and Implementation” Washington, DC: World Bank.
Tarozzi, A., J. Desai, and K. Johnson (2015): “The Impacts of Microcredit: Evidence from Ethiopia,”
        American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7: 54–89.




                                                                                                   29
                                             Appendix: Summary of Methodology and Child Labor Measurement

   Topic         Country       Reference         Methodology                     Intervention                   Area          Child Labor Outcomes                 Age
                                                                 Participants in the PWP (adults with
                                                                 children under the age of 18 or a
                                                                 disabled adult) were required to engage
Public Works                                      Propensity
                Argentina     Juras (2014)                       in an eligible work or job-training activity   Urban   Work for pay over the past week           10-14
  Program                                       Score Matching
                                                                 no less than 4 hours per day, 5 days per
                                                                 week. Participants received a monthly
                                                                 wage of about US$50.
                                                                 Eligible women - identified to be the very
                                                                 poorest in selected rural communities-
                                                                 are offered a menu of possible business
Business and                                                                                                                                                      No age
                               Bandiera et                       activities, ranging from livestock rearing             Annual hours devoted to wage
 vocational    Bangladesh                            RCT                                                        Rural                                             range
                                al. (2013)                       to small retail operations, coupled with               labor or self-employment
  training                                                                                                                                                         given
                                                                 complementary and intensive training in
                                                                 running whichever business activity they
                                                                 choose.
                                                                 The Program offered households
                              Wodon and                          monthly food rations conditional on
  Food for                                                                                                              Children is engaged in economic
               Bangladesh      Ravallion              IV         school attendance of their primary             Rural                                              5-16
 Education                                                                                                              activities or household work
                                (2000)                           school-age children (85% of all classes
                                                                 each month).
                                                                 Schools were randomly assigned to three
                                                                 groups: school meals where lunch was
                              Kazianga, de
                                                                 served on each school day for both boys
  Food for                    Walque, and                                                                               Farm and Non-Farm Work.
               Burkina Faso                          RCT         and girls, take home rations where girls       Rural                                              6-15
 Education                     Alderman                                                                                 Household chores
                                                                 received 10kg of cereal flor conditional
                                 (2009)
                                                                 on a 90% attendance rate and a control
                                                                 group
                                                                 Along with school construction, the
                                                                                                                        Activities performed by the child
                                                                 program provided incentives to children
                                                                                                                        inside the household (collecting
  School                      Kazianga et al                     to attend school and a mechanism for
               Burkina Faso                          RDD                                                        Rural   firewood, cleaning, taking care of         6-12
Construction                     (2014)                          mobilizing community support for
                                                                                                                        siblings, among others) over the
                                                                 education in general, focusing on girls’
                                                                                                                        past 7 days
                                                                 education.


                                                                                                                                                             30
   Topic         Country       Reference       Methodology                 Intervention                   Area            Child Labor Outcomes                 Age
                                                                                                                  Children’s participation in
                                                             Along with school construction, the                  household chores and economic
                                                             program provided incentives to children              activities (work outside the
  School                      De Hoop and                    to attend school and a mechanism for                 household, work for pay outside
               Burkina Faso                       RDD                                                     Rural                                                5-12
Construction                  Rosati (2014)                  mobilizing community support for                     the household, work in the family
                                                             education in general, focusing on girls’             business or selling goods in the
                                                             education.                                           street, farming, and tending
                                                                                                                  animals) over the past 7 days
                                                             The program provided vouchers to low-
   School                     Angrist et al.                 income high school students renewable                Participation and hours worked, no           15 on
                Colombia                          RCT                                                     Urban
  Vouchers                      (2002)                       annually conditional on satisfactory                 definition on work given                    average
                                                             academic progress.
                                                                                                                  Children engaged in paid and
                                                             Recipient poor households received $15       Urban
                               Schady and                                                                         unpaid work in the family farm or
    UCT          Ecuador                           IV        per month per family without conditions       and                                                 6-17
                              Araujo (2006)                                                                       enterprise during the previous 7
                                                             attached. Transfers are made to women.       Rural
                                                                                                                  days.
                                                                                                                  Children engaged in paid (outside
                                                             Recipient poor households received $15       Urban   the child's home) and unpaid (work
                              Edmonds and
    UCT          Ecuador                           IV        per month per family without conditions       and    in the family farm or enterprise,           11-16
                              Schady (2012)
                                                             attached.                                    Rural   chores) employment during the
                                                                                                                  previous 7 days.
                                                             Mothers of child laborers were offered: i)
                                                             vocational training ii) business training
                                                             and preparation of a business plan; and
                                                             iii) a starting kit to kick-start the
Business and
                              Kovrova and                    enterprise (value between US$ 100 and                Economic activities for pay or
 vocational    El Salvador                        RDD                                                     Urban                                                5-15
                              Rosati (2016)                  US$ 300/).                                           unpaid, household chores
  training
                                                             Children not enrolled in school were
                                                             offered training to help them enter
                                                             school at the appropriate level for their
                                                             age.
                                                             Survey design was randomized into 2
                                                             groups i) proxy answers the questions on
 Child Labor                  Dammert et                                                                          Participation in economic activities
                 Ethiopia                         RCT        child labor ii) self reported information    Rural                                               6 – 14
Measurement                    al. (2016)                                                                         over the past week
                                                             on child labor.



                                                                                                                                                         31
   Topic       Country     Reference       Methodology                   Intervention                Area          Child Labor Outcomes                 Age
                                                         The PWP pays individuals from selected
                                                         beneficiary households 6 birr ($US 0.61)
                                                         per day or food of equivalent value (at
                                                         2005 prices) to work on labor-intensive
                                                         projects designed to build community
                                                         assets. Each beneficiary household was              Hours worked in household
                          Hoddinott,
                                            Nearest      allocated a labor quota of up to 30 days            agricultural income-generating
Public Works              Giligan, and
               Ethiopia                     Neighbor     of work for each household member per       Rural   activities, household chores, or           6-16
  Program                  Taffesse
                                            Matching     year, for a maximum transfer of 180 birr            hours worked for wages outside the
                             (2009)
                                                         per member per year. The program is                 household during past week
                                                         complemented by a series of food
                                                         security activities, such as access to
                                                         credit, agricultural extension, advice on
                                                         food crop production, and livestock
                                                         production, among others.
                                                                                                             Work is defined as an activity
                                                                                                             related to crop cultivation, care of
                                                                                                             livestock, fishing, mining,
                                                                                                             manufacture and processing, retail
                                                         Local administrative units were randomly
                                                                                                             and wholesale trade, finance, public
                                                         assigned to one of four groups:
                                                                                                             administration, education, health,
                                                         microlending only, family planning
                                                                                                             and social services or other
                          Tarozzi et al.                 services only, both, or none (control).
Microfinance   Ethiopia                       RCT                                                    Rural   services. The survey recorded the          10-15
                             (2015)                      intervention. The program expansion
                                                                                                             two most important activities the
                                                         offering group lending contracts was
                                                                                                             individual was involved in during
                                                         supposed to target poor women
                                                                                                             the previous 12 months, the
                                                         borrowers, but it was not enforced.
                                                                                                             number of weeks spent in such
                                                                                                             activities, the number of days
                                                                                                             usually spent per week as well as
                                                                                                             the number of hours spent per day.
                                                         The Programa de Asignación Familiar
                                                         (PRAF), offered a flat transfer                     Work outside home (paid), unpaid
                          Galiani and
                                                         (irrespective of household size) to poor            in the family farm/business or work
    CCT        Honduras    McEwan             RCT                                                    Rural                                              6-12
                                                         household conditional on children's                 inside the home (children worked
                            (2013)
                                                         school enrollment and attendance as                 exclusively on household chores).
                                                         well as health clinic attendance.


                                                                                                                                                   32
   Topic       Country   Reference      Methodology                  Intervention                 Area            Child Labor Outcomes                Age
                                                      The PWP provides a legal guarantee of               Based on reported child's primary
                          Shah and                    up to 100 days of annual employment at              activity on productive work,
Public Works
                India     Steinberg         DID       the statutory minimum wage rate to          Rural   domestic work, working on the               5-16
  Program
                            (2015)                    rural households willing to supply manual           household enterprise, or working
                                                      labor on local public works                         outside the home for payment
                                                      Poorest households were offered                     Time (minutes) spent performing
Business and                                                                                                                                         No age
                         Banerjee et                  transfer of productive assets (e.g.                 household chores and working in
 vocational     India                      RCT                                                    Rural                                              range
                          al. (2011)                  livestock), additional training, and                the past 24 hours, no definition of
  training                                                                                                                                            given
                                                      integration into microfinance groups                work given
                                                      Neighborhoods were randomly selected
                                                      for the opening of a MFI branch offering
                                                      group lending contracts. Clients must be
                                                      female aged 18 to 59 who have resided               Hours worked per child over the
                         Banerjee et
Microfinance    India                      RCT        in the same area for at least one year,     Urban   past 7 days (no definition of work          5-15
                          al. (2015)
                                                      and at least 80 percent of women in a               given)
                                                      group must own their home. Groups are
                                                      formed by women themselves, not by
                                                      the MFI.
                                                      The unconditional cash transfer
                                                      programme was designed to improve
                                                      school enrolment and attendance and
                                                      the health and nutrition of children
                                                      among the poorest 10 per cent of
                                                      households in Malawi. The transfer
                                                      ranges from US$4 per month for a
                                                                                                          Participation in household chores,
                                                      household with one eligible member to
                                                                                                          domestic work outside the
                         Covarrubias                  US$13 per month for households with
    UCT        Malawi                    PSM, DID                                                 Rural   household, paid work, self-                 4-17
                         et al (2012)                 four or more eligible members. In
                                                                                                          employment, and unpaid family
                                                      addition, the programme offers a
                                                                                                          farm/business activities
                                                      schooling attendance bonus ranging from
                                                      US$1.30 per month for primary school
                                                      age children to US$2.60 per month for
                                                      secondary school age children.




                                                                                                                                                33
   Topic       Country     Reference      Methodology                  Intervention                   Area           Child Labor Outcomes                    Age
                                                        The MFI targets women who operate a
                                                        business or are interested in starting one.
                                                        Treatment clusters received access to         Urban   Participation in an economic
                          Angelucci et
Microfinance   Mexico                        RCT        credit (group lending contract) and door-      and    activity, i.e. report having a job or a        4-17
                           al. (2015)
                                                        to-door loan promotion, whereas control       Rural   business
                                                        clusters were not given access to credit
                                                        and received no loan promotion
                                                                                                              Includes all workers who report
                                                                                                              that they worked over the previous
                                                                                                              week (whether paid or unpaid). It
                                                        The PROGRESA program offered
                                                                                                              also includes participation in
                                                        transfers to poor household conditional
                                                                                                              informal activities such as selling a
                          Skoufias and                  on children's school enrollment and
    CCT        Mexico                        RCT                                                      Rural   product; helping in family business;           8-17
                          Parker (2001)                 attendance, as well as health clinic
                                                                                                              making products to sell; washing,
                                                        attendance. Transfers were given to
                                                                                                              cooking or ironing; and working in
                                                        mothers.
                                                                                                              agriculture activities or caring for
                                                                                                              animals. Domestic activities are not
                                                                                                              included in this definition of work.
                                                        Villages were randomly assigned to
                                                                                                              Hours worked over the past 7 days
                          Attanazio et                  obtain access to group loans, individual
Microfinance   Mongolia                      RCT                                                      Rural   in self-employment, household                  6-15
                           al (2015)                    loans, or no loans. Loans were targeted
                                                                                                              business, and other activities
                                                        at poor females
                                                        Villages were randomly selected for the
                                                        opening of a MFI branch offering group
                                                        lending contracts. To be eligible for a
                                                        group liability loan, the applicant must be
                                                        between 18 and 70 years old, have a
                                                        residency certificate, and have been
                                                                                                              Hours worked over the past 7 days
                          Crepon et al.                 running an economic activity other than
Microfinance   Morocco                       RCT                                                      Rural   in self-employment, outside                    6-15
                             (2015)                     no livestock agriculture for at least 12
                                                                                                              activities and housework.
                                                        months.




                                                                                                                                                        34
   Topic        Country      Reference    Methodology                   Intervention                 Area          Child Labor Outcomes             Age
                                                        Communities received technical
                                                        assistance and materials for the
                                                        construction of up to three classrooms
                                                        with capacity for 35 children each. In
                                                        addition, each community received
                                                        technical assistance and materials to
                             Martinez,                  build playgrounds, child-sized latrines,             Hours worked on family plot,
 Preschool                  Naudeau and                 and a washing station. Each class was                household chores and caring for
               Mozambique                    RCT                                                     Rural                                           5-9
construction                  Pereira                   staffed with two volunteer teachers                  other household members during
                               (2012)                   selected by the school management                    the previous week
                                                        committee. Finally, parents and
                                                        caregivers of preschoolers in the
                                                        community had the opportunity to
                                                        participate in monthly parenting
                                                        meetings focusing on thematic topics,
                                                        including health, nutrition, and literacy.
                                                        The first intervention provided
                                                        scholarships for child's schooling-related
                                                        costs (such as fees, tuition, uniforms,
                            Edmonds and                 books and other supplies). The second
                                                                                                             Child involvement in weaving 7
    CCT          Nepal        Shreshta       RCT        intervention provided the scholarship        Rural                                          10-16
                                                                                                             days prior to the survey date
                               (2014)                   and an additional stipend conditional on
                                                        regular attendance. Children in the
                                                        control group received no schooling-
                                                        related assistance.
                                                        The program offered households with at
                                                        least one female member 16 to 60 years
                                                        old a package of benefits that included
                                                        capital transfers (cash, seeds, or
Business and                                            livestock); technical assistance and
                            De Hoop et                                                                       Paid or unpaid engagement in
 vocational     Nicaragua                    RCT        training in business plan development,       Rural                                          8-17
                             al. (2015)                                                                      economic activities
  training                                              financial literacy, and technical skills.




                                                                                                                                               35
    Topic        Country      Reference    Methodology                  Intervention                   Area           Child Labor Outcomes                  Age
                                                         The Atencion a la Crisis program consists
                                                         of three packages of cash transfers to
                                                         poor households over a one year period
                                                                                                               The child labor measure is based on
                                                         (1) a cash transfer conditional on children
                                                                                                               a recorded diary
                                                         attending school and health service
                             Del Carpio,                                                                       of various types of activities, which
                                                         regularly (2) CCT plus a scholarship for
     CCT         Nicaragua   Loayza and       RCT                                                      Rural   are then aggregated into                     8-15
                                                         one member of the household (age 16 or
                             Wada (2016)                                                                       hours of work per week devoted to
                                                         above) to attend an occupational training
                                                                                                               traditional farming, skill forming
                                                         course and (3) CCT plus a household
                                                                                                               activities, and household chores.
                                                         grant for the creation of a micro business
                                                         or a new economic and productive
                                                         activity.
                                                                                                               Child labor refers to children who
                                                         The Red de Proteccion Social (RPS)
                                                                                                               are engaged in market work, which
                                                         offered a flat transfer (irrespective of
                                                                                                               includes wage employment, self-
                              Dammert                    household size) to poor household
     CCT         Nicaragua                    RCT                                                      Rural   employment,                                  7-13
                               (2009)                    conditional on children's school
                                                                                                               agriculture, unpaid work in a family
                                                         enrollment and attendance as well as
                                                                                                               business, and helping on the family
                                                         health clinic attendance.
                                                                                                               farm
                                                         Microfinance rural clients were offered
                              Giné and                   an eight-day business training course and
   Business
                 Pakistan     Mansuri         RCT        access to a loan lottery where eligible       Rural   Economic activities for pay                  9-15
   Training
                               (2011)                    clients could borrow up to 7 times the
                                                         average loan size.
                                                         Analyzes the extension of an accident
                                                         and health insurance scheme offered by                ILO definition of child labor, it
                                                         the National Rural Support                            includes: i)all children working in
                             Landmann
                                                         Program(NRSP), a large microfinance                   hazardous occupations and ii) those
Microinsurance   Pakistan    and Frolich      RCT                                                      Rural                                                5-17
                                                         institution in Pakistan, which is a                   woking on non-hazardous
                               (2015)
                                                         mandatory insurance for all clients, their            occupations depending on the
                                                         spouses and their children below 18                   number of hours and age
                                                         years
                                                                                                               Participation and hours worked, not
                             Karlan and                  Pre-existing lending groups were offered      Urban
   Business                                                                                                    definition of work given
                   Peru       Valdivia        RCT        training on general business skills as part    and                                                 6-15
   Training
                               (2010)                    of their mandatory weekly meetings.           Rural


                                                                                                                                                       36
   Topic         Country      Reference       Methodology                  Intervention                    Area           Child Labor Outcomes                 Age
                                                            The PWP was targeted at individuals in
                                                            the 15 – 35 year age group in poor and
                              Rosas and                                                                    Urban
Public Works                                                vulnerable communities. Beneficiaries                  Participation in paid activities in the
               Sierra Leone   Sabarwal           RCT                                                        and                                                6-14
  Program                                                   were entitled to a minimum of 50 days                  last 12 months
                               (2016)                                                                      Rural
                                                            and a maximum of 75 days of work at a
                                                            daily wage rate of about US$1.80.
                                                            Survey design was randomized into 4
                                                            groups (i)two different questionnaire
                                                            designs (detailed and short) and (ii)two       Urban
 Child Labor                  Dillon et al.                                                                        Participation in economic activities
                Tanzania                         RCT        respondent types (proxy and self report).       and                                                10–15
Measurement                      (2012)                                                                            over the past week
                                                            self-reporting. Use of a short module          Rural
                                                            compared with a more detailed
                                                            questionnaire
                                                            Program targets any household with a
                                                            child under 3 years old in three districts
                                                            with high poverty and rates of infant
                              Handa et al                   mortality and under-nutrition. Recipient               Children engaged in paid and
    UCT          Zambia                          RCT                                                       Rural                                               4-14
                                (2015)                      households receive a flat (i.e. irrespective           unpaid work activities
                                                            of household size) transfer of US$12 a
                                                            month. There are no conditions to
                                                            receive the money.




                                                                                                                                                          37
