                                                    WPS7893


Policy Research Working Paper                      7893




    Demographic Change and Development
                          A Global Typology

                               S. Amer Ahmed
                                Marcio Cruz
                                Bryce Quillin
                              Philip Schellekens




Development Economics
Development Prospects Group
November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7893


  Abstract
  Demographic change can be a positive contributor to                                in the near future. The third group comprises mostly
  development at any stage of demographic transition. This                           upper-middle-income countries that experienced rapid fer-
  paper revisits the literature on the determinants and eco-                         tility declines in the 1960s, and where working age people
  nomic impacts of demographic change, and presents a                                will be a shrinking share of the population in the coming
  new global typology that classifies countries into four cat-                       decade. The last group is made up of mostly high-income
  egories based on demographic characteristics and future                            countries that have some of the highest shares of elderly
  development potential. In the first group are high-fertility,                      in the world, and below-replacement fertility rates since
  low-income countries that are lagging in many human                                at least the 1980s. The typology helps identify develop-
  development indicators. In the second group are mostly                             ment policy priorities for countries in different stages of
  low- and lower-middle-income countries where fertility                             demographic transition, and opportunities through global-
  rates have started falling recently and where changes in                           ization due to demographic differences between countries.
  age structure offer tremendous opportunity for growth




  This paper is a product of the Development Prospects Group, Development Economics. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may
  be contacted at at sahmed20@worldbank.org, marciocruz@worldbank.org, bquillin@worldbank.org, and pschellekens@
  worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
             Demographic Change and Development: A Global Typology

                S. Amer Ahmed, Marcio Cruz, Bryce Quillin, and Philip Schellekens1




Keywords: demographic change, demographic dividend, economic development
JEL: I3, J1, O1


Acknowledgements: The authors are grateful to Pinyi Chen and Huade Huo for very able research assistance. Andrew
Mason and Ron Lee provided critical input in the development of the typology presented in this paper. The authors
are particularly grateful for helpful comments provided by Christian Eigen-Zucchi, Michele Gragnolati, Hans Lofgren,
Maryla Maliszewska, and Ayhan Kose. This is a background paper for the Global Monitoring Report 2015/2016
produced by the World Bank Group and International Monetary Fund. This work was partially supported by the
Knowledge for Change Partnership multi-donor trust fund. This paper also reflects feedback and comments provided
by reviewers in the World Bank Group and International Monetary during the preparation of the Global Monitoring
Report.




1
 Development Prospects Group of the World Bank, Washington DC. The authors can be contacted at
sahmed20@worldbank, marciocruz@worldbank.org, bquillin@worldbank.org, and pschellekens@worldbank.org.
1. Introduction

Demographic change and development is a two-way relationship. Demographic change affects key
intermediate outcomes of development, such as the pace of economic growth per capita, savings
and human capital, and these intermediate outcomes in turn influence demographic change. The
three fundamental factors driving changing population size and age structure - mortality, fertility,
and migration across and within countries - are closely tied to development progress.
Concomitantly, changes in the age structure of the population also affect the ratio of potential
workers per potential consumers, with direct implications for per capita growth, savings, and
poverty.

This relationship between demography and development is important as the world's population is
growing more slowly and aging. Between 1950 and 2015, the global population grew by 191
percent, from 2.5 billion to almost 7.3 billion.2 Population growth was the fastest from the mid-
1950s through the mid-1970s, causing development policy discussions to be marked by concerns
about unfettered population growth and a perceived need to control the “population bomb”
popularized by Ehrlich (1968) and revisited in Ehrlich and Ehrlich (2009). The implication of these
demographic trends were alarming enough that they received substantial attention in policy
discussions, as illustrated by population change and development being the theme of the World
Development Report 1984 (World Bank 1984). Then, in the 1990s, population growth started to
fall: by 2020 the average annual growth rate is expected to fall below 1 percent, down from more
than 2 percent in the late 1960s. These new demographic trends renewed the attention of the
development community towards this topic, now focusing on global challenges and opportunities
due to disparities on demographic change across countries (Bussolo, Koettl, and Sinnott 2015;
Caning, Raja and Yazbeck 2015; World Bank 2015a, 2015b, 2015c).

In addition, global demographic trends are at a turning point: the proportion of people ages 15 to
64 – a practical definition of the working age population for international comparison - rose till
reaching a peak in 2012 and is now starting to fall again. The rise in the number of dependents per
person of working age is driven mainly by an increase in the elderly as a share of the population.
This shift in the pace of population growth and age structure has also shifted the policy discussion
on the links between development and demography towards concerns regarding the economic
effects of a shrinking working age population.

However, global trends mask wide differences at the country level both in their current
demographic profiles and in the direction and pace of future change. Many of today’s high-income
countries have had decades of low fertility rates and high life expectancies. In contrast, many
developing countries have seen declines in their fertility rates only more recently, with some of

2
  Based on data from the World Population Prospects 2015 Revision (United Nations 2015). All population data
reported in this paper are from UN (2015), unless otherwise specified.
                                                       2
the poorest countries still experiencing persistently high fertility. As a result, half of the world’s
population will be in countries that will experience slowdowns in population growth with rising
shares of the elderly over the coming decades (albeit at different paces). The other half will live in
countries with relatively young populations, whose high fertility is driving global population
growth.

This paper revisits the main findings of the literature on the determinants and economic impacts
of demographic change, and presents a new global typology that classifies countries into four
categories based on the concept of demographic dividends. It then discusses the economic and
development challenges facing the countries in each of the four groups. The analysis illustrates
how development progress varies with key demographic characteristics. The paper also provides
insights into development policy priorities for countries based on their demographic
characteristics, built on summarizing key pieces from the literature discussing policy implications
on demographic change and development. In a departure from the policy discussions of
demographic change and development in the literature, this paper also identifies how countries can
take advantage of demographic disparities across countries through trade, migration, the cross-
border flow of short- and long-term capital investment.

The next section summarizes the main findings of the literature on the drivers of demographic
change and its economic effects. Section 3 discusses how the new global typology is constructed
and provides the distribution of countries in a global map based on the new typology. Section 4
discusses the patterns that emerge when this typology is applied to viewing development
challenges and opportunities by taking into account their demographic characteristics. Section 5
discusses how countries can take advantage of disparities in demographic change to boost
development through facilitating trade, migration, and capital flows. Section 6 concludes and
provide some caveats to use of the typology.


2. Development and demographic change: What do we know about this relationship?

This section reviews the main findings of the literature on development and demographic change,
starting with a review of the main drivers of demographic change. It will present evidence on how
the relationship between demographic change and development suggests that changes in income,
public health, and education are key drivers of demographic change. The path of birth and death
rates determines the natural growth of a population. But population growth is also affected by
migration (both international and internal), as it influences age structure directly as people move
and indirectly by impacting fertility in both the migrant-sending and migrant-receiving countries.
Mortality, fertility, and migration also have direct effects on age structure, which defines the share
of children, elderly, and working age people in the total population, affecting countries’ capacity
to produce, save and invest.

                                                  3
2.1 Main drivers of demographic change

A first key driver of demographic change is the mortality rate. The initial decline in mortality that
occurs as part of the demographic transition is associated with the start of an epidemiological
transition. A reduction in the mortality rate of a population is normally accompanied by a decline
in the incidence of infectious and contagious diseases, particularly among children under age five.
This decline, in turn, increases the share of the population dying from chronic and degenerative
diseases. Increased use of vaccinations against fatal diseases, together with improved hygiene and
sanitation and better access to clean water, typically contribute to the initial declines in mortality
rates, as was first observed in Europe in the 1700s (Bloom and Williamson 1998; Cutler, Deaton,
and Lleras-Muney 2006). Mortality began to decline only relatively recently in developing
countries and remains high in low-income countries. In low-income countries, it is still driven by
infectious diseases and neonatal complications (figure 1). Neonatal disorders, diarrhea, lower
respiratory infections and other infections are the cause of more than half of deaths in children
under age six. In Sub-Saharan African countries, neglected tropical diseases (NTDs), malaria,
HIV, and tuberculosis represented about 50 percent of deaths between 1990 and 2010.3

Mortality rates across countries are strongly influenced by access to and supply of public health
services. Different from other vital events that are subject to individual choice, death can be a
consequence of several factors that are not under an individual’s control (Soares 2005). For
example, East Asia experienced a particularly fast decline in child mortality, and indeed mortality
at all ages, which led to an increase in life expectancy from 61.5 to 76.6 years between 1960 and
1992 (World Bank, 2015c). Among the possible explanations for this achievement is widespread
access to new public health programs and medical knowledge and technologies (Bloom and
Williamson 1998). Although there is a clear association between individuals’ income and mortality
outcomes, the access to new technologies and public health improvements played a key role in
reducing mortality rates. Improving nutrition, public health quality and access, urbanization,
vaccination, and medical treatments are among the main sources of reduction in infectious diseases
and child mortality (Fogel 1997; Cutler Deaton, and Lleras-Munry 2006; Chaturvedi, De Costa
and Ravem 2015).




3
    NTDs are a group of diseases that thrive mainly among the poorest populations (WHO 2015).
                                                         4
Figure 1 The causes of death vary dramatically across development level
a. Child deaths account for the vast majority of deaths in low-income countries
Number of deaths in low-income countries in 2010, millions




b. Almost all deaths in high-income countries are due to cancer, cardio or circulatory diseases or other non-
  communicable diseases among the elderly
Number of deaths in high-income countries in 2010, millions




Source: World Bank staff, based on data from The Global Burden of Disease (GBD) Study 2010 Mortality Results, 2010, both
sexes, available for 179 countries and documented in Wang and others (2013).


As countries move to the later stages of demographic transition and average life expectancies rise,
chronic and degenerative diseases become the primary causes of death. The epidemiological
transition thus continues. While non-communicable diseases are challenges for countries across
the development spectrum, high-income country populations aged 64 or more accounted for 79
percent of deaths in 2010. These deaths occurred almost entirely from cancer, cardiovascular
issues, and other chronic conditions, and these countries accounted for about 43 percent of global
deaths among individuals above 80 years old. Thus, to improve life expectancy, high-income
countries must focus on improving health at older ages. Addressing the chronic diseases most
commonly responsible for morbidity at older ages is much costlier than addressing the infectious
and contagious diseases that afflict young children in low-income countries, however, especially
considering the impact on life expectancy.

A second key driver of demographic change is the fertility rate. Declining infant mortality rates
and increasing educational attainment, life expectancy, and income are all associated with a
reduction in total fertility. A reduction in infant mortality rates generally has a lagged effect on
reducing fertility, however, largely because of reproductive decisions that are based on
“replacement” of deceased children and the “insurance” of having children in case some do not



                                                              5
survive to adulthood.4 Improvements in child health may thus be a precursor to lower rates of
fertility. In contrast, education (especially of females) and household income are negatively
correlated with fertility. Reher (2011), Soares (2005), and Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) discuss
the importance of infant mortality for fertility. However, the empirical literature testing the
suggested three main determinants of long-term demographic transition does not converge in its
conclusions. Murtin (2013) finds that education is more robust than infant mortality, income, and
other variables in determining a fertility transition. Herzer, Strulik, and Vollmer (2012), on the
other hand, suggest that mortality changes and income growth are the most important drivers of
changes in fertility rate, while Angeles (2010) suggests that reductions in fertility rate are driven
mostly by reductions in mortality rate.

There are two potential income-related mechanisms that underlie the “quality” versus “quantity”
trade-off that parents face. First, as parents’ educational attainment rises—particularly that of
women—the opportunity cost of having children rises. That alone could encourage parents to have
fewer children or to delay having children (Galor 1999; Galor and Weil 2000). Second, as incomes
rise, parents could choose to have more children and also invest more in the human capital of their
children. Empirical evidence suggests however, that as incomes rise, families choose to have fewer
but more highly educated children. This behavior would suggest that parent’s elasticity of demand
for quality is higher than for quantity.5

The labor market implications of rising levels of education, particularly for women, influence
fertility. Bloom et al. (2009) suggest that high fertility rates may limit female education and labor
force participation and a single birth may reduce a woman’s labor supply by almost two years
during her reproductive life. As women become more educated, the opportunity cost of not
participating in the labor market rises, leading to either fewer or later births, although the presence
or absence of gender empowerment also plays a role in the participation of women in the labor
force. While higher educational attainment (especially of females) and higher household income
are both associated with declines in fertility, the importance of education (particularly primary
education) in affecting fertility seems to be more robust in analyses that aim to identify a causal
relationship between fertility and education.


A third key driver of demographic change is migration across and within countries. Migration can
change age structure and population growth substantially and is driven by a range of “push” and
“pull” factors. Push factors include incentives that encourage migration away from a given place
(be it a country or subnational region), while pull factors are those that encourage migration to a
given place. Push and pull factors include economic inequalities (differences in wages,

4
  The intuition is that with their children more likely to survive infancy and childhood, parents will reduce their
number of births to maintain the same net number of children.
5
  There is a broad literature on this topic, although Becker (1960) and Becker and Lewis (1973) are among the best-
known studies.
                                                         6
employment prospects, or access to services) and inequalities defined more broadly (such as
differences regarding security from physical harm, violation of human rights, and limitations on
religious or personal freedoms) (Hansen and Spilimbergo 1999; Harris and Todaro 1970; Mayda
2010; Molho 1986).

As migrant-sending countries develop and inequality within recipient countries declines, the
economic incentives for migration could become less pronounced. High-income countries tend to
be the most popular destinations for migrants, and most migrants come from developing
countries (Ahmed, Go, and Willenbockel 2016).6 The broader impact of development on
migration, however, depends on the patterns of growth. If economic development does not
promote employment growth, then it has the potential to exacerbate the push factors to migrate
out.7 Massey (1988) provides examples of how economic development characterized by rapid
structural transformation has the potential to create unemployment in rural—primarily
agriculture-dependent—areas, increasing the incentives to migrate. If, on the other hand, growth
in a country is on a path of eventual convergence with incomes in the high-income countries,
there may be a reduction in the pull factors. In parallel, as fertility rates fall and working age
population growth slows in developing countries, push pressures for emigration might also
decline. Conflict presents another major driver of internal and international migration, with the
number of forced migrants now at the highest level since World War II: 65.3 million people were
displaced in 2015, up from 59.5 million in the previous year (UNHCR 2016).


2.2 Effects of demographic change on development outcomes

Changes in age structure have been recognized as potentially having a significant feedback effect
on income per capita growth, savings, and poverty reduction.8 Most famously, demographic
transition in East Asia has been credited with facilitating the region’s rapid income growth since
the 1960s (Bloom and Williamson 1998; Bloom et al. 2000; Higgins and Williamson 1997). At
the same time, countries that are still early in the transition process, as is the case for many high-
fertility African countries, are considered to have tremendous potential in accelerating income per
capita growth in coming decades as fertility rates fall (Eastwood and Lipton 2011; Ahmed et al.
2016). More recently, Cruz and Ahmed (2016) estimate that a 1 percentage point change in the
working age population share of a country can increase GDP per capita growth by 1.5 percentage
points and the savings share of GDP by 0.8 percentage points, while reducing poverty headcount
rates by 0.76 percentage points, on average.

6
  Recent evidence from Artuc et al. (2015) suggests that there may be some recent shifts in the trends in migration
from developing countries to developed countries, with non-OECD destinations accounting for a third of skilled
migration destinations.
7
  Massey (1988) provides examples of how economic development characterized by rapid structural transformation
has the potential to create unemployment in rural areas, increasing the incentives to migrate.
8
  This is an extensive literature which includes, among others, Bloom and Canning (2004), Higgins and Williamson
(1997), Kelley and Schmidt (1995, 2005, 2007), and World Bank (2013a).
                                                        7
Examinations of the development implications of demographic transition are not restricted to
countries early in the transition process however. In contrast to the potential to boost economic
growth in many developing countries, demographic change has been found to be a potential drag
to economic growth in aging – and generally richer – economies. McKibbin (2006) conducts an
analysis for several economies and finds that demographic change can lead to lower GDP for many
high-income countries. For example, Japan’s GDP in 2050 is projected to be 28 percent smaller
than it was in 1985. In these aging economies, the policy issues arising from demographics are
thus fundamentally different from those of countries that are relatively younger, and tend to focus
on issues like potentially slower labor supply growth, weakening economic dynamism, fiscal
sustainability of old-age support systems, and long-term care, inter alia. Aging in advanced
economies is also expected to be a drag on global growth through international spillover effects
(IMF 2015). Manyika et al. (2015) consider the impact of demographic change on growth for a
longer time horizon and estimate that the declining working age population share could reduce the
global average income per capita by 20 percent over 2015-65.

Lee and Mason (2006) linked demography and development together through the concepts of the
first and second demographic dividends, which can be realized at different stages of demographic
transition. These concepts are related to the demographic transition model (DTM), which describes
the transition of populations from high to low fertility and mortality rates. This transition generally
parallels the economic development of a country (Szreter 1993). The model consists of at least
four distinct phases, with countries effectively moving from high fertility and low life expectancy
to low fertility and high life expectancy as they move through the demographic transition. At the
same time, they go from high proportions of children and few elderly to low proportions of children
and more elderly. Fertility rates and mortality rates are both high in the first stage, where the
population tends to be younger and population growth stable but low. If mortality rates fall but
fertility rates remain high, as in the second phase, then population growth accelerates, with
growing numbers of young and rising youth dependency. In the third stage, fertility rates also begin
to decline, and population growth slows. After a long period of lower fertility, the growth rate of
the working age population slows and the aged dependency ratio begins to rise. When fertility
rates and mortality rates reach low levels, population growth also stabilizes at a low rate, in the
fourth stage of the DTM.

The first demographic dividend may be realized when countries are transitioning through the early
stages when their working age population shares are rising and their child and aged dependency
ratios are low. The rising working age population shares suggest that even if employment rates are
constant, the proportion of income-earners will rise relative to the total number of consumers in
the economy. The declining dependency ratios will also mean that there will be more resources
available to be spent on consumption and investment. All of these will almost immediately boost
aggregate growth, consumption, and subsequently poverty reduction. Mason and Kinugasa (2007)

                                                  8
suggest that the contribution of the first demographic dividend explains between 9.2 to 15.5
percent of per capita economic growth over the 1960–2000 period for a wide sample of countries.
Looking forward, Ashraf, Weil and Wilde (2013) use simulation methods to show for the case of
Nigeria that differences in fertility rates exemplified by the United Nations’ World Population
Prospects’ (UN WPP) medium- and low-fertility variants can mean a difference in output per
capita of 5.6 percent at a 20-year horizon and 11.9 percent at a 50-year horizon. With a global
simulation model, Ahmed et al. (2016) show that the demographic dividend could account for 11–
15% of gross domestic product (GDP) volume growth by 2030 for Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole.

The second demographic dividend arises and can continue as countries enter the later stages of the
demographic transition. When working age populations were rising and high, and dependency
ratios are low, there is scope for economies to potentially save more, and invest more in both
physical and human capital. For example, Loayza, Schmitt-Hevel and Serven (2000) found that an
increase of 1 point in the old-age dependency would lead to a reduction of 0.66 percentage point
in the ratio between gross private savings and gross private disposable income. An increase of 1
point in the young dependency ratio would lead to reduction of 0.3 percentage point, using a similar
specification. There have been many studies finding that lower child dependency leads to higher
saving rates (Mason 1987; Kelley and Schmidt 2005; Higgins and Williamson 1997; and Kinugasa
and Mason 2005). However, there is less consensus on the effect of the aged dependency ratio on
savings. Since people expect to live longer, they may save more during the economically active
portion of their lives (Kinugasa and Mason 2007; Attanasio and Szekely 2000, and Mason et al.
2011). Lower fertility rates leading to lower child dependency ratios, are also associated with more
investment in human capital (Becker, 1960; Soares, 2005). These additional investments on
physical and human capital can lead to a permanent increase in productivity which can persist long
after the working age population shares have begun to decline and populations begin to age.

The realization of these demographic dividends is not automatic. Given the potential for
demographic change to boost development progress, the literature has extensively explored the
policy and institutional conditions necessary for countries to take advantage of demographic
transition from a period of high to low fertility (Bloom, Canning and Sevilla 2003). Recent
analyses from the World Bank have examined how Sub-Saharan African economies can take
advantage of their large and growing working age populations (Ahmed and Cruz 2016; Canning
Raja, and Yazbeck 2015; World Bank 2015b, 2016). For example, in a scenario analysis, Ahmed
and Cruz (2016) finds that 35 to 75 percent of poverty reduction in those Southern African
economies between 2015 and 2050 could be attributed to changes in age-structure in those
economies, without any improvements in policy outcomes like employment rates. However, the
magnitude of the demographic dividends could be greater if countries are able to achieve policy
outcomes in the areas of education, savings- investment, and employment. The paper finds that
different policy outcomes interacting with the shifting age structures in different ways suggest
quantitatively different economic impacts despite qualitatively similar policies.

                                                 9
3. A new typology of demographic change and development

Demographic dividends thus provide a powerful conceptual framework to delineate the
mechanisms by which a country’s demographic patterns and trends affect economic outcomes.
This section describes a global classification of countries on the basis of their demographic
characteristics with a starting point of Lee and Mason’s (2006) conception of the first demographic
dividend.

The first broad group of the new typology includes countries where potential for the first
demographic dividend has either already past or is currently passing. This is determined by
assessing if a country’s working age population shares are expected to contract between 2015 and
2030.9 To distinguish these countries where the first demographic dividend has already passed or
is just passing, the fertility rate from 30 years ago is used to identify how far along countries are
in the final phase of demographic transition. Thirty years describes the approximate length of time
that defines a “generation”: from the birth of a parent to the birth of their child, although the exact
length would of course vary by country and across time. If the fertility rate in 1985 was below
replacement, then countries are most likely to be the furthest along in their demographic transition,
with the first demographic dividend in their past. These are classified as post-dividend countries.
If the fertility rate in 1985 was at or above replacement levels, then it is likely that they entered the
final phase of demographic transition more recently, and are still reaping the first demographic (if
they were able to reap it), but are at the tail end of that window. These are classified as late-
dividend countries.

The second broad group includes countries where the working age population shares are expected
to grow till 2030, and where the potential window for the first demographic dividend occurred
recently or will occur in the future. To distinguish between these two sub-groups, the current total
fertility rate is considered. If it is below four births per woman, then it is likely that the country
has been progressing through the demographic transition model and will be experiencing rapid
reductions in the population share of its youth. These are the early-dividend countries. If current
fertility rates are four births per woman or higher, then it suggests that countries are still in the
midst of demographic transition and has yet to experience the lower child population share
associated with the first demographic dividend. These are the pre-dividend countries. The four
births per woman cut-off threshold is about twice the replacement level, making it unlikely that
fertility rates in these countries would be below replacement level by 2030, as from the data for
WPP’s medium scenario’s projections.




9
 The 2015 to 2030 time period is a relatively brief period in demographic terms. However, it is the timeframe of the
2030 Sustainable Development Agenda which has been agreed to by 193 countries, and is used to anchor national
and multilateral development policy discussions.
                                                        10
Table 1 Criteria for Typology
 Growth of Working Age              Total Fertility Rate, 1985              Total Fertility Rate, 2015
 Population Share, 2015-30
                                           <2.1                 >=2.1              <4                    >=4
               <= 0                   Post-dividend         Late-dividend
                >0                                                           Early-dividend       Pre-dividend
Note: The working age population is defined as the share of the population aged between 15 and 64 years. Total
fertility rate is the average number of births per woman in her lifetime.




Figure 1 World through the lens of the demographic typology




            Source: World Bank staff based on data from UN (2015).


A few criteria are thus used to identify whether the potential for a first demographic dividend is in
its past, present, or future. These criteria – summarized in Table 1 – are then applied to 191
economies covered by both the United Nations World Population Projections 2015 Revision (UN
2015) and the World Development Indicators, to yield the typology illustrated in Figure 1.10 The
population data from 1950-2015 are the historical estimates of the World Population Projections
(WPP). The population data from 2015 onwards are from the WPP’s medium-fertility scenario.




10
  Table A1 in the Annex provides the fertility rate and working-age population changes that were estimated from
the UN WPP for all countries considered in this paper.
                                                         11
Figure 2 The different demographic country types correspond to countries in different stages of
demographic transition
                                  Total fertility rate
                                    9           Pre-dividend             Early-dividend
                                                Late-dividend            Post-dividend
                                    8
                                     7
                                     6
                                     5
                                     4
                                     3
                                     2
                                     1
                                     0
                                         45          55           65           75          85
                                                       Life expectancy (years)
Source: World Bank staff based on data from UN 2015.
Note:The total fertility rate is the average number of births a woman in a given country has, assuming she lives through to the end
of her reproductive life.


This demographic typology reflects the different stages of demographic transition. The first
demographic indicator considered in the typology—the fertility rate—is a main determinant of
demographic transition. At the start of demographic transition, countries typically have high
fertility and mortality rates. As transition proceeds, the mortality rate begins to decline while the
fertility rate remains high, resulting in rising life expectancy. Later, the birth rate begins to decline
as well, until finally fertility and mortality rates both level off at low rates. Indeed, the pre-dividend
countries have the low life expectancy and high fertility rates of countries in the early stages of
demographic transition, post-dividend countries have the high life expectancy and low fertility of
countries in the final stages of demographic transition, and early- and late-dividend countries lie
somewhere in between (Figure 2). The second indicator considered in the demographic typology
- the working age population share - is an outcome of demographic transition and the conceptual
basis of the demographic dividend model.

A number of patterns emerge when global development progress is viewed through the lens of
the new typology. More than half of the global population lives in pre- and early-dividend
countries and more than a third lives in late-dividend countries (Figure 3). Most of the early-
dividend population lives in lower-middle-income countries, in part because Bangladesh and
India are lower-middle-income countries. Similarly, most of the late-dividend population lives in
upper-middle-income countries, which include China. Pre-dividend countries, which account for
less than 11 percent of the global population, are mostly low-income countries and are mostly in
Sub-Saharan Africa. Post-dividend countries, accounting for another 11 percent of the global
population, are predominantly high-income countries, mostly in North America, Western
Europe, and Oceania.


                                                                12
Figure 3 Income level is correlated with the stage of demographic transition


a. 70 percent of the global population lives in                         b. Most low-income countries are pre-dividend
  early- and late-dividend countries                                       while most high-income countries are post-
                                                                           dividend
 Share of global population in 2015, percent                            Number of countries in 2015
            LIC        LMC           UMC                 HIC             45       LIC         LMC               UMC            HIC
 45
 40                                                                         40

 35                                                                         35

 30                                                                         30

 25                                                                         25

 20                                                                         20

 15                                                                         15
 10                                                                         10
  5                                                                          5
  0                                                                          0
       Pre-dividend   Early-dividend   Late-dividend   Post-dividend             Pre-dividend Early-dividend Late-dividend Post-dividend

Source: World Bank staff, based on data from UN (2015). LIC is low-income countries, LMC is lower-middle-income countries,
UMC is upper-middle-income countries, and HIC is high-income countries.


Pre-dividend countries are projected to account for most of the global population growth through
2050. The fertility rates of pre-dividend countries is expected to remain above replacement for
several decades, leading to rapid population growth and slower age structure changes. The total
fertility rate of pre-dividend countries—currently above four—is falling only slowly in the
countries in this group and their younger age cohorts will continue to swell in the coming decades.
As a result, the population of this group of countries will grow by 49 percent (or 413 million
people) by 2030 and by 132 percent (or 1.1 billion people) by 2050. Children as a share of the
population will remain above 40 percent until 2030, and above 34 percent until 2050.



4. Development policy through the lens of the new typology

4.1 Persistent poverty in pre- and early-dividend countries

More than 90 percent of the world’s poor live in pre- and early-dividend countries (Figure 4). Pre-
dividend countries, where 44 percent of the population lives below the poverty line on average,
account for 38 percent of the global poor. Early-dividend countries have a much lower poverty
rate of 17 percent but account for 49 percent of the global poor, largely because this group includes
Bangladesh and India, which together are home to 33 percent of the world’s poor. The late-
dividend group of countries has an average poverty headcount of only 4 percent, but one member
of this group, China, accounts for 10 percent of global poverty.

                                                                       13
Figure 4 Pre- and early-dividend countries account for most of global poverty

                                  Average poverty headcount rate and share of global poverty, percent
                                  60
                                                   Average poverty headcount rate
                                                   Share of global poverty
                                  50

                                   40

                                   30

                                   20

                                   10

                                    0
                                           Pre-dividend     Early-dividend    Late-dividend

Source: Cruz et al. (2016)
Note: Data are for 2012 and are based on a $1.90/day poverty line from Povcalnet. The average poverty headcount rate is the
unweighted average across countries in a given group. The sample of countries included 31 pre-dividend countries, 48 early-
dividend countries, 34 late-dividend countries, and 4 post-dividend countries.

The pre- and early-dividend countries with the highest poverty rates also continue to face fast
population growth, with populations expected to double in coming decades. The five countries
expected to have the most rapid population growth between 2015 and 2050 are all pre-dividend in
Sub-Saharan Africa: Angola, Mali, Niger, Uganda, and Zambia. These countries are very poor,
with 2012 poverty rates that ranged from 29 to 62 percent (Cruz et. al., 2016). Without
improvements in their poverty headcount rates, these countries will experience even greater
concentrations of poverty in the future.

Early- and late-dividend countries, where much of the global poverty reduction over the past two
decades occurred, also experienced a fertility transition over this period. Between 1990 and 2012,
the global poverty headcount rate fell from 37.1 percent to 12.8 percent, representing a reduction
in the number of global poor by more than 1.04 billion. By virtue of their large populations and
high poverty headcount rates, China and India accounted for much of the reduction in global
poverty. These countries now not only have lower poverty headcounts but also lower population
growth rates, having lowered their fertility rates over time. Bangladesh and Indonesia, which
together accounted for another 10 percent of global poverty in 2012, also have experienced slowing
population growth rates. Poverty reduction successes in these countries would thus have a
diminishing impact on global poverty reduction.




                                                              14
 Figure 5 Early-dividend countries are                     Figure 6 A large share of the population of
 urbanizing rapidly                                        early- and late-dividend countries still live in
                                                           slums

 Share of population living in urban areas, percent        Share of urban population living in slums, percent
  70       Pre-dividend               Early-dividend                Pre-dividend    Early-dividend     Late-dividend
           Late-dividend              Post-dividend         70

     60
                                                             60

     50
                                                             50
     40
                                                             40
     30

                                                             30
     20

     10                                                      20
                  1990                       2013                           1990                       2014


Source: World Bank staff based on World Bank World Development Indicators, Millennium Development Goals database, and
UN 2015.
Note: Data reflect unweighted averages for the different country groups.


About 90 percent of countries that met the MDG target of halving poverty rates were early- and
late-dividend countries.11 As of 2012, around 40 percent of early-dividend and 68 percent of late-
dividend countries were able to halve their poverty headcount rates from their 1990 levels. In
contrast, only 2 percent of pre-dividend countries were able to achieve similar reductions in their
poverty rates. Given that pre-dividend countries also typically have faster population growth rates
than countries at a more advanced stage of demographic transition, and large reductions in poverty
headcount rates may also not provide a complete perspective on poverty reduction (Herrmann
2015). For example, Mali reduced its poverty headcount rate by a third between 1990 and 2012,
but due to its high population growth, the number of poor still rose by 13 percent. The countries
that have had the most success in reducing poverty are those where the working age share of the
population has peaked or is close to peaking and where population growth has decelerated in
parallel to improvements in life expectancy, infant mortality, and fertility.

As more and more people live in urban areas, progress in reducing the shares of urban populations
living in slums has been modest. Overall, the shares of populations in pre-, late-, and post-dividend
countries living in urban areas stayed relatively stable between 1990 and 2013 (Figure 5).
However, early-dividend countries have seen rapid urbanization over this period, a shift that is
driving global urbanization trends. Rising urbanization has been paralleled by an increase in the
number of those living in slums (Figure 6). Large cities in developing countries, such as Baghdad,


11
  Based on the $1.90/day poverty line data from Povcalnet. The sample of countries included 31 pre-dividend
countries, 48 early-dividend countries, 34 late-dividend countries, and 4 post-dividend countries.
                                                        15
 Figure 7 Education expenditure per capita is negatively correlated with child dependency ratio

                                 Public education expenditure per capita, log (circa 2012)
                                 10      High-income countries      Developing countries


                                  9



                                  8



                                  7



                                  6
                                      0      20      40       60      80        100      120
                                                   Child dependency ratio

Source: World Bank staff based on data from UN 2015 and World Bank World Development Indicators.


Caracas, Johannesburg, Karachi, Lagos, Lima, Mumbai, Nairobi, and Rio de Janeiro have large
slums, some of them with estimated populations of more than 500,000. Lack of access to public
services in these slums has the potential to lead new generations of urban slum residents into
poverty traps (Marx, Stoker, and Suri 2013).

Low educational attainment in pre-dividend countries has implications for the future global supply
of labor. In pre-dividend countries, just 35 percent of whom completed lower-secondary education,
compared with 72 percent in early-dividend countries and 90 percent in late-dividend countries.12
These pre-dividend countries will account for most of the global growth in the working age
population over the next few decades; if their education attainment rates do not improve, the global
average skill level of the working age population will grow only slowly.13

Pre- and early-dividend countries present a high demand for services for children, including
education. Education is a critical component of early childhood development, with long-term
implications for not just human capital accumulation and future income, but also socialization and
health (Heckman, Pinto and Savelyev 2013). However, low- and middle-income countries
generally have lower public spending per capita on education, while having substantially greater
child dependency ratios than high-income countries (Figure 7). These countries thus face the
challenge both of increasing the quality of their education through improvements in per capita
spending and expanding their spending to accommodate a larger child population in the near

12
   These are based on data for 191 countries from World Development Indicators. The data are for the latest year
available between 2011 and 2012.
13
   This is equivalent to the constant enrollment rate assumption in the most pessimistic education projection scenarios
of KC et al. (2010).
                                                            16
future. In pre-dividend countries, in particular, children as a share of the population are projected
to stay almost the same (or rise in some cases) for several decades.

Policy action focused on human development may help pre-dividend countries progress to the next
stage in the demographic transition. There is a relationship between fertility rates and policies that
improve maternal and child health services; expand education coverage (particularly to girls); and
empower women in the household and in the labor force (Bloom et al. 2009; Soares and Falcao
2008; Canning, Raja, and Yazbeck 2015). Priority services areas include immunization programs,
enhanced growth monitoring of children, and services targeted at women during pregnancy and
after giving birth. Several multilateral initiatives embrace a multi-pronged approach, as illustrated
by the multilateral African Road Map for reducing maternal and newborn mortality. A number of
countries are strengthening the newborn components in pre-existing child health plans as part of
the World Health Organization’s Every Newborn Action Plan (WHO and UNICEF 2015).
Generally, policies that facilitate gender empowerment and reproductive health also empower
households to make their own decisions regarding number of children. Relevant policies include
strengthening reproductive rights, and improving access to reproductive health services (UN
2014). Successful interventions often include the whole community, changing gender norms and
support the sexual health and rights of girls and women (Klugman and others 2014; Azevedo and
others 2012).

The policy priorities for early-dividend countries would differ from that of pre-dividend countries
in that they may need to focus on interventions to realize and maximize demographic dividends.
For the first dividend, this means creating productive jobs at a rate that exceeds the rate of
population growth. Such job creation may be sped up by progress in several areas: investments in
human capital (including vocational and technical training), maintenance of macroeconomic
stability, financial inclusion, and labor market policies that allow all socioeconomic groups to
benefit from favorable population dynamics (Fox and Sohnesen 2012; Lee and Mason 2006;
Troiano 2015). In many countries, persistent low female labor force participation is an obstacle to
the realization of the first demographic dividend. Gender gaps in labor force participation have
generally remained persistent, especially in some demographic types and in some regions. In the
Middle East and North Africa region, for example, the average female participation rate is 25
percent, and several countries have rates below 20 percent, including Algeria, Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, and Jordan.14 Facilitating the access of females to the labor market has simultaneous
effects on demography, human capital, and growth, and is needed to realize the first demographic
dividend (Galor 2012).




14
     Based on data from the World Development Indicators 2016.
                                                        17
4.2 Weakening economic dynamism in late- and post-dividend countries


Late-dividend countries have experienced demographic change at a much faster pace than many
post-dividend countries did. By the 1940s most post-dividend countries already had low fertility
rates, which briefly rose in the post-war period but then fell and generally remained low. In the
1950s, late-dividend countries had almost double the fertility rates of post-dividend countries, and
average life expectancies were shorter by nine years (Figures 8 and 9). However, late-dividend
countries have since made substantial improvements in these metrics, with extremely rapid
improvements in life expectancy. Several factors fed into this faster pace of improvement, all
having to do with the importance of these countries in the global economy. As a result, late-
dividend countries are expected to have the same age structure as post-divided countries by 2050
(Figure 10).

At the same time, late-dividend countries accounted for 36 percent of global GDP growth in 2000-
14 (Figure 11). Growth in many of these countries was rapid. Brazil and China alone, for example,
contributed a quarter of global growth over the period. Brazil and China grew at high average
annual real GDP growth rates, at 3.5 and 10 percent, respectively over this period. However, the
working age populations and working age population shares of late-dividend countries will
contract over the next few decades, suggesting demographic change is likely to dampen their
contribution to global growth going forward.

 Figure 8 Fertility rates in late-dividend countries                           Figure 9 Differences in life expectancy across
 have converged to those of post-dividend                                      typologies of countries have narrowed
 countries since the 1950s

 Total fertility rates                                                         Life expectancy, years
 7                                                                               80
                                                                                             1950-1955      2010-2015
                                   1950-1955       2010-2015
 6
                                                                                70

 5
                                                                                60
 4
                                                                                50
 3

                                                                                40
 2

 1                                                                              30
       Pre-dividend      Early-dividend   Late-dividend   Post-dividend              Pre-dividend Early-dividend Late-dividend Post-dividend

Source: World Bank staff based on data from World Bank World Development Indicators, Millennium Development Goals
database, and UN (2015).
Note: Data reflect unweighted averages for the different country groups. The total fertility rate is the average number of births per
woman.



                                                                          18
 Figure 10 Late-dividend countries are aging                         Figure 11 Aging countries account for most of
 rapidly                                                             global growth, 2000-14

 Share in population of age 65+, percent                             Contributions to global GDP growth, percent
     30         Pre-dividend               Early-dividend            60
                                                                             Pre-dividend              Early-dividend
                Late-dividend              Post-dividend                     Late-dividend             Post-dividend
     25                                                              50

     20                                                              40

     15                                                              30

     10                                                              20

      5                                                              10

      0                                                               0
          1950 60   70   80   90 2000 10    20   30   40 2050                 LIC            LMC        UMC             HIC

 Source: World Bank staff based on UN 2015 and World Bank World Development Indicators.


Post-dividend countries’ contributions to global growth have been slowing down, with potential
spillovers for other countries (IMF 2015). These countries account for 59.8 percent of global
economic activity in 2014, and 42 percent of global GDP growth. Post-dividend economies are
also the major export destinations for pre- and early-dividend countries and account for two-thirds
of global import demand. While other post-dividend countries or late-dividend countries meet most
of this demand, the post-dividend countries are the pre-eminent markets for exports from pre- and
early-dividend countries, mainly textiles, clothing and other light manufactures as well as
commodities. If growth in post-dividend countries slows, early- and pre-dividend countries will
need to find alternative export markets. In addition, as post-dividend economies age, their national
savings rate is expected to fall, leading to a possible slowdown in capital flows to the rest of the
world.15

In some late- and post-dividend countries, pension systems are increasingly stressed as the number
of beneficiaries rises relative to the numbers the systems were designed to support (Bogetic et al.
2015). Late- and post-dividend countries will have a combination of shrinking share of working
age population combined with an increase in the share of aged people, potential candidates for
public pension (Bonoli and Shinkawa 2005). As populations age, pension systems need to adapt
to demographic and occupational changes to avoid generosities and incentives that encourage early
retirement and thus long retirement periods (Bussolo, Koettl, and Sinnott 2015; World Bank
2015c). In 2012, one-quarter of the European Union’s population—130 million people—received
at least one pension. The European Union spent about €1.71 billion on pensions in 2012, which
represents about 13.3 percent of its GDP.

15
  Börsch-Supan, Ludwig and Winter (2002) and the World Bank (2013b) suggest that capital flows from fast-aging
economies to younger economies could be substantial in the future.
                                                                19
 Figure 12 Health expenditure per capita is positively correlated with aged dependency ratio

                                 Public health expenditure per capita, log (2013)
                                           High-income countries     Developing countries
                                 9.5

                                 8.5

                                 7.5

                                 6.5

                                 5.5

                                 4.5

                                 3.5

                                 2.5
                                       0          10            20            30            40
                                                 Aged dependency ratio

Source: World Bank staff based on data from UN 2015 and World Bank World Development Indicators


Some high-income countries are experiencing a rapid rise in health care costs as they age (Figure
12). Health care spending generally increases with age, with a notable jump in spending between
the ages of 55 and 60, reflecting changes in morbidity (EC 2015). In OECD countries, health care
spending on those 65 and older is expected to jump from 40 percent in 2010 to 60 percent by 2060
(De la Maisonneuve and Martins 2013). In the United States, health spending is expected to rise
faster than GDP and account for 19.6 percent of GDP by 2024, up from 17.4 percent in 2013 (CMS
2015a). The cost of Medicare (the public health insurance for people 65 or older) is expected to
increase substantially, moving from $256.5 billion in 2002 to $489.4 billion in 2010 (CMS 2015b).
The aging of baby boomers in the coming years will lead to an unprecedented increase in the size
and composition of the elderly population in the program (Lassman et al. 2014).

For post-dividend countries, characterized by a large share of the population aged 65 or older, the
challenge is to adapt to aging so that living standards can be maintained and improved. The welfare
system should aim to ensure that no one is left behind throughout the different stages of the life
cycle: provision of child care to reconcile work and parenthood; education at different stages of
life; health care; long-term care complementing the care provided by families, pensions and a
social safety net that catches those that otherwise would risk falling into poverty (OECD 2013).
Policies will also need to help raise employment rates also beyond today’s typical retirement ages
and encourage savings channeled to productive physical investments, as argued by Bussolo, Koettl
and Sinnot (2015). Public policy may also help raise low fertility rates by making it easier to
combine child-rearing and labor market engagement and reducing financial burdens of having
children. In Europe, countries with the highest female labor force participation and employment
rates also have high fertility rates, demonstrating that it is possible to reconcile parenthood with
work (Myrskylä et al. 2009).


                                                            20
Late-dividend countries can view the experiences of post-dividend and draw some lessons on
challenges around the corner. For example, for late-dividend countries it may be particularly
important to ensure that rules for pension systems are consistent with working at an older age as
life expectancy increases (World Bank 2015c). Given that the share of the elderly still is relatively
small, the short-run repercussions of the specific policy choices in this area are relatively limited.
However, given that the share of the old will grow, the initial design of policies in this area is
extremely important considering their fiscal consequences and the difficulty of changing
behavioral and institutional patterns. Design of sustainable old-age support systems could also
have important synergies with other interventions that late-dividend countries may need to
consider. For example, carefully designed pension systems could create the supportive incentives
that will allow older and healthier workers to continue to work, if they chose.


5. Leveraging demographic differences between country-types


Countries in all phases of the demographic transition can leverage differences in demographic
patterns and trends across countries through cross-border capital flows, migration, and trade for
their domestic development objectives. Differences between the demographic country-types are
producing important spillovers across countries, contributing to changes in comparative advantage
underpinning trade, and the returns earned by labor and capital (World Trade Organization 2013).
These changes require the implementation of policies to support enhanced trade in goods and
services, as well as greater factor mobility. This may encourage labor-intensive production to shift
from aging countries to younger societies, or migration from countries with growing working age
populations to countries where the number of workers is falling, thereby delivering non-tradable
services such as care for the elderly (World Bank 2015c). International cooperation - in addition
to domestic measures - is thus needed on trade facilitation, legal migration, and capital flows to
take advantage of the demographic differences between countries in a global setting.

First, in coming decades, global trade flows are projected to continue shifting toward countries
earlier in their demographic transition, possibly yielding substantial benefits for poorer countries
(Maliszewska et. al. 2016). Differences in demographic change may lead to comparative
advantages that influence trade patterns. Countries with slower population growth tend to become
more capital-abundant over time, while countries with faster population growth become more
labor-abundant (Figure 13). Trade can potentially reduce poverty through faster growth, more
economic diversification, and greater macroeconomic stability. Maliszewska et. al. (2016)
suggests that lower trade costs could result in additional income gains in pre- and early-dividend
countries, amounting, respectively, to 3.6 percent and 2.5 percent of GDP by 2030. Moreover, the
benefits from trade facilitation could lift an additional 13 million people out of poverty. It can also
facilitate technology transfers through knowledge embodied in goods and services production,

                                                  21
  Figure 13 Early-dividend countries are more                           Figure 14 Post-dividend countries tend to
 specialized in labor-intensive exports                                 receive the most migrants
 Export shares by sectors, percent (2015)                               Migrant stock by destination in 2013, millions


    High-skilled services             Low-skilled services              60        From pre-dividend           From early-dividend
    High-skilled manufacturing        Low-skilled manufacturing                   From late-dividend          From post-dividend
 100                                                                    50

   80                                                                   40

   60                                                                   30

   40                                                                   20

   20                                                                   10

    0                                                                       0
         Pre-dividend   Early-dividend Late-dividend   Post-dividend            To pre-dividend   To early-   To late-dividend   To post-
                                                                                                  dividend                       dividend



Source: World Bank staff estimates.
Note: Migrant stock share by destination is calculated as share of world migrant stock in 1960 and 2000.



boosting exports, productivity and growth. Amiti	 and	 Konings	 (2007)	 and Topalova	 and	
Khandelwal	(2011)	provide evidence from Indonesia and India, that lower input and output tariffs
can increase firm-level productivity by inducing tougher import competition, promoting learning,
and providing access to further variety and high- quality inputs. Bas (2012) and Cruz and Bussolo
(2015) respectively show that the probability of entering and surviving in the export market is
higher for firms producing in industries that have experienced greater tariff reductions on their
intermediate goods.

Trade policy measures can be important tools in enabling countries to adapt to the opportunities
and challenges in demographic change. Agricultural trade is still distorted by high tariffs, export
subsidies, and domestic support in such a way that harms poor, rural producers (Anderson, Ivanic,
and Martin 2013; WTO 2014). Although average tariffs on manufactured goods have been
declining over the years, substantial tariff and nontariff barriers still affect the free flow of goods
between countries (UNCTAD 2013; WTO 2012). Reductions in those barriers, coupled with
improving trade facilitation, could encourage firms to relocate production to relatively more labor-
abundant countries and allow developing countries to take full advantage of their growing labor
forces. In pre- and early-dividend countries, additional trade facilitation measures may add to their
comparative advantage in labor-intensive products and help create jobs. Trade can also help meet
the demand for health services in aging countries and the demand for education services in young
countries. Both health care and education are traded only lightly across borders due to high
barriers, so liberalizing trade in those areas could potentially yield substantial benefits (Blouin,
Drager, and Smith 2006; Smith, Chanda, and Tangcharoensathien 2009).


                                                                       22
Second, the potential gains from expanding legal migration are large, especially given the
generally high level of restrictions on the movement of people across borders (World Bank 2006;
Tyers and Shi 2007; Walmsley, Winters, and Ahmed 2007; Borgy et al. 2010; Clemens 2011).
Demographic disparities can amplify those gains. While South-South migration flows have grown
rapidly, substantial migration takes place from younger developing countries to aging high-income
countries (Figure 14). International migration flows can mitigate the decline in working age
population shares in aging countries. Younger immigrants can help ease the pressures of aging
populations in late- and post-dividend countries, improve the growth prospects, and ensure the
sustainability of public finances in destination countries. But the impact of migration on both origin
and destination countries depends on the skills of migrants, and socio-political challenges must be
managed.

A wide range of policies could potentially foster legal migration, with benefits to both sending and
receiving countries. In the past 10 years, many countries revised their migration laws in response
to changes in demography, labor market conditions, and political contexts. Pre-departure
orientation and training, protecting the rights and preventing the abuse of migrants, lowering
remittance costs, and removing regulatory and bureaucratic barriers to return migration are all
actions that can enhance the net development benefits (OECD 2013). Migration benefits sending
countries through remittances, but also presents challenges, such as brain drains and Dutch disease
effects (Beine et. al. 2001, 2008, 2015) that can be actively managed.

Third, different trajectories of demographic change have important implications for capital flows.
Countries early in their demographic transition need to boost investment, and those later in their
transition seek higher returns than may be available domestically. Aksoy et. al. (2015) shows that
population ageing may contribute to reduced output growth and significantly lower real interest
rates across the economies of OECD countries. So global demographic disparities can augment
the impetus for international capital flows. However, low institutional quality seems to lead the
explanation for the lack of capital flows from rich countries (in advanced stage of demographic
transition) towards poor countries (in early stages of demographic transition) over the 1970-2000
period (Alfaro et. al., 2008).

Improving institutional quality and developing the financial sector could attract capital flows to
pre- and early-dividend countries. Facilitation of international capital flows could allow young,
labor-abundant countries to attract much-needed capital. In the initial stages of the demographic
transition, investment demand exceeds savings, stimulating current account deficits. The opposite
tends to be true for countries in later stages of demographic transition. Capital flows could generate
an increase in labor productivity and wages, contributing to faster growth in young, labor-abundant
countries. For capital sending countries, increasing investment in young economies can provide
opportunities to raise capital returns and diversify investment portfolios, especially if labor-
abundant countries create favorable investment climates, ensure macroeconomic stability, deepen

                                                 23
their financial sectors, and strengthen governance. Countries early in their demographic transition
can promote foreign direct investment by reducing investment barriers, such as caps on foreign
ownership and requirements for joint ventures (World Bank 2013). Yet, minimum levels of
financial and institutional development are needed to reduce the riskiness of financial liberalization
(Sahay et al. 2015). Moreover, countries should proceed cautiously, in an incremental and
sequenced manner as they embrace financial globalization (Obstfeld, 2008).


6. Conclusion

For the purposes of analysis and identifying policy priorities, the world can be considered to have
four types of countries when viewed through the lens of demography. Although demography is by
no means the only force that shapes the economy, it has direct effects on the availability of key
resources for development and, at the same time, impacts the demand for public services.

Pre-dividend countries lag in key human development indicators and have fertility rates greater
than four births per woman. Their high dependency ratios are expected to decline as the fertility
transition proceeds. Early-dividend countries have progressed further in the fertility transition,
with fertility rates below four births per woman and the working age share in the population likely
to rise considerably in the future. Realizing the first demographic dividend should be priority for
these countries, as well as laying the groundwork for the second dividend. Late-dividend countries
have shrinking working age shares, but their overall age structures are still favorable for the first
demographic dividend. However, they may experience rapid aging in coming decades so realizing
the second dividend is key. Finally, post-dividend countries are where fertility transitioned below
replacement levels three decades ago, and have shrinking working age population shares and high
shares of elderly. They are too late in the transition to gain additional benefits from the first
demographic dividend, but could still be realizing the second dividend.

One key value-added of this typology is how it is able to link a long-run process, i.e. demographic
change, to current policy discussions by identifying potential challenges and opportunities,
including those arising from demographic disparities across countries. Alternative approaches to
build systematic links between demographic change and economic policy are less cogent. For
example, UN (2004) introduced the idea of the demographic window of opportunity of a country
– a 30 to 40-year period when a country’s working age population share is greatest, starting when
a country has the potential to achieve demographic dividends from the time when the population
share of children 15 years and younger is less than 30 percent and the proportion of people 65
years and older is still below 15 percent. The intuition behind the demographic window concept is
thus also based on the size of the working age population share, but it provides no additional
information that could be used to determine its progress through the window, and is thus limited
in its ability to inform policy.


                                                 24
Another key value-added of the typology presented in this paper is that it connects the demographic
differences between countries and to opportunities for greater development through international
cooperation. Regional and country analyses of demographics, such as those referred to in this
paper, tend to focus on demographically-informed interventions at the country level. For the
purposes of spurring dialogue with policy makers, this is a practical approach since many
interventions are in the realm of domestic policy. However, in an increasingly interconnected
world with diverging demographic trends, the complementary channels of international trade,
migration, and capital flows offer a set of mechanisms that countries at different stages of
demographic transition - and hence with different opportunities and challenges - can use to reach
mutual beneficial arrangements. These could take the form of trade in labor-intensive goods from
younger, developing countries to older countries that have moved up the value chain, migration
from labor-abundant pre- and early-dividend countries to late and post-dividend countries with
slower labor supply growth, or capital flows from aging economies seeking higher returns from
investments in younger, emerging economies. The demographically-informed typology allows for
identification of these possible flows, and also helps countries recognize the potential gains of
greater openness.

While the typology is ultimately a useful device in linking demographics to development
challenges, opportunities and policies, four points need to be kept in mind when considering its
application to single-country analyses. First is that the classification of a country into a specific
type is sensitive to the data used and the thresholds presented in Table 1, and when considering
the policy implications of a specific country, their status vis-a-vis other country-types should be
taken into account. For example, Russia’s TFR in 1985 was 2.12, but it was 2.04 in 1980 and 1.55
in 1990, suggesting that a period average or a different year would have defined Russia as a post-
dividend country. Second, population projections differ across alternative databases and scenarios,
so the typology of countries may vary depending on the source of the projections. An example of
this is Ethiopia, which can be classified as an early-dividend country using WPP 2015 Revision
data, but which would have been a pre-dividend country if WPP 2012 Revision data had been used
instead. Third, the central concept of the working age is defined as being from 15 to 64 years, for
ease of international comparison. However, there is evidence that in aging economies, the
definitions of working age and dependents may be changing and the standard definition of the
working age population may not apply to rural, informal, or poor workers who often have to work
beyond age 64 (Sanderson and Scherbov 2010; World Bank 2015c). Finally, a global typology at
the country level may mask important disparities in demography across regions within countries.




                                                 25
References


Acemoglu, D., and S. Johnson. 2007. “Disease and Development: The Effect of Life Expectancy
     on Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy (115) 6: 925–85.
Ahmed, S.A., and M. Cruz. 2016. “Making the most of demographic change in Southern Africa.”
     World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7798. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ahmed, S.A., D.S. Go. and D. Willenbockel. 2016. “Short-Term Pains, Long-Term Gains, and the
     Potential for South-South Migration.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7628.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ahmed, S.A., M. Cruz, D.S. Go, M. Maliszewska, and I. Osorio‐Rodarte. 2016. “How Significant
     Is Sub‐Saharan Africa's Demographic Dividend for Its Future Growth and Poverty
     Reduction?” Review of Development Economics. DOI: 10.1111/rode.12227.
Aksoy, Y, H S Basso, T Grasl, and R Smith (2015), “Demographic Structure and Macroeconomic
       Trends”, Birkbeck Working Papers in Economics and Finance No. 1501.
Alfaro, L., Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and Volosovych, V. 2008. "Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to
        Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
        MIT Press, vol. 90(2), pages 347-368, May.
Anderson, K., M. Ivanic, and W. Martin. 2013. “Food Price Spikes, Price Insulation, and Poverty.”
      Policy Research Working Paper 6535, World Bank, Washington DC.
Angeles, L. 2010. “Demographic Transitions: Analyzing the Effects of Mortality on Fertility.”
      Journal of Population Economics: Journal of the European Society for Population
      Economics (ESPE) 23 (1): 99–120.
Artuc, E., F. Docquier, C. Ozden, and C. Parsons (2015) A Global Assessment of Human Capital
       Mobility: The Role of Non-OECD Destinations. World Development, 65, 6-26.
Ashraf, Q.H., D.N. Weil, and J. Wilde. 2013. “The effect of fertility reduction on economic
       growth”. Population and Development Review, 39(1), pp.97-130.
Attanasio, O. P., and G. L. Violante. 2000. “The Demographic Transition in Closed and Open
       Economy: A Tale of Two Regions.” Working Paper 412, Research Department, Inter-
       American Development Bank, Washington, DC.
Azevedo, J. P., M. Favara, S. E. Haddock, L. F. Lopez-Calva, M. Muller, and E. Elizaveta. 2012.
      Teenage Pregnancy and Opportunities in Latin America and the Caribbean: On Teenage
      Fertility Decisions, Poverty and Economic Achievement. Washington, DC: World Bank
      Group.
Becker, G. S. 1960. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility.” In Demographic and Economic Change
       in Developed Countries. New York: Columbia University Press.
Becker, G. S., and H. G. Lewis. 1973. “On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of
       Children.” Journal of Political Economy 81 (2).



                                               26
Beine, M., Docquier, F., and Rapoport, H., 2001. "Brain drain and economic growth: theory and
       evidence," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 64(1), pages 275-289,
       February.
Beine, M., Docquier, F., and Rapoport, H. 2008. "Brain Drain and Human Capital Formation in
       Developing Countries: Winners and Losers," Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society,
       vol. 118(528), pages 631-652, 04.
Beine, M., Coulombe, S., and Vermeulen, W, N. 2015. "Dutch Disease and the Mitigation Effect
       of Migration: Evidence from Canadian Provinces," Economic Journal, Royal Economic
       Society, vol. 125(589), pages 1574-1615, December
Birdsall, N., A. Kelley, and S. Sinding, eds. 2003. Demographic Change, Economic Growth, and
       Poverty in the Developing World. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Blouin, C., N. Drager, and R. Smith, eds. 2006. International Trade in Health Services and the
       GATS: Current Issues and Debates. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Bloom, D., and D. Canning. 2004. “Global Demographic Change: Dimensions and Economic
      Significance.” in Global Demographic Change: Economic Impacts and Policy Challenges,
      proceedings of a symposium, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
      Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26–28, pp. 9–56.
Bloom, D., D. Canning, and P.N. Malaney. 2000. Population dynamics and economic growth in
      Asia. Population and Development Review, 26, pp.257-290.
Bloom, D., D. Canning, and J. Sevilla. 2003. The demographic dividend: A new perspective on
      the economic consequences of population change. RAND Corporation.
Bloom, D., D. Canning, G. Fink, and J. E. Finlay. 2009. “Fertility, Female Labor Force
      Participation, and the Demographic Dividend.” Journal of Economic Growth 14 (2): 79–
      101.
Bloom, D., and J. Williamson. 1998. “Demographic Transition and Economic Miracles in
      Emerging Asia.” World Bank Economic Review 12 (3): 419–56.
Bogetic, Z., H. Onder, A. Onal, E. Skrok, E. Schwartz, and H. Winkler. 2015. “Fiscal Policy Issues
       in the Aging Societies.” MFM Discussion Paper 1, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Bonoli, G., and T. Shinkawa. 2005. Aging and Pension Reform around the World: Evidence from
       Eleven Countries. UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Borgy, V., X. Chojnicki, G. Le Garrec, and C. Schwellnus. 2010. Macroeconomic Consequences
       of Global Endogenous Migration: A General Equilibrium Analysis. Annals of Economics
       and Statistics 97/98: 13-39.
Börsch-Supan, A., A. Ludwig, and J. Winter. 2002. Ageing and international capital flows (pp.
       55-83). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Bussolo, M., J. Koettl, and E. Sinnott. 2015. Golden Aging: Prospects for Healthy, Active, and
       Prosperous Aging in Europe and Central Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank
Canning, D., Raja, S. and Yazbeck, A.S. eds., 2015. Africa's Demographic Transition: Dividend
      or Disaster? Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                               27
Chaturvedi, S., A. De Costa, and J. Raven. 2015. “Does the Janani Suraksha Yojana Cash Transfer
       Programme to Promote Facility Births in India Ensure Skilled Birth Attendance? A
       Qualitative Study of Intrapartum Care in Madhya Pradesh.” Global Health Action, 8.
Clemens, M.A. 2001. Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk? Journal
      of Economic Perspectives. 23 (3): 83-106.
CMS (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services). 2015a. Health Expenditure Projections 2014-
      2024 Forecast Summary. Washington, DC: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
______. 2015b. Health Expenditures by Age and Gender. Washington, DC: Centers for Medicare
      and Medicaid Services.
Cotlear, C., ed. 2011. Population Aging: Is Latin America Ready? Washington, DC: World Bank.
Cruz, M., Foster, F., Quillin, B., and Schellekens, P. 2015. Ending extreme poverty and sharing
       prosperity: Progress and policies. Policy Research Note PRN/15/03, World Bank.
Cruz, M. and Bussolo, M. 2015. "Does input tariff reduction impact firms'exports in the presence
       of import tariff exemption regimes?" Policy Research Working Paper Series 7231, The
       World Bank
Cruz, M. and S.A. Ahmed. 2016. “On the Impact of Demographic Change on Growth, Savings,
       and Poverty.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7805. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.
De la Maisonneuve, C. and J. O. Martins. 2013. “A Projection Method for Public Health and Long-
       Term Care Expenditures.” Economics Department Working Papers 1048, Organisation for
       Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Eastwood, R., and M. Lipton. 2011. “Demographic Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa: How Big
      Will the Economic Dividend Be?” Population Studies 65(1): 9–35.
EC (European Commission). 2015. The 2015 Ageing Report. Economic and Budgetary
     Projections for the 28 EU Member States (2013-2060). Brussels: European Commission.
Ehrlich P. 1968. The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine Books.
Ehrlich, P.R. and A.H. Ehrlich. 2009. “The population bomb revisited”. The electronic journal of
       sustainable development, 1(3), pp.63-71.
Fogel, R. W. 1997. “New Findings on Secular Trends in Nutrition and Mortality: Some
       Implications for Population Theory.” Handbook of Population and Family Economics 1:
       433–81.
Fox, L., and T. P. Sohnesen. 2012. “Household Enterprises in Sub-Saharan Africa: Why They
       Matter for Growth, Jobs, and Livelihoods.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
       6184. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Galor, O., and D. N. Weil. 1999. “From Malthusian Stagnation to Modern Growth.” American
Galor, O., and D. N. Weil. 2000. “Population, Technology and Growth: From the Malthusian
       Regime to the Demographic Transition.” American Economic Review 90 (4): 806–28.
Galor, O. 2012. “The Demographic Transition: Causes aAnd Consequences.” Cliometrica 6: 1–
       28.
                                              28
Gragnolati, M., O. H. Jorgensen, R. Rocha, and A. Fruttero. 2011. Growing Old in an Older Brazil:
      Implications of Population Aging on Growth, Poverty, Public Finance, and Service
      Delivery. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Gragnolati, M., R. Rofman, I. Apella, and S. Troiano. 2015. As Time Goes by in Argentina:
      Economic Opportunities and Challenges of the Demographic Transition. Washington, DC:
      World Bank.
Hanson, G. H., and A. Spilimbergo. 1999. “Illegal Immigration, Border Enforcement, and Relative
      Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the U.S.–Mexico Border.” American Economic
      Review. 89 (05): 1337–57
Harris, J. R., and M. P. Todaro. 1970. “Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two-
        Sector Analysis.” American Economic Review 60 (1): 126–42.
Heckman, J., R. Pinto, and P. Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mechanisms Through Which
     an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.” American Economic
     Review 103 (6): 2052–2086
Herrmann, M. (Ed). 2015. Consequential omissions. How demography shapes development –
      Lessons from the MDGs for the SDGs. Berlin: Berlin Institute for Population and
      Development.
Herzer, D., H. Strulik, and S. Vollmer. 2012. “The Long-Run Determinants of Fertility: One
       Century of Demographic Change, 1900–1999.” Journal of Economic Growth. 17 (4): 357–
       85.
Higgins, Matthew. 1998. “Demography, National Savings, and International Capital Flows.”
       International Economic Review 39: 343–69.
Higgins, M., and J. G. Williamson. 1997. “Age Structure Dynamics in Asia and Dependence on
       Foreign Capital.” Population and Development Review 23 (2): 261–93.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth–Short- and
       Long-term Factors. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Joshi, S., and T. P. Schultz. 2013. “Family Planning and Women’s and Children’s Health: Long-
        Term Consequences of an Outreach Program in Matlab, Bangladesh.” Demography 50 (1):
        149–80.
KC, S., B. Barakat, A. Goujon, V. Skirbekk, W. Sanderson, and W. Lutz. 2010. “Projection of
       populations by level of educational attainment, age, and sex for 120 countries for 2005-
       2050”. Demographic Research, 22(15), 383-472.
Kelley, A., and R. Schmidt. 1995. “Aggregate Population and Economic Growth Correlations: The
       Role of the Components of Demographic Change.” Demography 32 (4): 543–55.
______.2005. “Evolution of Recent Economic-Demographic Modeling: A Synthesis.” Journal of
      Population Economics 18 (2): 275–300.


                                               29
______. 2007. “A Century of Demographic Change and Economic Growth: The Asian Experience
      in Regional and Temporal Perspective.” In Population Change, Labor Markets and
      Sustainable Growth: Towards a New Economic Paradigm, edited by A. Mason and M.
      Yamaguchi, 39–74. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Kinugasa, T., and A. Mason, A. 2007. “Why countries become wealthy: the effects of adult
      longevity on saving”. World Development, 35(1), 1-23.
Klugman, J., L. Hanmer, S. Twigg, T. Hasan, J. McCleary-Sills, and J. Santamaria. 2014. Voice
      and Agency: Empowering Women and Girls for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC:
      World Bank Group.
Lassman, D, M. Hartman, B. Washington, K. Andrews, and A. Caitlin. 2014. “US health spending
      trends by age and gender: selected years 2002-10.” Health Affairs, 33(5), pp 815-22
Lee, R., and A. Mason. 2006. “What Is the Demographic Dividend?” Finance and Development
       43 (3).
______. 2010. “Some Macroeconomic Aspects of Global Population Aging.” Demography 47 (1):
      S151–S172.
______, eds. 2011. Population Aging and the Generational Economy: A Global Perspective.
      Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar.
______. 2014. “Reformulating the Support Ratio to Reflect Asset Income and Transfers.” Paper
      presented at the 2013 Meeting of the IUSSP in Busan, Korea.
Lee, R., et al. 2014. “Is Low Fertility Really a Problem? Population Aging, Dependency, and
       Consumption.” Science 346 (6206): 229–34.
Loayza, N., K. Schmitt-Hebel, and L. Servén. 2000. “What Drives Private Saving across the
      World?” Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (2): 165–81.
Manyika, J., J.Woetzel, R. Dobbs, J. Remes, E. Labaye, and A. Jordan. 2015. Global Growth: Can
      Productivity Save the Day in an Aging World? New York: McKinsey Global Institute.
Mansoor, A. and B. Quillin. 2006. Migration and Remittances: Eastern Europe and the Former
      Soviet Union. Washington DC: World Bank.
Maliszewska, M., Ahmed, S. A., Cruz, M. and Winters, L. A. (2016) Cashing in the demographic
       dividend. In: GTAP Annual Meeting 2016, Washington-DC.
Marx, B., T. Stoker, and T. Suri. 2013. The Economics of Slums in the Developing World. Journal
       of Economic Perspectives. 27 (4): 187-210.
Mason, A. 2005. Demographic transition and demographic dividends in developed and developing
      countries. In United Nations expert group meeting on social and economic implications of
      changing population age structures (Vol. 31).
Mason, A., and T. Kinugasa. 2008. “East Asian economic development: two demographic
      dividends”. Journal of Asian Economics, 19(5), 389-399.
Massey, D. S. 1988. “Economic Development and International Migration in Comparative
      Perspective.” Population and Development Review 14 (3): 383– 414.


                                              30
Mayda, A. M. 2010. “International Migration: A Panel Data Analysis of the Determinants of
      Bilateral Flows.” Journal of Population Economics 23: 1249–1274.
McKibbin, W. J. 2006. “The Global Macroeconomic Consequences of a Demographic Transition.”
     Asian Economic Papers 5 (1): 92–134.
Molho, I. 1986. “Theories of Migration: A Review.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy 33 (4):
      526-556.
Murtin, F. 2013. “Long-Term Determinants of the Demographic Transition, 1870–2000.” Review
       of Economics and Statistics 95 (2): 617–31.
Myrskylä, M., H. P. Kohler, and F. C. Billari. 2009. “Advances in Development Reverse Fertility
      Declines.” Nature 460 (7256): 741–43.
Obstfeld, M. 2009. "International Finance and Growth in Developing Countries: What Have We
       Learned?" NBER Working Papers 14691, National Bureau of Economic Research.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2013. Pensions at a Glance
     2013: OECD and G20 Indicators. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Ozden, C. and M. Schiff. 2007. International Migration: Economic Development and Policy. New
       York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Reher, D. S. 2011. “Economic and Social Implications of the Demographic Transition.”
       Population and Development Review 37 (Supplement): 11–33.
Sahay, R., M. Cihák, P. N’Diaye, A. Barajas, S. Mitra, A. Kyobe, Y. N. Mooi, and S. Reza Yousefi.
       2015. “Financial Inclusion: Can It Meet Multiple Macroeconomic Goals?” IMF Staff
       Discussion Note, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Sanderson, W. C., and S. Scherbov. 2010. “Remeasuring Aging.” Science 329 (5997): 1287–88.
Soares, R. 2005. “Mortality Reductions, Educational Attainment, and Fertility Choice.” American
       Economic Review 95 (3): 580–601.
Soares, R. R., and B. L. S. Falcão. 2008. “The Demographic Transition and the Sexual Division
       of Labor.” Journal of Political Economy 116 (6): 1058–104.
Smith, R.D., R. Chanda, and V. Tangcharoensathien. 2009. Trade in Health-Related Services. The
       Lancet 373.9663: 593-601.
Szreter, S. 1993. “The Idea of Demographic Transition and the Study of Fertility Change: A
        Critical Intellectual History.” Population and Development Review 19 (4): 659–701.
Tyers, R., and Q. Shi. 2007. Demographic Change and Policy Responses: Implications for the
       Global Economy. World Economy 30 (4): 537-66.
Troiano, S. 2015. “Population Dynamics and the Implications for Economic Growth, Poverty and
       Inequality—What Is Relevant for Southern Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
UN (United Nations). 2004. World Population to 2030. New York: United Nations, Department
     of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
———. 2014. World Contraceptive Use 2014. New York: United Nations.


                                               31
———. 2015. World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision, New York: United Nations,
   Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 2016. Globa Trends: Forced
    Displacment in 2015. Geenva: United Nations High Comissioner for Refugees.
Walmsley, T.L., L.A. Winters, and S.A. Ahmed. 2007. Measuring the Impact of the Movement of
      Labor Using a Model of Bilateral Migration Flows. GTAP Technical Paper 28. Purdue.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2015. Investing to Overcome the Global Impact of Neglected
     Tropical Diseases. Geneva: WHO.
WHO and UNICEF (World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund). 2015.
    Every Newborn Action Plan Progress Report. Geneva: World Health Organization.
World Bank. 1984. World Development Report 1984. Washington DC: World Bank.
______. Global Economic Prospects 2006 - Economic Implications of Remittances and Migration.
      Washington DC: World Bank.
______. 2009. World Development Report: Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington DC:
      World Bank.
______. 2011. Malaysia Economic Monitor: Brain Drain. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2013a. Bangladesh Poverty Assessment: Assessing a Decade of Progress in Reducing
      Poverty 2000-2010. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2013b. Global Development Horizons: Capital for the Future. Washington, DC: World
      Bank.
______. 2014. Economic Impacts of Child Marriage: Conceptual Framework and White Paper.
      World Bank and the International Center for the Research on Women.
_______. 2015a. Global Monitoring Report 2015/16: Development Goals in an Era of
      Demographic Change. Washington DC: World Bank.
_______.2015b. South Africa Economic Update: Jobs and South Africa’s Changing
      Demographics, Washington DC: World Bank.
______. 2015c. Aging in East Asia and Pacific: Capitalizing on the Demographic Transition.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2015d. World Development Indicators Database. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2016. Forever Young? Social policies for a changing population in Southern Africa.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2012. World Trade Report 2012; Trade and Public Policies:
      A closer look at non-tariff measures in the 21st century. Geneva: World Trade
      Organization.
______. 2013. World Trade Report 2013: Factors shaping the future of world trade. Geneva:
      World Trade Organization.
______. 2014. World Trade Report 2014; Trade and Development: Recent Trends and the Role of
      the WTO. Geneva: World Trade Organization.
                                            32
Annex


Table A1 Economies by World Bank Group Classification and Demographic Typology16
                                                                Percent change
                         World Bank                             in working-        Total
                         Group income      Demographic          population         fertility       Total fertility
 Name                    classification    type                 share, 2015-30     rate, 1985      rate, 2015
 Afghanistan             LIC               Pre-dividend         17.53              7.47            4.25
 Albania                 UMC               Late-dividend        -10.69             3.15            1.78
 Algeria                 UMC               Early-dividend       0.99               5.3             2.62
 Angola                  UMC               Pre-dividend         6.56               7.25            5.79
 Antigua and Barbuda     HIC               Post dividend        -2.78              2.07            2.03
 Argentina               HIC               Early-dividend       1.13               3.05            2.27
 Armenia                 LMC               Late-dividend        -8.09              2.58            1.51
 Aruba                   HIC               Late-dividend        -8.13              2.3             1.62
 Australia               HIC               Post dividend        -6.42              1.86            1.86
 Austria                 HIC               Post dividend        -9.17              1.45            1.53
 Azerbaijan              UMC               Late-dividend        -7.88              2.95            2.22
 Bahamas, The            HIC               Late-dividend        -6.78              2.65            1.83
 Bahrain                 HIC               Early-dividend       1.45               4.08            1.98
 Bangladesh              LMC               Early-dividend       6.15               4.98            2.08
 Barbados                HIC               Post dividend        -8.53              1.77            1.8
 Belarus                 UMC               Post dividend        -8.41              2               1.64
 Belgium                 HIC               Post dividend        -6.77              1.56            1.83
 Belize                  UMC               Early-dividend       4.65               4.7             2.46
 Benin                   LIC               Pre-dividend         7.6                6.88            4.5
 Bhutan                  LMC               Early-dividend       4.47               6.11            1.93
 Bolivia                 LMC               Early-dividend       4.99               5.09            2.83
 Bosnia and
                         UMC               Post dividend        -9.86              1.91            1.23
 Herzegovina
 Botswana                UMC               Early-dividend       4.39               5.11            2.67


16
  The World Bank Group income classifications for 2014 were used, so the list does not reflect countries that may
have changed income status. LIC is low-income countries, LMC is lower-middle-income countries, UMC is upper-
middle-income countries, and HIC is high-income countries.
                                                       33
                                                       Percent change
                     World Bank                        in working-      Total
                     Group income     Demographic      population       fertility    Total fertility
Name                 classification   type             share, 2015-30   rate, 1985   rate, 2015
Brazil               UMC              Late-dividend    -1.41            3.1          1.74
Brunei Darussalam    HIC              Late-dividend    -3.21            3.72         1.82
Bulgaria             UMC              Post dividend    -4.91            1.95         1.6
Burkina Faso         LIC              Pre-dividend     8.18             7.07         5.23
Burundi              LIC              Pre-dividend     3.67             7.59         5.66
Cabo Verde           LMC              Early-dividend   4.3              5.63         2.19
Cambodia             LIC              Early-dividend   2.39             5.99         2.53
Cameroon             LMC              Pre-dividend     8.25             6.6          4.46
Canada               HIC              Post dividend    -10.27           1.62         1.56
Central African
                     LIC              Pre-dividend     7.15             5.9          4.02
Republic
Chad                 LIC              Pre-dividend     7.99             7.21         5.79
Chile                HIC              Late-dividend    -4.98            2.6          1.73
China                UMC              Late-dividend    -7.12            2.75         1.59
Colombia             UMC              Late-dividend    -0.93            3.18         1.83
Comoros              LIC              Pre-dividend     6.34             6.7          4.23
Congo, Dem. Rep.     LIC              Pre-dividend     7.15             6.98         5.66
Congo, Rep.          LMC              Pre-dividend     6.23             5.55         4.64
Costa Rica           UMC              Late-dividend    -2.89            3.31         1.76
Côte d'Ivoire        LMC              Pre-dividend     4.49             6.85         4.77
Croatia              HIC              Post dividend    -6.58            1.72         1.48
Cuba                 UMC              Post dividend    -9.04            1.85         1.58
Cyprus               HIC              Late-dividend    -5.01            2.43         1.42
Czech Republic       HIC              Post dividend    -5.85            1.9          1.54
Denmark              HIC              Post dividend    -5.12            1.54         1.76
Djibouti             LMC              Early-dividend   4.93             6.18         2.99
Dominican Republic   UMC              Early-dividend   2.71             3.65         2.38
Ecuador              UMC              Early-dividend   1.28             4            2.44
Egypt, Arab Rep.     LMC              Early-dividend   3.29             5.15         3.16



                                                 34
                                                      Percent change
                    World Bank                        in working-      Total
                    Group income     Demographic      population       fertility    Total fertility
Name                classification   type             share, 2015-30   rate, 1985   rate, 2015
El Salvador         LMC              Early-dividend   2.51             4.17         1.87
Equatorial Guinea   HIC              Pre-dividend     1.32             5.89         4.52
Eritrea             LIC              Pre-dividend     12.43            6.51         4.02
Estonia             HIC              Late-dividend    -5.97            2.2          1.66
Ethiopia            LIC              Early-dividend   12.05            7.37         3.99
Fiji                UMC              Late-dividend    -0.28            3.47         2.48
Finland             HIC              Post dividend    -7.05            1.66         1.77
France              HIC              Post dividend    -5.44            1.81         1.99
French Polynesia    HIC              Late-dividend    -5.51            3.64         1.99
Gabon               UMC              Early-dividend   7.18             5.58         3.68
Gambia, The         LIC              Pre-dividend     6.25             6.14         5.53
Georgia             LMC              Late-dividend    -7.19            2.26         1.82
Germany             HIC              Post dividend    -10.74           1.43         1.44
Ghana               LMC              Early-dividend   6.42             5.88         3.95
Greece              HIC              Post dividend    -2.46            1.53         1.3
Grenada             UMC              Early-dividend   0.92             4.14         2.08
Guam                HIC              Late-dividend    -4.48            3.14         2.32
Guatemala           LMC              Early-dividend   8.1              5.5          3.03
Guinea              LIC              Pre-dividend     6.57             6.63         4.73
Guinea-Bissau       LIC              Pre-dividend     6.01             6.68         4.56
Guyana              LMC              Late-dividend    -3.02            3.77         2.47
Haiti               LIC              Early-dividend   6.11             5.7          2.85
Honduras            LMC              Early-dividend   7.02             5.37         2.25
Hong Kong SAR,
                    HIC              Post dividend    -17.53           1.36         1.3
China
Hungary             HIC              Post dividend    -4.48            1.86         1.4
Iceland             HIC              Late-dividend    -6.25            2.12         1.9
India               LMC              Early-dividend   3.11             4.27         2.34
Indonesia           LMC              Early-dividend   1.4              3.4          2.36



                                                35
                                                         Percent change
                       World Bank                        in working-      Total
                       Group income     Demographic      population       fertility    Total fertility
Name                   classification   type             share, 2015-30   rate, 1985   rate, 2015
Iran, Islamic Rep.     UMC              Early-dividend   1.48             5.62         1.62
Iraq                   UMC              Pre-dividend     5.1              6.09         4.35
Ireland                HIC              Late-dividend    -1.78            2.18         2
Israel                 HIC              Early-dividend   0.27             3.07         2.93
Italy                  HIC              Post dividend    -7.83            1.35         1.49
Jamaica                UMC              Late-dividend    -3.36            3.1          1.99
Japan                  HIC              Post dividend    -5.68            1.66         1.46
Jordan                 UMC              Early-dividend   7.74             6.02         3.2
Kazakhstan             UMC              Late-dividend    -2.03            3.03         2.53
Kenya                  LMC              Pre-dividend     8.34             6.54         4.1
Kiribati               LMC              Early-dividend   2.21             4.8          3.58
Korea, Dem.
                       LIC              Late-dividend    -1.47            2.36         1.94
People’s Rep.
Korea, People’s Rep.   HIC              Post dividend    -13.45           1.6          1.33
Kuwait                 HIC              Late-dividend    -2               3.15         2.04
Kyrgyz Republic        LMC              Late-dividend    -0.74            4.02         2.93
Lao PDR                LMC              Early-dividend   6.81             6.27         2.77
Latvia                 HIC              Late-dividend    -5.61            2.13         1.55
Lebanon                UMC              Late-dividend    -1.84            3.23         1.71
Lesotho                LMC              Early-dividend   4.97             5.14         3.01
Liberia                LIC              Pre-dividend     7.82             6.72         4.47
Libya                  UMC              Early-dividend   7.1              5.71         2.32
Lithuania              HIC              Post dividend    -7.62            2.06         1.63
Luxembourg             HIC              Post dividend    -6.68            1.47         1.61
Macao SAR, China       HIC              Post dividend    -16.77           1.94         1.34
Macedonia, FYR         UMC              Late-dividend    -6.94            2.27         1.55
Madagascar             LIC              Pre-dividend     4.74             6.3          4.21
Malawi                 LIC              Pre-dividend     9.24             7.3          4.88
Malaysia               UMC              Late-dividend    -1.75            3.59         1.9



                                                   36
                                                          Percent change
                        World Bank                        in working-      Total
                        Group income     Demographic      population       fertility    Total fertility
Name                    classification   type             share, 2015-30   rate, 1985   rate, 2015
Maldives                UMC              Early-dividend   3.66             6.66         1.98
Mali                    LIC              Pre-dividend     8.38             7.15         5.92
Malta                   HIC              Post dividend    -7.59            2.01         1.49
Mauritania              LMC              Pre-dividend     5.82             6.09         4.39
Mauritius               UMC              Late-dividend    -5.64            2.31         1.44
Mexico                  UMC              Early-dividend   2.42             3.75         2.14
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.   LMC              Early-dividend   1.22             5.2          3.08
Moldova                 LMC              Late-dividend    -7.08            2.64         1.23
Mongolia                UMC              Late-dividend    -1.48            4.84         2.54
Montenegro              UMC              Late-dividend    -4.46            2.11         1.65
Morocco                 LMC              Late-dividend    -0.95            4.45         2.38
Mozambique              LIC              Pre-dividend     7.28             6.33         5.12
Myanmar                 LMC              Early-dividend   3.22             3.8          2.13
Namibia                 UMC              Early-dividend   4.45             5.55         3.31
Nepal                   LIC              Early-dividend   10.01            5.33         2.09
Netherlands             HIC              Post dividend    -8.89            1.55         1.77
New Caledonia           HIC              Late-dividend    -2.95            3.03         2.04
New Zealand             HIC              Post dividend    -6.56            2.03         1.99
Nicaragua               LMC              Early-dividend   4.7              5            2.16
Niger                   LIC              Pre-dividend     1.75             7.69         7.46
Nigeria                 LMC              Pre-dividend     6.15             6.6          5.41
Norway                  HIC              Post dividend    -5.43            1.8          1.81
Oman                    HIC              Late-dividend    -4.18            7.85         2.51
Pakistan                LMC              Early-dividend   5.51             6.3          3.38
Panama                  UMC              Early-dividend   0.27             3.24         2.36
Papua New Guinea        LMC              Early-dividend   6.18             4.97         3.58
Paraguay                UMC              Early-dividend   2.65             4.77         2.45
Peru                    UMC              Early-dividend   1.69             4.1          2.35
Philippines             LMC              Early-dividend   2.4              4.53         2.87


                                                    37
                                                        Percent change
                      World Bank                        in working-      Total
                      Group income     Demographic      population       fertility    Total fertility
Name                  classification   type             share, 2015-30   rate, 1985   rate, 2015
Poland                HIC              Late-dividend    -8.38            2.16         1.33
Portugal              HIC              Post dividend    -5.92            1.62         1.24
Puerto Rico           HIC              Late-dividend    -3.09            2.26         1.59
Qatar                 HIC              Late-dividend    -2.27            4.41         1.95
Romania               UMC              Late-dividend    -3.79            2.22         1.53
Russian Federation    HIC              Late-dividend    -8.6             2.12         1.72
Rwanda                LIC              Early-dividend   11.47            7.99         3.62
Samoa                 LMC              Early-dividend   3.99             5.35         3.9
Saudi Arabia          HIC              Early-dividend   3.09             6.22         2.59
Senegal               LMC              Pre-dividend     7.23             6.88         4.83
Serbia                UMC              Late-dividend    -4.38            2.23         1.59
Seychelles            HIC              Late-dividend    -2.97            2.94         2.21
Sierra Leone          LIC              Pre-dividend     10.04            6.66         4.28
Singapore             HIC              Post dividend    -12.12           1.7          1.26
Slovak Republic       HIC              Late-dividend    -8.71            2.15         1.44
Slovenia              HIC              Post dividend    -10.57           1.65         1.65
Solomon Islands       LMC              Early-dividend   9.87             6.13         3.76
Somalia               LIC              Pre-dividend     4.81             7.26         6.12
South Africa          UMC              Early-dividend   2.73             4            2.28
South Sudan           LIC              Pre-dividend     6.75             6.83         4.73
Spain                 HIC              Post dividend    -6.41            1.46         1.38
Sri Lanka             LMC              Late-dividend    -1.84            2.64         2.03
St. Lucia             UMC              Late-dividend    -0.91            3.65         1.82
St. Vincent and the
                      UMC              Late-dividend    -1.32            3.1          1.9
Grenadines
Sudan                 LMC              Pre-dividend     7.27             6.3          4.13
Suriname              UMC              Early-dividend   0.37             3.42         2.28
Swaziland             LMC              Early-dividend   5.15             6.13         3.06
Sweden                HIC              Post dividend    -4.42            1.91         1.93



                                                  38
                                                          Percent change
                        World Bank                        in working-      Total
                        Group income     Demographic      population       fertility    Total fertility
Name                    classification   type             share, 2015-30   rate, 1985   rate, 2015
Switzerland             HIC              Post dividend    -8.81            1.55         1.57
Syrian Arab Republic    LMC              Early-dividend   11.32            5.87         2.77
Tajikistan              LMC              Early-dividend   0.33             5.41         3.32
Tanzania                LIC              Pre-dividend     6.7              6.36         4.92
Thailand                UMC              Late-dividend    -7.29            2.3          1.46
Timor-Leste             LMC              Pre-dividend     7.27             5.21         5.33
Togo                    LIC              Pre-dividend     7.63             6.62         4.35
Tonga                   UMC              Early-dividend   7.86             4.74         3.58
Trinidad and Tobago     HIC              Late-dividend    -2.76            2.75         1.73
Tunisia                 UMC              Late-dividend    -3.5             4            2.07
Turkey                  UMC              Early-dividend   0.9              3.35         2.01
Turkmenistan            UMC              Early-dividend   1.49             4.55         2.22
Uganda                  LIC              Pre-dividend     10.18            7.1          5.46
Ukraine                 LMC              Post dividend    -7.37            1.9          1.56
United Arab Emirates    HIC              Late-dividend    -4.19            4.83         1.73
United Kingdom          HIC              Post dividend    -5.18            1.84         1.91
United States           HIC              Post dividend    -7.77            1.91         1.9
Uruguay                 HIC              Late-dividend    -0.61            2.53         1.98
Uzbekistan              LMC              Early-dividend   1.46             4.4          2.33
Vanuatu                 LMC              Early-dividend   4.95             5.04         3.22
Venezuela, RB           HIC              Early-dividend   0.78             3.65         2.28
Vietnam                 LMC              Late-dividend    -3.84            3.85         1.95
Virgin Islands (U.S.)   HIC              Late-dividend    -10.79           3.02         2.18
West Bank and Gaza      LMC              Early-dividend   6.24             6.76         3.95
Yemen, Rep.             LMC              Early-dividend   10.13            8.8          3.79
Zambia                  LMC              Pre-dividend     7.43             6.68         5.14
Zimbabwe                LIC              Early-dividend   10.51            5.66         3.65




                                                    39
