                                                     WPS7920


Policy Research Working Paper                       7920




     Vulnerability to Drought and Food Price
                      Shocks
                         Evidence from Ethiopia

                                 Ruth Vargas Hill
                                 Catherine Porter




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7920


  Abstract
 Although the measurement and determinants of poverty                               against lack of rainfall and sudden increases in food prices.
 have been widely studied, vulnerability, or the threat of                          A moderate drought causes a 9 percent reduction in con-
 future poverty, has been more difficult to investigate due to                      sumption for many rural households, and high inflation
 data paucity. This paper combines nationally representative                        causes a 14 percent reduction in the consumption of
 household data with objective drought and price informa-                           uneducated households in urban areas. Vulnerability of
 tion to quantify the causes of vulnerability to poverty in                         rural households is considerably higher than that of urban
 Ethiopia. Previous estimates have relied on self-reported                          households, despite realized poverty rates being fairly sim-
 shocks and variation in outcomes within a survey, which                            ilar. This finding reflects that the household survey in 2011
 is inadequate for shocks such as weather and prices that                           was conducted during a year of good rainfall but rapid
 vary more across time than space. Historical distributions                         food price inflation. The results highlight the need for
 of climate and price shocks in each district were used to                          caution in using a snapshot of poverty to target programs,
 simulate the probable distribution of future consump-                              as underlying rates of vulnerability can be quite different
 tion for individual households; these were then used to                            from the poverty rate captured at one point in time. The
 quantify vulnerability to poverty. The analysis shows that                         results also suggest that significant welfare gains can be
 many Ethiopians are unable to protect their consumption                            made from risk management in both rural and urban areas.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to
  provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  rhill@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
      Vulnerability to drought and food price shocks:
                  Evidence from Ethiopia
                 Ruth Vargas Hill                  Catherine Porter
                 The World Bank                  Heriot-Watt University∗




Keywords: Vulnerability, Poverty, Drought, Inﬂation, Ethiopia.
JEL Codes: I31, I32, I38


  ∗
    Many thanks to Christopher Gaukler and Radhika Goyal for excellent research assistance, in par-
ticular for their dedication and patience in accessing and compiling the many datasets used in this
study. Thanks to Jose Cuesta, Tassew Woldehanna, Matthew Hobson, Camilla Holmemo, participants
at CSAE conference Oxford 2015 and anonymous reviewers for comments on earlier drafts. Comments
welcome to catherine.porter@hw.ac.uk
1         Introduction
Households in developing countries face signiﬁcant uncertainty about their future con-
sumption. There are many sources of this uncertainty, for example job insecurity, ill
health that aﬀects the productive labor and income of a household, death of family
members, drought that reduces crop yields and incomes and, more recently, price shocks
that make purchasing basic food supplies more diﬃcult for those with few resources.
    The importance of risk for decision making and the consequences of realized shocks
have become an ever-more important focus for policymakers as evidenced by the World
Development Reports of 2001 and 2014 (World Bank, 2014). The increasing availability
of data on shocks, particularly those that are experienced by entire communities at once
(such as weather shocks and price shocks), allow for better estimates of the welfare
impact of shocks. It also allows for new forward-looking quantitative research on the
intersection of poverty and risk.
    It is to this literature that this paper aims to add, by applying and extending lessons
from both theoretical and empirical work on shocks and vulnerability to a newly com-
piled dataset that is nationally representative, and used to calculate oﬃcial estimates of
poverty.1 The methodology we use is of general interest, as it combines several new ideas
for estimating the impact of rainfall and price shocks on welfare using cross-sectional
data, and combining these estimates with long-run data on rainfall and prices to gener-
ate estimates of household vulnerability. Although the availability of panel data surveys
is improving for developing countries, they are not yet widespread, often are small in
size, and not nationally representative. Vulnerability estimates have either relied on
self-reported shocks and short, unrepresentative panel surveys (Calvo and Dercon, 2013;
Klasen et al., 2015), or on the cross-sectional distribution of consumption (Chaudhuri,
2003)), neither of which are completely satisfactory. We show that measures of vulner-
ability that properly take covariate shocks into account can result in a very diﬀerent
understanding of welfare diﬀerences across groups than poverty measures at one point
in time. This highlights the importance of considering such measures of vulnerability
when designing poverty-targeted programs in many African countries where poverty is
infrequently measured and covariate shocks are important.
    Economists have recently incorporated rainfall data as an exogenous source of shocks
in various empirical models to estimate ex-post impacts of weather (Dell et al., 2014).
The impact of weather shocks on consumption outcomes for households has been ana-
lyzed in this way for a small sample of villages in rural Ethiopia by amongst others Dercon
and Krishnan (2000); Dercon (2004); Porter (2012), and similarly food price shocks in
urban areas have been analyzed using a household panel by Alem and S¨      oderbom (2012).
In this paper we quantify the welfare impact of drought and price inﬂation at a national
level in Ethiopia. We use community (woreda) level information on rainfall-induced
crop-losses as the objective measure of rainfall shocks and control for the probability of
drought in a given community using the historic distribution of drought. Conditional
on the probability of drought, the timing of the shock is considered to be exogenous.
    1
        The dataset we use has full coverage of all but the pastoral areas of Afar and Somaliland.



                                                      2
Other unobserved geographic characteristics are controlled for by the inclusion of district
(zone) ﬁxed eﬀects.2
    In addition, to date, no study has used the historical distribution of covariate shocks
to estimate the distribution of future consumption and poverty. Existing studies rely
instead on cross-sectional variation in shocks which does not accurately take into ac-
count the welfare volatility that arises from events that vary more across time than
space. We combine time-series information on rainfall-induced crop losses at the com-
munity level with the estimated impact of rainfall losses on consumption to predict future
consumption (in combination with similar estimates of the impact of price shocks and id-
iosyncratic shocks). Using the estimated probability distribution of future consumption
we calculate national estimates of vulnerability to poverty and also illustrate diﬀerences
in vulnerability to poverty between groups such as urban and rural, or by geographic
status (though with caveats around the meaning of ‘vulnerability’ discussed below).
    There are four reasons why we may consider Ethiopia a pertinent case study for a
focus on vulnerability. First, the Ethiopian economy is still largely comprised of rain-
fed agriculture in an agroclimatic environment that has been no stranger to extreme
drought in recent decades. Vulnerability to weather risk has historically been very high
among agricultural subsistence farmers, which describes the majority of Ethiopian rural
households. Almost half of rural households in Ethiopia were aﬀected by drought in a
ﬁve year period from 1999 to 2004 (Dercon et al., 2005). Although drought has been less
prevalent in the last decade than the previous two, the underlying climate risk remains
unchanged and could worsen with climate change (Robinson et al., 2013).
    Second, poverty in Ethiopia has fallen considerably in the last decade as a result of
successive years of good harvests and economic growth (World Bank 2015). This positive
change has resulted in many individuals with per capita consumption now just above
the national poverty line. These now non-poor individuals are likely still exposed to
considerable risk, and could be vulnerable to falling back into poverty (Devarajan et al.,
2013). However, it is possible that the growth experienced by Ethiopian households has
made them both less poor and more resilient, and an empirical assessment is needed to
determine the degree of vulnerability to poverty that is present in Ethiopia today.
    Third, a large safety-net program was introduced between the two surveys used in
the analysis, covering rural areas using geographical targeting. In 2005, the Government
of Ethiopia introduced the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) in an attempt to
transition food insecure households from an emergency food aid system to a more stable
and predictable safety net.3 The program tackles chronic poverty, but also aims to
protect beneﬁciaries and non-beneﬁciaries against drought. We can assess the impact of
shocks on those covered by the program and comment on targeting. Finally, Ethiopia
suﬀered from very high food price inﬂation during one of the survey years, providing
insights to other low income countries with increasing urban populations that have been
similarly aﬀected by high food price inﬂation in recent years.
    To preview our ﬁndings, we show that shocks do have a signiﬁcant impact on the
  2
      In Ethiopia, the largest administrative units are regions, then divided into 68 zones and 770 woredas.
  3
      The program was designed and ﬁnanced with the support of Development Partners.



                                                      3
consumption of households in Ethiopia, with rainfall shortfalls and food price increases
being the most important. A moderate drought reduces consumption by 9 percent
for many rural households in drought prone areas and the rapid inﬂation witnessed in
the ﬁrst half of 2011 caused consumption losses up to 14 percent among many urban
households. We ﬁnd considerable heterogeneity of impacts, with uneducated households
in urban areas suﬀering most from food price increases and those not covered by the
safety net in rural areas suﬀering most from rainfall losses.4 When covered by the safety
net, beneﬁciaries are better able to withstand shocks than non-beneﬁciaries, although
this cannot be fully attributed to the presence of the program.
    Vulnerability to poverty using our approach is 42 percent in rural areas, much higher
than poverty (headcount just under 30 percent); vulnerability is 5 percentage points
less prevalent than poverty in urban areas. This is on account of poverty having been
measured in a year of good conditions in rural areas (good weather) and bad conditions
in urban areas (high food price inﬂation). It highlights how a one-year snapshot of
poverty such as aﬀorded by a national consumption survey is not necessarily reﬂective
of the relative vulnerability of diﬀerent groups in the population, and also, that drought
and inﬂation do not always coincide. Analyzing our various vulnerability measures by
gender of the household head yields surprising results: female-headed households are
more vulnerable in urban areas, the opposite is true in rural areas. PSNP targeting in
rural areas appears to be good, but there are many households in rural woredas that are
not covered by the program, and many vulnerable households in urban areas too.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the empirical method and data
used to estimate the impact of weather and price shocks on household consumption.
Section 3 discusses the literature on vulnerability measurement and how the estimated
impact of weather and prices on consumption can be used to measure vulnerability to
poverty. Section 4 presents results on the impact of weather and prices on consumption.
Section 5 presents vulnerability estimates for 2011, with a breakdown by location and
gender. Section 6 concludes with some policy recommendations.


2       Quantifying the welfare impact of weather and
        price shocks
2.1     Method
A particular focus of the methodology employed in this paper is in identifying an inter-
nally consistent estimate of the welfare losses caused by shocks.
    The welfare measure used is that used by the Government of Ethiopia in estimating
poverty, namely total expenditure on food and non-food consumption per adult equiv-
alent (Woldehanna and Porter, 2013). The setting in which the household operates
(the economic, legal and political environment) and the household’s ability to cope with
    4
    Households not covered by the safety net includes both beneﬁciary housheolds observed before the
safety net was introduced and non-beneﬁciaries.



                                                 4
shocks determines how shocks impact consumption such that consumption can be given
by:

         ln Chjkt = Xhjkt β + Shjkt δ + Shjkt ∗ Xhjkt γ + µh + ηj + λk + ψt +   hjkt   (1)
    A household h resides in community (woreda) j within district (zone) k at time t. Our
explanatory variables are included in a vector X , comprising household and community
characteristics; and S is a vector comprising both idiosyncratic shocks (experienced by
an individual household, or an individual within a household), and covariate or aggregate
shocks (which aﬀect a whole village, region, or possibly even the whole country). Time
ﬁxed eﬀects, ψt , district ﬁxed eﬀects λk , woreda ﬁxed eﬀects ηj and household ﬁxed
eﬀects µh are unobserved.
    Individuals for whom a shock S has had a large negative impact are possibly more
likely to report its occurrence than individuals who could mitigate the eﬀects, thus
calling into question the assumption of exogeneity when S is measured using self-reported
shocks. This is an assumption on which internally valid estimation of δ and γ relies.
    Using objective measures of shocks helps overcome this challenge. This is possible
for covariate shocks such as weather and prices for which data on exposure is avail-
able. However, even with objective measures of shocks, the variation in the probability
distribution of Shjkt cannot be considered exogenous to welfare across households.
    We rely on the following observation to address this: although variation in the proba-
bility distribution of Shjkt may not be considered exogenous to welfare across households,
the timing of a shock conditional on its distribution is exogenous (Thomas et al., 2010;
Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang, 2013). Migration in Ethiopia is much lower than in other
countries (see World Bank 2015), so bias from migration is quite unlikely. Controlling
for the probability of occurrence and using objective measures of shocks improves the
internal consistency of estimates of δ and γ for drought and prices.
    Variables that reﬂect the likelihood of a shock occurring, that can allay concern
about the community unobserved eﬀects, include dummies for agro-ecological zones of
Ethiopia and moments of the location-speciﬁc historical distribution for covariate shocks
are included in Xhjt . Some studies, e.g. Christiaensen and Subbarao (2005) construct a
pseudo-panel of cohort or community-level data using two cross-section datasets which
allows community ﬁxed eﬀects to be included. However, in our dataset, the communities
chosen are not the same in both rounds, and also, our drought shock variable is at the
community level which precludes the inclusion of community ﬁxed eﬀects, however we
include a zone ﬁxed-eﬀect λk to capture unobservable characteristics at this level as well
as time ﬁxed-eﬀect ψt .
    To also allow for non-linearities in the relationship between Xhjkt and lnChjkt we test
the robustness of our ﬁndings on the impact of the most quantitatively important shock
(drought) by using propensity score matching.
    As the next section details, the years of data that are available for the analysis–2004
and 2010–are years in which rainfall shocks were observed, but not very large rainfall
shocks (the last big rainfall shocks prior to the surveys were in 2002 and 2003). It is
thus only possible to estimate the impact of moderate drought shocks.


                                            5
    A rich set of household and community characteristics is included in Xhjkt including
education and sector of employment of the household head (plus highest education of
males and females in the household), controls for demographics (household size and com-
position), assets and access to services, distance to the nearest market and road quality.
This is done to ensure a good estimate of the non-stochastic element of household welfare
is available for the vulnerability analysis. However with cross-sectional data as explicit
in the equation above, there are still possibly some unobserved household characteristics,
µh , that are important for determining household welfare. This is therefore a caveat to
the interpretation of our results.

2.2     Data
The base datasets for the analysis are the nationally representative Household Income
Consumption Expenditure Survey (HICES) and Welfare Monitoring Surveys (WMS) of
2010/11 and 2004/05 (henceforth 2011 and 2005 respectively). These contain informa-
tion on just over 20,000 households in each year. The HICES captures information on
expenditure on food and other items. The WMS records household assets and character-
istics as well as a fairly detailed module on self-reported adverse shocks. In both years
they were administered by Ethiopia’s Central Statistics Agency (CSA). The advantage
of using the HICES-WMS for vulnerability analysis is that they are relatively large,
nationally representative, comparable across years and allow measures of vulnerability
to be estimated at the household level that can be related back to the oﬃcial poverty
measures calculated by the Government of Ethiopia (Woldehanna and Porter, 2013).
This is extremely useful in a context where covariate shocks in particular (as our results
show) can impact signiﬁcantly on poverty numbers. The household level data allow us
to look at the relative importance of geographic and household factors in determining
vulnerability, and also how vulnerability varies across certain groups of households.
    Data were collected on a rich set of self-reported idiosyncratic shocks experienced
in the last 12 months.5 As discussed above, self-reported shocks are not always a good
measure of exposure to a shock. However, for some clearly deﬁned, salient events self-
reporting can be expected to be more reliable. Job loss and death of household members
are prevalent shocks that reﬂect clearly deﬁned, salient events, and these are included in
the analysis. There is also a self-reported food price shock where households are asked
if they have been adversely aﬀected by high consumer prices in the past year. This is
used to test the robustness of the objective measure of food price shocks that we use.
    For aggregate shocks, we use objective shock data reported outside the household
survey and matched to households by location. The 2011 HICES was conducted from
July 2010 to June 2011, with a random selection of households surveyed in each month.
Starting in November of 2010, Ethiopia experienced a period of rapid food price inﬂation
with inﬂation increasing substantially in a number of months, and particularly so in
December. The consumption aggregate is converted to December 2010 prices for all
   5
    Ten questions on shocks were asked in 2005 and twenty in 2011. However, for many of the categories
fewer than 3 percent of households reported experiencing the shock, hence they are not included in our
analysis.


                                                  6
households using the CPI. Exploiting the variation in the timing of the survey we use
the average rate of the monthly CPI increase in the three months prior to the survey
interacted with a dummy for net-food consumers (deﬁned as households in which nobody
works in agriculture) to calculate the price shock experienced.6 Previous analysis has
shown that there is a ﬁve month delay in the response of nominal wages to sudden food
price increases (Headey et al., 2012).
    In Ethiopia crop yields are very dependent on rainfall and vary considerably by year,
and across regions. We take advantage of the fact that in Ethiopia, much analysis
has been done by policymakers on variability of rainfall, and crop production. The
Livelihoods, Early Assessment and Protection project (LEAP) system, developed in
2006 by the Government of Ethiopia in collaboration with the World Food Programme
(Hoefsloot and Calmanti, 2012), uses crop-modeling approaches to estimate the likely
rainfall-induced crop loss in woredas throughout Ethiopia based on a water balance
model and crop types.7 The LEAP database contains estimates of the proportion of
crop lost as a result of insuﬃcient or poorly timed rainfall for each woreda from 1996 to
2012. These data are merged with the household survey data based on the woreda in
which each household resides.8
    Table 1 shows how frequently diﬀerent shocks are reported in the data, with the
most prevalent shocks being adverse food prices for urban areas, and drought and crop
damage for rural areas. Food price shocks are reported far more in 2011. The proportion
in 2005 reporting the shock was only 2%, but almost 20% in 2011, reﬂecting much higher
monthly increases in the CPI present during the survey period in 2010/11. The crop
loss ﬁgures from LEAP show the proportion of crops lost in each community, weighted
by crop type (where zero means no crop losses suﬀered). In 2010, few if any households
experienced crop losses of more than 30%, whereas in 2005 there were some zones that
experienced very high crop losses. In sum, 2011 was a better year for crops than 2005
(and better than a 15 year average) but a worse year for food price inﬂation (the worst
in the last 15 years).
    Table 2 shows the mean and standard deviations of the main variables used in the
analysis.


3       Estimating vulnerability to poverty
3.1     Measuring vulnerability
Vulnerability to poverty is conceptually distinct from poverty, due to the uncertainty
that is incorporated into the analysis (Moser, 1998; Alwang et al., 2001). The focus
    6
     Note that this does correlate strongly with the self-reported price shock.
    7
     See http://www.wfp.org/disaster-risk-reduction/leap, last accessed 28th October 2016. The
LEAP model also provides corresponding estimates of the number of households in need of assistance
based on a household economy model which can be seen as an alternative to our consumption based
approach.
   8
     Merging the two datasets together was a complex exercise, and approximately 8,000 observations
were lost along the way mainly in pastoral areas.


                                                7
                                   Table 1: Frequency of shocks

 Proportion of households reporting shock:
                                                                              2005     2011
 Food price                                                                    0.02     0.19
 Drought                                                                      0.10      0.05
 Crop damage                                                                  0.09      0.03
 Job loss                                                                     0.01      0.00
 % Crop loss (from LEAP)                                                      23.49    13.82
 Average monthly increase in CPI                                               0.2       1.7
 Times Woreda experienced over 50% crop loss (past 15 years)                            1.59
Notes: Shocks are self-reported, except for LEAP and CPI data.


in this paper is on vulnerability to absolute poverty, rather than to downturns in the
wellbeing indicator (Kamanou and Morduch, 2002; Dutta et al., 2011) or vulnerability
as welfare loss due to increased variance (Ligon and Schechter, 2003). We consider our
method to be complementary to qualitative studies, or other approaches. We focus on the
expected Foster Greer Thorbecke (FGT) measures that are the vulnerability analogues
of the static poverty measures used in national policy, combining these with the Calvo-
Dercon measure which is more sensitive to the threat of extreme poverty. Our focus
is deprivation in the space of household consumption, suitably spatially deﬂated and
adjusted for household composition.9
    The ﬁrst applied vulnerability measures that calculated expected poverty and proba-
bility of future poverty were developed around 15 years ago and are still most widely used
(see Hoddinott and Quisumbing (2003) for a review). Empirically, household poverty is
modeled as the realization of a stochastic process that generates consumption outcomes.
If realized consumption falls below a poverty line z , the household is classiﬁed ex-post
as a poor household. Vulnerability measurement, being ex-ante by deﬁnition, thus needs
a poverty measure, a poverty line, and a prediction of future consumption based on
assumptions about the stochastic process generating consumption. Household poverty
is deﬁned in the above papers using the FGT family of poverty indices (Foster et al.,
1984):10
                                                                     α
                                                        z − cht
                                  Pα,h,t =    max 0,                                                 (2)
                                                           z
    With α = 0 being the headcount, 1 the poverty gap and 2 the squared gap. Chaudhuri
et al. (2002) therefore deﬁned vulnerability as the expectation (i.e. the predicted value)
of poverty:
   9
     Other perspectives have also been applied but are not used in this paper. For example, understand-
ing the importance of assets for protecting livelihoods under stress, notably Moser (1998), and developed
                                                                 ´
in economics through the work of Carter and Barrett (2006); Echevin       (2013) and others. Dutta et al.
(2011) and G¨ unther and Maier (2014) consider that a desirable property for a vulnerability measure is
to reference it to the starting point of household welfare.
  10
     For convenience in this section we omit the community and district subscripts.


                                                   8
                        Table 2: Summary statistics

                       Variable                                Mean       Std. Dev.
Household characteristics
Monthly consumption per adult (1996 Ethiopian birr)           1757.374      2083.679
Age of household head                                          44.249        14.374
Female headed household                                         0.181         0.385
Head primary education                                          0.298         0.457
Head secondary education                                        0.051          0.22
Head nonformal education                                        0.044         0.206
Household sector of occupation: agriculture                     0.352         0.261
Household head unemployed                                       0.003         0.057
Household sector of occupation: manufacturing                   0.016         0.077
Household sector of occupation: services or trade               0.043         0.121
Household size                                                  5.858         2.293
Proportion of females 16-64                                     0.249          0.15
Proportion of females under 15                                  0.242         0.179
Proportion of females over 65                                   0.014         0.076
Proportion of males under 15                                    0.249         0.184
Proportion of males over 65                                     0.017         0.067
Household dependency ratio                                      0.513         0.204
Household owns more than 3 plots                                0.531         0.499
Household can raise 200 birr in a week                          0.755          0.43
Household received income from PSNP in 2010                    0.066          0.248
Household net consumer of food                                  0.481           0.5
Household owns land                                             0.913         0.283
Household has own ﬂush toilet/pit latrine                       0.388         0.487
Household uses ﬂush toilet/pit latrine                           0.5            0.5
Household has corrugated iron roof                              0.382         0.486
Household has electricity                                        0.1           0.3
Dummy: urban household that rents                               0.085         0.278
Geographic characteristics
Rural Household                                                0.849         0.358
Ln Distance to market (km)                                     3.726         1.229
Close to market (less than median minutes)                      0.49          0.5
Distance to town (minutes)                                    288.226       201.758
Shocks
Household suﬀered death of member                              0.043          0.204
Household suﬀered job loss of member                           0.007          0.086
Household suﬀered self-reported food price shock               0.121          0.326
Inﬂation rate (3-month moving average)                         1.545          1.412
Drought: proportion lost crops                                 14.848        18.928
                          N                                             37,964
              Notes: Descriptive statistics for 2005 and 2011 pooled.


                                         9
                                                                          α
                                                            z − ch,t+1
                          V [Pα , h, t] = E     max 0,                                           (3)
                                                                z
    Pritchett et al. (2000) and Chaudhuri (2003) further extend the deﬁnition of vulner-
ability as a high probability that the future consumption falls below the poverty line:

                                      Vh,t = P r (ch,t+1 ≤ z )                                   (4)
    In the binary measure, vulnerable households are deﬁned as those with probability
of consumption falling below the poverty line being greater than 0.5. The advantage of
this measure is that is very intuitive, and policy-relevant. However, it comes with the
disadvantages that are associated with the headcount measure, that it is not sensitive
to depth of poverty. Calvo and Dercon (2013) note particularly the concern that such
vulnerability measures allow (even a small probability) good event to outweigh possible
periods of deprivation. Ravallion (1988) and Kamanou and Morduch (2002) estimate the
expected value of the squared poverty gap; in this case, poor households are implicitly
assumed to have increasing absolute risk aversion.
    Calvo and Dercon (2013) take an approach that they argue is a middle-ground be-
tween vulnerability as expected poverty and vulnerability as utility loss of increased risk.
The authors propose a set of axioms extending those from static poverty measurement,
that we summarize as focusing on the level of welfare in a particular realized state,
and the probability of that state occurring, wherein if the probability of a lower welfare
outcome increases, vulnerability should not fall. Their “No compensation” axiom incor-
porates the concept that for vulnerability purposes, an improvement in the best scenario
should not compensate for bad (i.e. below the poverty line) scenarios. The authors oﬀer
a measure that depends on a constant relative risk sensitive (CRRS) measure, with risk
sensitivity captured in a ﬂexible parameter, θ:
                                                     1
                                Vht (z, p, c, t) =     1 − E [ xθ
                                                                h,t+1 ]                          (5)
                                                     θ
Where xh,t+1 = c ˜h,t+1 /z and c                                   ˜h,t+1 = z if ch,t+1 ≥ z . This
                               ˜h,t+1 = ch,t+1 if ch,t+1 < z , and c
censored consumption is then expressed relative to the poverty line z ; p are the set of
probabilities for the realized states of consumption in the expectation term.11

3.2     Estimating the probability distribution of future
        consumption
Underpinning all of the above vulnerability measures is the empirical estimation of the
cumulative density function (CDF) for future consumption ch,t+1 . We use the estimated
impact of shocks on consumption and the estimated probability of their occurrence to
generate the CDF of ch,t+1 for each household.
  11
    Note here that the Expected Poverty measures outlined in equation 3 above do also incorporate
such censoring (e.g. the poverty gap is calculated, and then summed - therefore it is censored at the
poverty line in each period).


                                                     10
    The earliest empirical work did not observe shocks, and relied on the cross-sectional
distribution of consumption to impute the prospective distribution for each household.
Chaudhuri (2003)) notes that the main drawback of this approach is that the method
implicitly assumes that shocks to consumption experienced by diﬀerent households are
drawn from the same distribution. Later work modeled the variance of consumption as
depending on household and community characteristics (Christiaensen and Subbarao,
2005), but did not adequately allow for the variance in consumption that results from
covariate shocks such as weather or prices. Survey data necessarily only observe one
(if cross-sectional) or a small number (if a panel) of weather and price outcomes. As a
result relying only on the variation within survey data alone does not provide a complete
estimate of the variation in consumption that arises from these shocks. As we show,
this variation can be substantial and omitting this source of variation results in an
underestimate of vulnerability.
    For the idiosyncratic shocks of death and job loss, we assume that the cross-sectional
distribution of the shock for a group of households with similar characteristics represents
the probability distribution of this shock occurring in a future period. This is similar
to other studies on vulnerability (Klasen et al., 2015). Household characteristics such
as assets, schooling and gender of the household head, plus land, cattle, highland and
pastoral in the rural areas are used to group households and estimate the probability of
the shock occurring (given all of the idiosyncratic shocks were deﬁned as binary events).
    For drought shocks, the 17 year historic distribution of crop losses due to inadequate
rainfall for each woreda using the LEAP dataset is used to deﬁne the distribution of
future rainfall shocks. To our knowledge nobody has used the historic distribution of
rainfall data to create future consumption distributions. For price shocks, the number of
times large increases in the CPI have been observed since 2005 is used to calculate the
probability that monthly inﬂation exceeds 1.5 percent on average in a given year. We do
not assume any covariance in drought and price shocks for the following two reasons: (i)
although there is a positive relationship between drought and price inﬂation in Ethiopia
the two episodes of very high inﬂation observed since 2005 have been driven by high
global food prices and monetary factors, not by poor rainfall, and (ii) drought is often
local in Ethiopia and the best estimates available suggest that since 2004 crop losses
have had limited local price eﬀects.
    These household-speciﬁc probability distributions are used to draw 6,000 sample
realizations of each shock. The impact of the shock on consumption in each scenario is
the realized shock drawn at random, multiplied by the impact of the shocks, δ and γ as
estimated from equation (5). We also incorporate a random error for each draw based
on the empirical distribution of the regression residuals.
    Although this method is appropriate for the type of shocks observed in the data,
recall that the drought shock included in the regression analysis is a continuous measure,
reﬂecting the proportion of normal crop yields lost due to insuﬃcient rainfall, and that
the two years of household survey data capture the moderate but not severe droughts
experienced during the 17 years. Developing an accurate distribution of drought-induced
consumption losses thus requires out-of-sample predictions on the magnitude of the loss.
    For out-of-sample large drought shocks, we use other empirical evidence to guide the

                                            11
simulation exercise. Using the Ethiopia Rural Household Survey, Porter (2012) found
that more extreme shocks impact consumption to a far greater extent than lesser shocks.
Rainfall in the bottom quintile of the 30 year village distribution caused up to 20% drop
in household consumption, whereas for the next quintile of the rainfall distribution (i.e.
less than average rainfall, but to a lesser extent), the impact was around 2% (and non-
signiﬁcant). Therefore in the simulations we also allow crop-loss to have a non-linear
impact on consumption, increasing ten-fold for shocks that are more than two standard
deviations above the long-run mean.
    The baseline consumption from the “ﬁxed eﬀects” or household and community char-
                              ˆ. Together, with the estimates of shock-induced consumption
acteristics is given by Xhjkt β
losses this allows us to calculate consumption for diﬀerent states of the world for each
household.

3.3     Estimating vulnerability
We create various vulnerability measures using the estimated CDF of ch,t+1 for each
household, noting that these capture vulnerability to the shocks that are captured in
our data.12
    We ﬁrst deﬁne all those with a predicted consumption lower than the national poverty
line as poor. The national absolute poverty numbers that are used by the Government
of Ethiopia (Woldehanna and Porter, 2013) are based on the Foster-Greer-Thorbecke
(FGT) family of poverty indices (Foster et al., 1984). A household is deﬁned as poor if
their total expenditure on all items is less than the national absolute poverty line of 3,781
birr in December 2010 prices. This is the amount of money needed to purchase food
of 2,200 kilocalories for every adult-equivalent in the household, and other (extremely
basic, necessary) items for everyone in the household.
    We next deﬁne as “vulnerable”, anyone with a probability of being poor higher than
0.5 across the 6,000 states of the world simulated (Pritchett et al., 2000; Chaudhuri,
2003). We also calculate the expected poverty gap and squared expected poverty gap
(equation 3, with α = 0, 1, 2; Christiaensen and Subbarao (2005)) to show vulnerability
to extreme poverty. Finally the Calvo-Dercon “no-compensation” vulnerability measure
(Calvo and Dercon, 2013), with the θ risk exposure reaction parameter set to 2, is also
calculated.13
    Finally, we note that we include only idiosyncratic shocks that negatively aﬀect con-
sumption, though a positive draw from the rainfall distribution would decrease poverty.
To the extent that there are any other positive shocks experienced by households, our
vulnerability estimates could be overestimates.
  12
     Though noting that the HICES 2011 contained questions about 20 diﬀerent shocks, including “other,
specify” and there were no others with a frequency higher than 3 or 4 percent.
  13
     In robustness checks, we vary the value of θ parameter.




                                                 12
4      Impact of weather and prices on consumption
In this section we present results on the impact of weather and price shocks on consump-
tion.
    We estimate equation 1 pooling observations for 2005 and 2011, including zone and
year ﬁxed eﬀects and allowing for clustering of the standard errors within zones. X in-
cludes education (of the household head, as well as highest education level of the house-
hold), assets, indicators of employment, age, dependency ratio, disability, gender and
woreda characteristics such as livelihood zone, access to market, probability of drought
occurrence in the past, and urban/rural location (which proxies for exposure to price
risk). A subset of X is interacted with the shock variables. For drought X includes
dummies that capture whether a household lives in a drought prone area, cultivates a
large or small amount of land, and, for those with little land, is a safety net beneﬁciary.
As the safety net was introduced after the ﬁrst survey, those that became beneﬁciaries
after 2005 are not counted as beneﬁciaries in 2005. For price shocks, X includes dummies
that capture whether a household lives in urban areas, is educated and is female headed.
Death and job-loss shocks are interacted with the same dummies. Table 3 shows the
impact of shocks on consumption. In table 6 in the annex we show separately the results
from the same model, for the “ﬁxed” elements of households and communities.
    Each increase in crop losses of 10 percent is correlated with a 3 percent fall in con-
sumption for households not receiving the PSNP, cultivating few plots and living in
drought-prone areas. The same 3 percent loss in consumption is also observed for house-
holds in drought prone areas that cultivate on a larger scale. Rainfall-induced crop losses
have no signiﬁcant impact on consumption for other households. Interestingly, land does
not mitigate the impact of the drought, though the safety-net appears to (noting that
drought was not so severe in 2011 when the PSNP was in operation). In a moderate
drought crop-losses are about 30 percent suggesting that a moderate drought causes a
drop in consumption of 9 percent for many households in drought prone areas.
    To investigate the impact on poverty of an extreme weather shock we estimate the
poverty rate were the weather conditions experienced in 2002–the worst drought recorded
in the LEAP database–to be experienced again. In this simulation the headcount poverty
rate would increase from 30% to 36%, almost reversing all of the gains in poverty reduc-
tion recorded from 2005 to 2011.
    Each 1 percentage point increase in the monthly inﬂation rate resulted in a 2 percent
reduction in consumption for rural households, a 2.5 percent reduction for urban house-
holds with an educated household head and a 3.5-3.8 percent reduction in consumption
for urban households with uneducated heads (female and male respectively). The im-
pact of the food price shock in 2011 was therefore substantial, reducing consumption by
14 percentage points among households with uneducated heads given that the average
monthly inﬂation was 3.87 percent from July 2010 to June 2011 (the start and end month
of the survey).14
  14
    In robustness checks we deﬁnes food price shock using the dummy self-report. The shock was
associated with reduction in consumption by 10-13% for those aﬀected in households with an uneducated
female household head in an urban area. Educated households in urban areas, and rural households


                                                 13
                               Table 3: Heterogeneous impact of shocks
                                                                       (1)
                                                      Ln consumption per adult (1996 prices)
 Death shock: rural hh many plots                                    -0.012
                                                                     (-0.63)

 Death shock: rural hh few plots                                      0.018
                                                                      (0.64)

 Death shock: urban hh head educated                                 -0.074∗∗
                                                                      (-2.73)

 Death shock: urban hh head uneducated female                         -0.064
                                                                      (-1.93)

 Death shock: urban hh head uneducated male                           -0.060
                                                                      (-1.25)

 Job loss shock: rural hh                                             -0.066
                                                                      (-1.08)

 Job loss shock: urban hh head educated                               -0.044
                                                                      (-1.72)

 Job loss shock: urban hh head uneducated female                      0.038
                                                                      (0.57)

 Job loss shock: urban hh head uneducated male                        -0.042
                                                                      (-0.60)

 Inﬂation: rural hh                                                  -0.019∗∗∗
                                                                      (-3.73)

 Inﬂation: urban hh head educated                                    -0.025∗∗∗
                                                                      (-5.47)

 Inﬂation: urban hh head uneducated female                           -0.035∗∗∗
                                                                      (-5.60)

 Inﬂation: urban hh head uneducated male                             -0.038∗∗∗
                                                                      (-5.03)

 Drought: non drought prone community                                -0.005∗∗∗
                                                                      (-3.37)

 Drought: drought prone, hh many plots                               -0.003∗∗∗
                                                                      (-5.69)

 Drought: drought prone, hh few plots with PSNP                       -0.002∗
                                                                      (-2.55)

 Drought: drought prone, hh few plots no PSNP                        -0.003∗∗∗
                                                                      (-6.03)
 Adjusted R-sq                                                          0.43
 Observations                                                          37969
 Robust t statistics in parentheses
 ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

Notes: Heterogeneous shock impacts reported, other control variables reported in table 6 in the annex.




                                                          14
    Death in the household has a large impact on consumption in urban areas (signiﬁcant
for households headed by uneducated females and by those with education) but no
signiﬁcant impact on consumption in rural areas. Job loss does not appear to have an
impact on consumption, this may be due to the fact that relatively few people are in
employment, and few report such a shock, resulting in low power to detect eﬀects. We
also re-estimated the model omitting the self-reported shocks of death and job loss given
their potential bias. The results on the impact of rainfall and inﬂation were unchanged.
    We performed several robustness checks on the estimated impact of rainfall-induced
crop-loss (including a squared term on the shock and a nonlinear impact for shocks above
60% crop losses) and conclude that the results are fairly robust to our choice of speciﬁ-
cation. As an additional robustness check, we use propensity score matching methods15
to calculate the “treatment eﬀect” of a higher than average drought. For this we created
a dummy variable for the ‘treatment’ equal to one if the woreda experienced crop loss
greater than the mean for the sample (13.6% or higher), and matched households based
on their characteristics and risk exposure. The ATT estimate was -.155 (s.e. =.0001).
Given the distribution of the crop losses in the sample (32% of households have expe-
rienced a drought shock deﬁned in this way), the result is consistent with the marginal
eﬀect estimated in the regression model. We also estimated a within-zone pseudo panel
model (i.e., collapsing to the average for each zone) and found similar, though less precise
results for the price shock and the drought shock.


5     Vulnerability estimates
Using the methodology described in section 3 above, we calculated total vulnerability to
poverty, as shown in table 4. In 2011, vulnerability to poverty was 38.2%, as measured
by the proportion of the population that had a higher than 50% chance of falling below
the poverty line (column 2). This shows that vulnerability is higher than poverty in
Ethiopia (with a headcount rate of just under 30% as shown in column 1), as is often the
case. Columns 3-5 outline some further measures of vulnerability that are more sensitive
to depth of future poverty episodes (rather than simply the probability of falling below
the line) as discussed in section 3. These are the expected poverty gap, expected squared
poverty gap (both as outlined in equation 3 above). The ﬁnal column shows the Calvo
and Dercon (2013) “no compensation” measure (equation 5).
   Although poverty is 4 percentage points higher in rural areas than urban areas, vul-
nerability according to all measures is substantially higher in rural areas. In particular,
the measures that are sensitive to depth are more than twice as high in rural areas com-
pared to urban areas, showing that it is rural households that are more vulnerable. Crop
conditions were relatively good throughout Ethiopia in 2011. This may seem surprising
given this was the onset of the Horn of Africa drought, but the crisis largely aﬀected
the pastoral regions of the country, which are not included in our sample. The relatively
good crop conditions in non-pastoral regions resulted in lower levels of poverty for many
were not impacted by the shock so deﬁned (see Table 7 in the annex).
  15
     teﬀects psmatch in stata 13.


                                                15
                            Table 4: Vulnerability Estimates, 2011

                         Headcount      V(prob)         E(Pov Gap)   E(Squared Gap)        Calvo-Dercon
 All                       0.294         0.382             0.082          0.050                0.142
 (Standard error)                       (0.003)           (0.001)        (0.001)              (0.001)

 Urban Households           0.261         0.210            0.038            0.020               0.065
 (Standard error)                        (0.003)          (0.001)          (0.000)             (0.001)
 Rural Households           0.302         0.416            0.082            0.050               0.142
 (Standard error)                        (0.005)          (0.001)          (0.001)             (0.002)
Notes: Survey-weighted proportion of population that have the characteristics. Headcount is the Foster
et al. (1984) headcount measure, E(pov gap) and E(squared gap) are the expected values of the FGT
poverty measures respectively. The ﬁnal column is Calvo and Dercon (2013) measure with parameter
θ set at one-third. Bootstrapped standard errors in brackets.


households as higher crop incomes allowed them to consume more. Although households
were less poor in 2011 than in previous years, they were still quite vulnerable to poverty
in the future. In urban areas more households were poor in 2011 (26 percent) than had
a higher than 50 percent chance of being poor in the future (21 percent). This reﬂects
the fact that urban household were experiencing a very bad year in 2011 as a result of
high price inﬂation.
    We explore next whether there are gender diﬀerences in the urban and rural vulner-
ability proﬁles. Klasen et al. (2015) examine the correlates of poverty and vulnerability
in Thailand and Vietnam with respect to gender of the household head, and ﬁnd that in
both countries, female headed households are more vulnerable, though this is driven by
diﬀerent factors: higher exposure to shocks in Thailand, and higher poverty in Vietnam.
The authors also call for more gender disaggregated poverty and vulnerability analysis
as a guide to policy. In Ethiopia there are still signiﬁcant gaps between male and female
adult outcomes, especially with regard to education and literacy - in 2011, more than half
of Ethiopian women had no education (compared with 38 percent of men). We therefore
calculated our various vulnerability measures, disaggregated by gender, for both urban
and rural areas. Table 7 in the annex shows some key descriptive statistics disaggregated
by location and gender. The results show that in rural areas female-headed households
have signiﬁcantly lower levels of vulnerability (37 percent) than male-headed households
(42 percent). This result is fairly consistent across all of our calculated vulnerability
measures. In contrast, female-headed households show signiﬁcantly higher vulnerabil-
ity in urban areas, with 22 percent being likely to be poor, compared to 20 percent of
male-headed households. Referring back to our regression results in table 3, we found
that uneducated households suﬀered most from food price shocks. Higher urban vulner-
ability can in part be attributed to the fact that female headed households have lower
levels of education. For the rural results, we see that female headed households have
slightly lower poverty than male headed households. We also ﬁnd that the impact of
drought was lower for PSNP beneﬁciaries with low land holdings (which describes most
female-headed households), and so PSNP targeting of female headed households could


                                                   16
explain the diﬀerence.

                 Table 5: Vulnerability by gender of household head, 2011

                         Headcount      V(prob)         E(Pov Gap)   E(Squared Gap)        Calvo-Dercon
 Rural Households
 Male-head                  0.307         0.424            0.092            0.057               0.159
 (Standard error)                        (0.006)          (0.002)          (0.001)             (0.003)
 Female-head                0.274         0.372            0.084            0.054               0.147
 (Standard error)                        (0.011)          (0.003)          (0.002)             (0.005)
 Urban Households
 Male-head                  0.243         0.204            0.038            0.020               0.064
 (Standard error)                        (0.004)          (0.001)          (0.001)             (0.002)
 Female-head                0.282         0.225            0.039            0.020               0.067
 (Standard error)                        (0.006)          (0.001)          (0.001)             (0.002)
Notes: Survey-weighted proportion of population that have the characteristics. Other notes as in table
4 above.

    Unreliable rainfall has historically underpinned much of the discussion on vulnera-
bility in Ethiopia given the predominance of livelihoods that are dependent on rainfed
production systems. This characterization of vulnerability has resulted in a widespread
understanding of a geographic footprint of vulnerability, with more drought prone places
characterized as more vulnerable. Safety net interventions have been targeted in these
areas. We compared the level of vulnerability across geographic types (according to
altitude and crop reliability). We ﬁnd that vulnerability still has a strong geographic
footprint in Ethiopia. The moisture reliable lowlands are the most vulnerable places in
Ethiopia in 2011, followed by the Enset-growing lowlands and the drought-prone high-
lands. It may at ﬁrst seem surprising that the moisture reliable lowlands are the most
vulnerable places in Ethiopia, given that by their deﬁnition moisture is indeed more
reliable in these areas. However, poverty, although falling, is still very high in the mois-
ture reliable lowlands. More than half, 59%, of residents were poor in 2005. This fell
substantially to 45% in 2011, though was still 13 percentage points higher than the next
geographic area. Vulnerability is high in these lowlands not because residents are more
subject to climate shocks that will drive them into poverty, but because residents are al-
ready poor. Lower levels of education and asset ownership result in our model predicting
higher vulnerability in these areas.
    However, even though vulnerability may have a geographic footprint in Ethiopia,
much vulnerability is not geographically determined, but instead determined by other
factors such as individual access to assets, or lifecycle events. This causes individuals
everywhere, in every woreda of Ethiopia, to be vulnerable. We compared the proportion
of vulnerable households in PSNP and non-PSNP woredas. Our results show that the
PSNP is targeted to many of the most vulnerable areas: in particular, the vulnerable
enset lowlands and to the drought prone highlands. However they also point to a need
for safety nets in the moisture reliable lowlands, and at present very few woredas in
these areas are included in the PSNP. Indeed, a safety net program that is targeted to

                                                   17
speciﬁc woredas will necessarily result in many vulnerable Ethiopians being left without
protection. The analysis ﬁnds that 37 percent of households living in non-PSNP woredas
are vulnerable to absolute poverty.


6    Conclusions and policy implications
We use a nationally representative dataset merged with climate and price data to esti-
mate the impact of climate and price shocks on household consumption. We ﬁnd that
many Ethiopians are unable to protect their consumption against lack of rainfall and
sudden increases in food prices. There is considerable heterogeneity in the impact of all
types of shocks. Rural households in drought prone areas that are not currently recipi-
ents of the safety net, and households with little education in urban areas are most at
risk to suﬀer drops in their consumption. We estimate that a moderate drought causes a
9 percent reduction in consumption for households that are not covered by the PSNP in
drought-prone areas. This implies a substantial increase in poverty when rains are poor.
As an example, were the drought of 2002 to be repeated, we estimate that the headcount
poverty rate would increase by 21 percentage points from 30 to 51 percent. Sudden food
price increases can be similarly devastating for urban households. We estimate that the
high inﬂation experienced in the ﬁrst half of 2011 resulted in a reduction of 14 percent
in the consumption of uneducated households in urban areas.
    We take actual distributions of climate and price shocks in each district to simulate
the probable ex-ante distribution of consumption and use this to quantify vulnerability to
poverty in Ethiopia. Our numbers can be compared directly to oﬃcial poverty numbers,
to show how sensitive current poverty estimates are to shocks that are prevalent in the
context. We ﬁnd that 42 percent of rural households are vulnerable to poverty, but only
21 percent of urban households. Vulnerability to poverty is much higher than poverty in
rural areas but this is not the case in urban areas, reﬂecting the fact that the household
survey was conducted during a year of good conditions for rural households and very
diﬃcult conditions for urban households. Within rural areas, vulnerability is higher in
areas prone to drought. However, much vulnerability is not geographically determined,
but instead determined by other factors such related to gender and education. We show
that the ranking of vulnerability across groups (e.g. rural female, rural male) are fairly
stable across the choice of measure, though measures that are more sensitive to depth
of potential deprivation should also be carefully checked.
    The methodology used avoids a number of the limitations of cross-section data where
possible but caveats to the analysis remain with regard to unobserved household char-
acteristics. For this type of analysis, the data requirements are indeed high, and future
challenges include generalizing estimates of consumption more reliably out-of-sample in
order to improve the vulnerability estimates (Anttila-Hughes and Sharma, 2014).
    In terms of policy, the results highlight the need for caution in using poverty data
collected once every ﬁve years to target programs, as underlying rates of vulnerability
can be quite diﬀerent from the poverty rate captured at one point in time. More frequent
collection of poverty data, and vulnerability analysis such as performed in this paper can


                                           18
help address this concern.
    The results also point to the need to protect households from large covariate shocks,
particularly households for whom shocks are most costly. Safety nets can help households
manage agricultural risk such as drought, but other risk management instruments can
also help, particularly for households that are better-oﬀ and unlikely to be included in
safety net programs. Agricultural index insurance has been piloted in a number of sites in
Ethiopia, and research suggests that if oﬀered through the right institutional set-up, and
with some subsidization of marketing costs, it will be purchased by a number of farmers
(Berhane et al., 2012; Dercon et al., 2014). The World Food Programme and Oxfam
have also piloted incorporating index insurance with the PSNP. This has resulted in high
demand for insurance among PSNP households. Further work is also ongoing on using
indexes to trigger payments from a risk pool (such as in the African Risk Capacity16 ) at
a national level in order to support increased safety net disbursements during times of
widespread drought.
    A number of options may be available to increase protection for rural households
against bad weather, but this analysis has also shown that households–particularly urban
households–need protection from food price shocks also. The high impact of food price
shocks in urban areas points to the need for urban safety nets that are able to respond to
sudden price increases. Further research on what causes slow nominal wage adjustment
in urban areas, such as ﬁxed nominal wages in the public sector (World Bank, 2016),
may shed light on additional policy interventions that can reduce the impact of this risk
on urban welfare.




 16
   A special agency of the African Union, also funded by development partners.   http://www.
africanriskcapacity.org/ last accessed 26th January 2015.


                                            19
References
Alem, Y. and S¨ oderbom, M. (2012). Household-level consumption in urban ethiopia:
  The eﬀects of a large food price shock. World Development, 40(1):146–162.
Alwang, J., Siegel, P. B., and Jorgensen, S. L. (2001). Vulnerability: a view from diﬀerent
  disciplines. Technical report, Social protection discussion paper series.
Anttila-Hughes, J. and Sharma, M. (2014). Linking risk models to microeconomic indi-
 cators. Microeconomics and Catastrophe Risk Modelling Paper 2, World Bank.
Anttila-Hughes, J. K. and Hsiang, S. M. (2013). Destruction, disinvestment, and death:
 Economic and human losses following environmental disaster. Available at SSRN
 2220501.
Berhane, G., Clarke, D., Dercon, S., Hill, R. V., and Taﬀesse, A. S. (2012). Financial
  innovations for social and climate resilience: Ethiopia case study. Research report.
Calvo, C. and Dercon, S. (2013). Vulnerability to individual and aggregate poverty.
  Social Choice and Welfare, 41(4):721–740.
Carter, M. R. and Barrett, C. B. (2006). The economics of poverty traps and persistent
  poverty: An asset-based approach. The Journal of Development Studies, 42(2):178–
  199.
Chaudhuri, S. (2003).          Assessing vulnerability to poverty:       concepts,
 empirical methods and illustrative examples.             Department of Eco-
 nomics     Columbia     University   available at:     http://info.   worldbank.
 org/etools/docs/library/97185/Keny 0304/Ke 0304/vulnerabilityassessment. pdf.
Chaudhuri, S., Jalan, J., and Suryahadi, A. (2002). Assessing household vulnerability
 to poverty from cross-sectional data: A methodology and estimates from indonesia.
 Working paper, Department of Economics, Columbia University.
Christiaensen, L. J. and Subbarao, K. (2005). Towards an understanding of household
 vulnerability in rural kenya. Journal of African Economies, 14(4):520–558.
Dell, M., Jones, B. F., and Olken, B. A. (2014). What do we learn from the weather?
  the new climate-economy literature. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(3):740–98.
Dercon, S. (2004). Growth and shocks: evidence from rural ethiopia. Journal of Devel-
  opment Economics, 74(2):309–329.
Dercon, S., Hill, R. V., Clarke, D., Outes-Leon, I., and Seyoum Taﬀesse, A. (2014). Oﬀer-
  ing rainfall insurance to informal insurance groups: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment
  in ethiopia. Journal of Development Economics, 106:132–143.
Dercon, S., Hoddinott, J., and Woldehanna, T. (2005). Shocks and consumption in 15
  ethiopian villages, 1999-2004. Journal of African economies.

                                            20
Dercon, S. and Krishnan, P. (2000). Vulnerability, seasonality and poverty in ethiopia.
  Journal of Development Studies, 36(6):25.

Devarajan, S., Go, D. S., Maliszewska, M., Osorio-Rodarte, I., and Timmer, H. (2013).
  Stress-testing africa’s recent growth and poverty performance. Technical report, The
  World Bank.

Dutta, I., Foster, J., and Mishra, A. (2011). On measuring vulnerability to poverty.
 Social Choice and Welfare, 37(4):743–761.
´
Echevin, D. (2013). Measuring vulnerability to asset-poverty in sub-saharan africa.
  World Development, 46:211–222.

Foster, J., Greer, J., and Thorbecke, E. (1984). A class of decomposable poverty mea-
  sures. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 761–766.

 unther, I. and Maier, J. K. (2014). Poverty, vulnerability, and reference-dependent
G¨
 utility. Review of Income and Wealth, 60(1):155–181.

Headey, D., Nisrane, F. B., Worku, I., Dereje, M., and Taﬀesse, A. S. (2012). Urban
  wage behavior and food price inﬂation: The case of ethiopia. Ethiopia Strategy Support
  Programme II Working Paper, 41.

Hoddinott, J. and Quisumbing, A. R. (2003). Methods for microeconometric risk and
 vulnerability assessments. Technical report, The World Bank.

Hoefsloot, P. and Calmanti, S. (2012). Leap version 2.61 for ethiopia user manual.
 Technical report, The World Bank.

Kamanou, G. and Morduch, J. (2002). Measuring vulnerability to poverty, vol-
 ume 58. WIDER Discussion Papers–World Institute for Development Economics
 (UNU-WIDER).

Klasen, S., Lechtenfeld, T., and Povel, F. (2015). A feminization of vulnerability? female
  headship, poverty, and vulnerability in thailand and vietnam. World Development,
  71:36–53.

Ligon, E. and Schechter, L. (2003). Measuring vulnerability*. The Economic Journal,
  113(486):C95–C102.

Moser, C. O. (1998). The asset vulnerability framework: reassessing urban poverty
 reduction strategies. World development, 26(1):1–19.

Porter, C. (2012). Shocks, consumption and income diversiﬁcation in rural ethiopia.
  Journal of Development Studies, 48(9):1209–1222.

Pritchett, L., Suryahadi, A., and Sumarto, S. (2000). Quantifying vulnerability to
  poverty: A proposed measure, applied to indonesia. Technical Report 2437, World
  Bank.

                                           21
Ravallion, M. (1988). Expected poverty under risk-induced welfare variability. The
  Economic Journal, pages 1171–1182.

Robinson, S., Strzepek, K., and Cervigni, R. (2013). The cost of adapting to climate
  change in ethiopia: Sector-wise and macro-economic estimates. Ethiopia Strategy
  Support Program II (ESSP) working Paper, 53.

Thomas, T., Christiaensen, L., Do, Q.-T., and Trung, L. D. (2010). Natural disasters
 and household welfare: evidence from vietnam. World Bank Policy Research Working
 Paper Series.

Woldehanna, T. and Porter, C. (2013). Poverty and growth in ethiopia (1995/96 -
 2010/11): The poverty reduction legacy of meles zenawi and future challenges. Tech-
 nical report, Government of Ethiopia.

World Bank (2014). World development report 2014: Risk and opportunity. Technical
 report, World Bank.

World Bank (2016). Why so idle? wages and employment in a crowded labor market.
 ﬁfth ethiopia economic update. Technical report, World Bank.




                                        22
Annex: Additional Tables




                       23
                                          Table 6: Household Characteristics
                                                                   (1)
                                                  Ln consumption per adult (1996 prices)
 Dummy: female uneducated Household head                         -0.004
                                                                 (-0.14)

 Dummy: male uneducated Household head                            -0.004
                                                                  (-0.15)

 Rural Household                                                   0.044
                                                                   (0.38)

 Age of household head                                           -0.004∗∗∗
                                                                  (-15.11)

 Female headed Household                                         -0.063∗∗∗
                                                                   (-6.05)

 Head primary edu                                                  0.039
                                                                   (1.33)

 Head completed secondary education                              0.197∗∗∗
                                                                  (6.23)

 Head nonformal edu                                                0.062
                                                                   (1.95)

 Drought prone village                                           0.094∗∗∗
                                                                  (3.47)

 Logarithm of household size                                     -0.511∗∗∗
                                                                  (-23.88)

 Proportion of females 16-64                                     0.261∗∗∗
                                                                  (7.13)

 Proportion of females under 15                                  0.206∗∗∗
                                                                  (6.97)

 Proportion of females over 65                                   0.420∗∗∗
                                                                  (5.86)

 Proportion of males under 15                                    0.177∗∗∗
                                                                  (5.83)

 Proportion of males over 65                                     0.267∗∗∗
                                                                  (3.45)

 Ln Distance to market                                             0.004
                                                                   (0.56)

 Close to market (less than median minutes)                       -0.016
                                                                  (-1.09)

 Household owns land                                              -0.029∗
                                                                  (-2.24)

 Household owns more than 3 plots                                0.056∗∗∗
                                                                  (5.89)

 Household has corrugated iron roof                              0.107∗∗∗
                                                                  (10.88)

 Household uses ﬂush toilet/pit latrine                          0.060∗∗∗
                                                                  (5.64)

 Household has own ﬂush toilet/pit latrine                       0.054∗∗∗
                                                                  (6.29)

 Household has electricity                                        -0.037∗
                                                                  (-2.30)

 Dummy: urban household that rents                               0.125∗∗∗
                                                                  (9.64)
 Observations                                                      37969
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
Other controls included but not reported include zone and year ﬁxed eﬀects, agro-climactic zones, further demographic controls, occupation.




                                                                    24
     Table 7: Descriptive statistics: Urban and Rural , male and female households
                Expenditure   Death shock   Job loss    Food price   Crop loss   PSNP
 Urban male      3131.669         0.01       0.012        0.185         0        0.023
 Urban Female    3041.826        0.022       0.013        0.208          0       0.053
 Rural male       1661.1         0.008       0.001        0.184       11.729     0.116
 Rural female    1735.116         0.04       0.002        0.217       12.884     0.185
Notes: Variables deﬁned in Table 2.




                                                       25
                                  Table 8: Self-reported food-price shocks
                                                                            (1)
                                                           Ln consumption per adult (1996 prices)
 Death shock: rural hh many plots                                         -0.014
                                                                          (-0.74)

 Death shock: rural hh few plots                                            0.028
                                                                            (0.99)

 Death shock: urban hh head educated                                       -0.070∗∗
                                                                            (-2.66)

 Death shock: urban hh head uneducated female                               -0.040
                                                                            (-1.19)

 Death shock: urban hh head uneducated male                                 -0.047
                                                                            (-1.03)

 Job loss shock: rural hh                                                   -0.044
                                                                            (-0.75)

 Job loss shock: urban hh head educated                                     -0.036
                                                                            (-1.44)

 Job loss shock: urban hh head uneducated female                            0.041
                                                                            (0.61)

 Job loss shock: urban hh head uneducated male                              -0.006
                                                                            (-0.10)

 Food price shock: rural hh                                                 -0.008
                                                                            (-0.47)

 Food price shock: urban hh head educated                                   -0.018
                                                                            (-1.05)

 Food price shock: urban hh head uneducated female                         -0.077∗∗
                                                                            (-2.74)

 Food price shock: urban hh head uneducated male                            -0.042
                                                                            (-1.25)

 Drought: non drought prone community                                      -0.005∗∗∗
                                                                            (-3.43)

 Drought: drought prone, hh many plots                                     -0.003∗∗∗
                                                                            (-5.69)

 Drought: drought prone, hh few plots with PSNP                             -0.002
                                                                            (-1.82)

 Drought: drought prone, hh few plots no PSNP                              -0.003∗∗∗
                                                                            (-6.43)
 Adjusted R-sq                                                                0.45
 Observations                                                                39577
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
Notes: This table replicates results in table 3, but the food price shock is self-reported rather than CPI. Controls as those
of table 3. Robust t statistics in parentheses.




                                                            26
