                                                      WPS7894


 Policy Research Working Paper                       7894




Heterogeneous Returns to Income Diversification
                          Evidence from Nigeria

                                  Eleonora Bertoni
                                    Paul Corral
                                    Vasco Molini
                                  Gbemisola Oseni




 Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
 November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7894


  Abstract
 This paper investigates the impact of income diversifica-                          the existence of heterogeneous returns on diversification
 tion on farming households’ welfare in Nigeria on two                              as a consequence of the drought, and estimates the returns
 rounds of the Nigeria General Household Survey-Panel,                              through a non-parametric selection model using a local
 namely the 2010/2011 and 2012/2013. The study finds                                instrumental variable. The choice of this model is dictated
 that income diversification is the norm in Nigeria, with                           by the necessity to account for both heterogeneous effects
 about 60 percent of farmers diversifying away from sub-                            of diversification and selection bias related to households’
 sistence farming into non-farm activities and cash crops.                          decision to diversify. Overall, it is found that diversification
 In addition, using the panel of farmers interviewed before                         positively affects consumption in Nigeria. However, who
 and after a severe drought that hit Northern Nigeria in                            benefits the most is crucially determined by the initial con-
 particular in 2011, the study finds that diversification                           ditions under which diversification is undertaken and the
 increased throughout Nigeria from 60 to 64 percent and                             specific agro-climatic context in which households operate.
 in the North from 58 to 63 percent. The study postulates




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to
  provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  ebertoni@worldbankgroup.org,pcorralrodas@worldbank.org, vmolini@worldbank.org, and goseni@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Heterogeneous Returns to Income Diversiﬁcation: Evidence from

                                               Nigeria

              Eleonora Bertonia c , Paul Corrala , Vasco Molini∗ a , and Gbemisola Oseni† b

                    a Poverty-Global Practice, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
                   b
                       Development Data Group, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
                                         c
                                           Università di Torino, ITA




                                           November, 2016




Key words: Income Diversiﬁcation, Oﬀ-farm, Heterogeneous returns, Nigeria.
JEL classiﬁcation: C14, D31, J43, Q12.
  ∗
      Corresponding author: Vasco Molini. Telephone: +1 202 473 4891. E-mail: vmolini@worldbank.org
  †
      We aknowledge comments from Carlo Azzarri and Alberto Zezza on previous versions of this paper.
1. Introduction


Although agriculture is the most prevalent income generating activity in many developing
countries, a considerable portion of farming households do not rely solely on agriculture. If
markets were complete, the rational behavior would be for households to focus on the activ-
ities where they have comparative advantage and that yield the highest returns. However,
many farm households in developing countries are poor and have limited access to eﬃcient
credit, land, labor, and insurance markets. Thus households often engage in multiple in-
come generating activities to buﬀer agricultural related shocks and ensure a more consistent
income stream.

The belief that improvement of the lives of those residing in rural areas necessarily entails
improvement of agriculture is not that uncommon (Escobal, 2001). Although the prevalence
of diversiﬁcation has already been proven empirically,1 most policy that seeks to improve
rural lives still tends to focus only on agriculture (Escobal, 2001). While it is still the case that
many rural households in developing countries engage in agriculture, studies have shown that
diversiﬁcation has become more common and rural policies should reﬂect this. It is expected
that income from sources outside of agriculture will become more prevalent, especially in
Sub-Saharan Africa where agriculture may not be able to keep up with population growth
(Haggblade et al., 2007). Diversiﬁcation presents farming households an avenue to increase
their consumption in the event that agriculture alone may not suﬃce. In any case, poor
farming households often lack suﬃcient land to subsist only from agriculture (Banerjee and
Duﬂo, 2007), and hence agriculture should just be one part of the policy agenda. Furthermore
agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa relies mostly on rainfall and thus is very susceptible to
any weather shocks, and could leave farmers with unreliable income streams. Therefore
diversiﬁcation could be a path towards achieving consumption smoothing.

Despite the potential positive eﬀects of diversiﬁcation, households do not necessarily have
equal access or beneﬁt equally from diversiﬁcation. Davis et al. (2009) mentions that access
to activities outside of agriculture is not equally distributed, and that the rich may potentially
beneﬁt more from these activities. In a similar fashion, Dabalen et al. (2004) ﬁnd in Rwanda
that farm workers on average could considerably increase their income by participating in
oﬀ-farm activities, but the gains from oﬀ-farm activities beneﬁt mostly the non-poor.

The present paper contributes to the literature on two fronts. First, it attempts to address
the above mentioned diversiﬁcation heterogeneity applying a semi-parametric method which
  1
      Davis et al., (2009); Winters et al., (2009), Davis et al., (2014).


                                                         2
allows to analyze both the diﬀerences resulting from observable characteristics as well as those
from un-observable skills. Second, making use of a very rare data set for Sub-Saharan Africa
- a panel of households interviewed before and after a serious climatic shock- it shows how
heterogeneity is relevant also across time. Returns from observable characteristics but most
importantly unobservable skills can vary substantially after a shock and standard statistical
techniques fail to capture this eﬀect.

Overall, it is found that diversiﬁcation positively aﬀects consumption in Nigeria. However,
who beneﬁts the most is crucially determined by the initial conditions under which diversiﬁ-
cation is undertaken and the speciﬁc agro-climatic context in which households operate. For
example, in Nigeria, it is found that the severe drought that hit the country between 2011
and 2012 -just after the 2011 harvesting season and before the 2012 planting season (Bjerge
and Fisket, 2016) - by reducing the opportunities to diversify in higher returns activities, has
accentuated the heterogeneity of the returns on diversiﬁcation. Figure 1 shows that in 2011
the country experienced a lower than average rainfall and higher than average temperatures
resulting in a severe drought (Bjerge and Fisker 2016).

The paper is divided into six sections. The next section discusses some of the literature
related to the topic of income diversiﬁcation and farming. Section three provides background
on Nigeria, speciﬁcally how the North and South of the nation diﬀer, and discusses the data
utilized. Section four elaborates on the methodology used, while section ﬁve discusses the
results obtained. Finally, conclusions are presented in section six.



2. Diversiﬁcation and agriculture


In recent literature,2 the importance of oﬀ-farm3 activities as a poverty reduction strategy
is well documented. As much as 40-60 percent of rural incomes in Latin America, Asia, and
Africa are obtained from rural non-farm employment and the sector outweighs migration
and farm wage labor as a source of income and liquidity (Davis et al. 2009). Why farmers
tend to diversify is also well documented and literature tends to classify the reasons into
two groups: “push” and “pull” factors.4 Households are “pushed” to diversify in order to
   2
     Escobal, 2001; De Janvry et al., 2005; Reardon et al., 2007; Davis et al., 2009; Winters et al., 2010;
Barrett et al., 2001.
   3
     oﬀ-farm activities refers to any labor activity outside of the household’s farm, including agricultural
wage labor. Non-farm refers to activities which do not include agricultural wage labor (Gordon and Craig,
2001).
   4
     See Barrett et al. (2001); Haggblade (2007); Davis et al. (2009); Reardon et al. (2007), among others.


                                                     3
minimize risk, due to low marginal productivity on the farm, to cope with shocks, or to
counter liquidity constraints (Barrett et al., 2001; Reardon et al., 2007). When markets
are perhaps missing, or imperfect, the household may have or want more than what the
market is able to absorb or oﬀer; it is under these circumstances that the farming decisions
of the household are dependent on the household’s endowments (Bardhan and Udry, 1999).
These imperfect markets gives rise to liquidity constraints, low marginal productivity of
labor on the family farm, and adoption of risk mitigating strategies. Thus, diversiﬁcation
entails taking up diﬀerent activities with low correlation between each other in order to
decrease the impact of a negative shock on consumption (Dercon, 2002). On the other hand,
diversiﬁcation which has accumulation objectives is often related to pull factors (Reardon et
al., 2007). Households are “pulled” into diversiﬁcation due to strategic complementarities
between activities, and comparative advantage (Barret et al., 2001). Households involved in
diversiﬁcation driven by pull factors are usually accumulating assets; consequently, they see
their incomes rise.

Studies ﬁnding a positive relationship between diversiﬁcation and agricultural production are
numerous. Oﬀ-farm income is found to have a positive and signiﬁcant eﬀect on agricultural
production in rural Nigeria (Babatunde, 2012); Oseni and Winters (2009) ﬁnd that in Nigeria,
participation in non-farm activities has a positive and signiﬁcant eﬀect on the expenditure
on agricultural inputs. Not all the studies examining the relationship between diversiﬁcation
and agricultural production found, however, positive links. Capital intensive activities which
are more proﬁtable tend to attract the rich, and often include activities demanding high
human capital (Reardon et al., 2007). Consequently, these activities may potentially move
households away from agriculture. Kilic et al. (2009) ﬁnd that this is the case among rural
households in Albania, where households prefer to move out of agriculture as opposed to
investing in it. Pfeiﬀer et al. (2009) ﬁnd for Mexico that diversiﬁcation is negatively related
to agricultural output; all else being equal, the greater the access to oﬀ-farm opportunities,
the less likely the household will remain in agriculture.

As mentioned before, non-farm incomes can play an important role in reducing poverty but
also income inequality. Results from a study conducted in the Hubei province of China show
that in the absence of non-farm employment, rural poverty and inequality would be worse (de
Janvry et al., 2005). The study also suggests that those farmers who remain in agriculture
possess non-observable characteristics associated to higher productivity in agriculture. When
linking oﬀ-farm activities to more general distributional issues, the question arises as whether
returns of oﬀ-farm activities are homongenous along the income distribution or it can be
postulated some sort of heterogenity. A corollary of this is clearly whether, as consequence

                                               4
of external shocks, the returns can modify and of how much.

On the heterogeneity across the income distribution, Dabalen et al. (2004), for example ﬁnd
that in Rwanda the beneﬁts of diversiﬁcation tend to diminish as it approaches the lower end
of the distribution; authors posit that ﬁxed costs and entry barriers into certain activities
play a role in this results. Likewise, Reardon et al., (2007) ﬁnd that diﬀerences in asset
endowments between rich and poor households lead them to very diﬀerent diversiﬁcation
paths. In general, poorer households, due to insuﬃcient endowments, may pursue low risk
diversiﬁcation activities which oﬀer low returns (Barrett et al., 2005) or initiate businesses
that can only accommodate family members as employees (Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2007); and
in many cases, this initiative is in response to a shock (ibid). On the other hand, richer
households are often involved in low risk activities which present higher payoﬀs, but require
more endowments (Reardon et al., 2007). Consequently, education, land ownings, and num-
ber of family members are found to be signiﬁcant determinants of participation in oﬀ-farm
activities5 .

This research purports to show that, in general, diversiﬁcation is beneﬁcial to participating
households. The gains, however, are not expected to be the same for all parties involved as
the returns to diversifying are potentially heterogeneous across the population and, for the
same households, across diﬀerent systemic conditions (e.g after a shock). This heterogeneity
and how to model it is discussed more in depth in the methods section.



3. Country context and data


Nigeria is divided into 37 states, six geo-political zones6 and, in addition, the country is also
commonly divided into two major regions, the North, and the South. The majority of the
Muslims in Nigeria are concentrated in the North, while Christians are more heavily concen-
trated in the South (Falola and Heaton, 2009). This divide between the North and South is
not only evident in religion, but also in social-economic and agro-ecological characteristics
(World Bank, 2016); the North of Nigeria is partly covered by the Sudan-Sahel ecological
zone; consequently, the North suﬀers from worse climate variations compared to the South
(Ekpoh et al., 2011). In the 1970s, oil, which is mainly found in the Niger-delta, in Southern
Nigeria, became the most important commodity of the country (Falola and Heaton, 2008).
While oil may be the main commodity for the country, agriculture is the main source of
  5
      Escobal (2001), de Janvry et al. (2005), Oseni and Winters (2009).
  6
      North West, North Central, North East, South West, South East, and South South.


                                                   5
employment for the population. About 60 percent of the country’s population relies on
agriculture for their livelihoods (Oseni and Winters, 2009). The majority of industries and
cities of the country are located in the South, while the North is more rural and less densely
populated (Oseni and Winters, 2009), thus, it is not surprising to ﬁnd a socio-economic
divide in the country. In addition, poverty is found to be much more prevalent in Northern
Nigeria than it is in the South and concurrently, the majority of the country’s middle class
is concentrated in the Southern regions (Corral et al., 2015).

The analysis uses data from two rounds of the Nigeria General Household Survey Panel
(GHS- Panel) conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics in 2010-2011 (round 1) and
in 2012-2013 (round 2). The GHS-Panel which has a sample of 5,000 households is part of
the Living Standards Measurement Study - Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA)
project which aims to improve agricultural statistics in Sub-Saharan Africa. The GHS-Panel
provides information on household agricultural activities, household’s human capital, other
economic activities, and access to services and resources. Moreover, since the surveys were
administered in two visits, namely: post-planting (Aug-Oct 2010; Sept-Nov 2012) and post-
harvest (Feb-Apr 2011; Feb-Apr 2013), it contains data on farm and non-farm activities for
the corresponding season. High resolution precipitation records for the 2001-2009 periods
are derived from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) climate
prediction center. The latter are geo-referenced amounts for the households in the GHS-
Panel sample.

The observational units for this analysis are Nigerian farming households that are present
during both survey rounds,7 in total we have 2,232 farming households 8 . The outcome
of interest is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the household diversiﬁes its sources of
income. In order to construct this indicator, various modules from the GHS-Panel are
relied upon, speciﬁcally, the labor and non-farm enterprise modules. These modules permit
identiﬁcation of individuals and the types of activities they are involved in. According to
this information, a household is classiﬁed as diversiﬁed if any household member is involved
in any labor activity outside of the household’s farm. More in details, if any individual
within the household reports working outside the household’s farm, the household would
be classiﬁed as diversiﬁed. Additionally, if anyone inside the household owns a non-farm
enterprise which is in operation, the household is classiﬁed as diversiﬁed. Finally, if the
   7
     Farming households are deﬁned as all households who own land and reported planting crops during the
post-planting season.
   8
     Households for which land measures were not available were removed. Additionally households in Lagos
and Abuja were also removed due to their urban nature.



                                                   6
household is involved in planting any commercial crops9 that would also be considered a
diversiﬁed household.

Table 1 displays the percentage of households involved in the diﬀerent income generating
activities, and how these activities are combined. There are four main activities which we
consider: non-farm enterprises (NFE), non-farm wage labor, farm wage labor (outside one’s
household’s farm), and commercial crop production. A number of preliminary ﬁndings are
worth noting. First, the majority of Nigerian farming households diversify according to the
aforementioned classiﬁcation. On average, depending on the GHS-Panel survey round and
location, 60-65 percent of households have a portfolio that is not solely based on food crop
farming. Second, NFE diversiﬁcation activities constitute the lion’s share for all non-farm
diversiﬁcation activities. Diversiﬁcation by pursuing commercial crop production (which is
more prominent in the South than in the North) follows after NFE activities. The other
two options are quite marginal. Households also combine more than one activity. The most
common combination is commercial crop production and NFE ownership.

Table 1 also illustrates a sharp variation in the number of diversifying households between the
two survey rounds; Northern households in particular increased their participation in NFE
activities by close to 10 percent. A plausible explanation for this increase is the climatic
shock faced by Nigeria in 2011, (Figure 1). The country, in particualr in the Northern
area, faced severe droughts that started just after the Post-Harvest 2011 survey data were
collected and lasted until a few months before the new survey round (Post Planting 2012)
started (Bjerge and Fisker, 2016). The increase in diversiﬁcation observed can be considered
a a response to these unexpected climatic events.

The welfare measure chosen for the analysis is expenditures per capita. We expect diversiﬁed
households to have higher per capita expenditures. The reason for this is that these house-
holds, as discussed above, should have lower income volatility, and should be less susceptible
to shocks. Table 3 presents summary statistics by survey round, for the whole country, and
by region. Diversiﬁed households have signiﬁcantly higher levels of per capita expenditures in
the ﬁrst survey round. Additionally, it is evident that average expenditures in the North are
considerably lower than those in the South in both survey rounds. Non-diversifying house-
holds in the South appear to have on average higher expenditures than Northern households
which diversify.

Education of the household head, is signiﬁcantly greater (by more than a year) among
diversifying households. Interestingly, due to lower levels of education in the North, during
  9
      Cotton, sesame, ginger, Arabic gum, cocoa, kolanut, palm oil.


                                                      7
both rounds, the mean years of education among non-diversifying households in the South
is almost the same as that of diversifying households in the North. Education, as explained
above, allows households to diversify in more lucrative activities.

Among diversifying households the proportion of male headed households is signiﬁcantly
greater than the propotion of male headed households among non-diversifying households.
Male headed households are more likely to diversify than female headed ones. This likelihood
is particularly evident in the South, where the number of female headed households in the
sample is higher than the national average; among diversiﬁers, only 20 percent are female
headed, while among non-diversiﬁers, the number increases to close to 30 percent. Addition-
ally, diversiﬁed households have on average larger household sizes (more adult males, females,
and dependents). In the North, diversifying households have on average more dependents
as seen in both rounds where the diversiﬁed households have on average 4 dependents while
the non-diversiﬁed households have 3. Family size is also a factor that may push households
towards diversiﬁcation. If we assume concave agricultural production, greater family sizes,
all else being equal, lead to lower family labor productivity on the household’s land, and
could push households to seek outside options.

Diversifying households tend to reside in urban areas, or in proximity of urban areas. In the
South, 26 percent of diversifying households reside in urban centers compared to around 11
percent for non-diversifying households. In the North, the diﬀerence is equally signiﬁcant
where about 5 percent of non-diversifying households and between 10 and 11 percent of
diversifying households reside in urban areas. These ﬁgures support the argument that
better infrastructure may pull households towards diversiﬁcation, or at least present more
lucrative opportunities. Furthermore, the infrastructural constraints10 faced by diversifying
households are on average signiﬁcantly lower.

Overall, the data reveal that households who diversify are considerably diﬀerent than those
who do not. Households who diversify have on average greater years of education. Addi-
tionally, diversifying households have more household members on average, yet per capita
expenditure is also greater. The following section discusses the proposed method used to
analyze these two groups, and the impact of diversiﬁcation on household’s consumption.
  10
     The index is constructed using principal-component analysis (Filmer and Pritchett, 2001). The index
takes into consideration the time necessary to reach the closest bank, bus, market from the center of the
village. Increasing values are used to denote distances larger than a certain threshold. Additionally, actual
distances to road, market, and population centers are used. Therefore higher values of the index denote
higher mobility constraints faced by the household.




                                                     8
4. Methodology



Panel IV


The starting point of our analysis is assessing the impact of diversiﬁcation on Nigerian
farmers’ welfare. Given this, we ﬁrstly take advantage of the panel nature of our data
and implement a ﬁxed-eﬀects (FE) estimation of an individual-eﬀects model with two error
components of the form11 :




                                       Yit = Xit β + αi + εit                                        (1)




Where αi is the time-invariant component of the error term and εit is the time-variant
component. In the FE model, the regressors xit are allowed to be correlated to the time-
invariant component of the error (αi ), while assuming independence between xit and the
idiosyncratic error εit (Cameron and Trivedi, 2010). The outcome of interest yit is per
capita expenditure of household i at time t, where t = 2. The vector of regressors xit
includes variables that might inﬂuence a household’s level of per capita expenditure such
as an indicator of whether the household is diversiﬁed; an infrastructural constraint index;
some caracteristics of the household head such as gender, age, marital status and years of
completed education; some variable describing the demographic composition of the household
(i.e. the number of adult male and female and the number of dependants); the area of
residence (whether urban or rural); the hectares of land owned by the household; and some
distance measure between the household and major community sites (i.e. market, population
center and border post).

When estimating the FE model, we have to take into account that the choice to diversify
may be endogenous. Un-observables skills such as ability that lead a household to choose to
diversify, may be conditioning the considered outcome (Angrist and Pischke, 2008). When
this is the case, xit will no longer be independent from the idiosyncratic error εit , resulting in
incosistent FE estimators. An instrumental variable approach is, thus, required. We need to
  11
    The Hausman test rejects the null that the random-eﬀect (RE) estimator provides consistent estimates,
so we use a FE model.


                                                   9
assume the existence of instruments zit that are correlated with xit and uncorrelated with εit
in all periods. This assumption is conﬁrmed by the result of the Wu-Hausman F-test which
rejects the null hypothesis that the dummy for diversiﬁcation is exogenous.

The instrument we propose is a measure of rainfall variability computed as the average of
the mean yearly precipitation during the rainy season from 2001 up to 3 years before the
survey interview for each household12 . In building the rainfall measure we are taking into
account the diﬀerent timing of the rainy season according to the diﬀerent climatic zones of
the country, that is: June/July to September in the North, and March/April to October in
the Central and Southern areas (Mustapha and Arshad, 2014).



Panel IV results


The results from the ﬁrst-stage of the 2SLS estimation are reported in Table 4. The instru-
ment we propose satisﬁes the relevance condition(Cov (z, x) = 0) in that it is signiﬁcantly
negatively correlated with the decision to diversify. Moreover, the value of the Weak Iden-
tiﬁcation F-statistics of 12.45 relieve concerns regarding a weak instrument bias 13 . The
rationale behind choosing this instrument is that a farmer’s decision to diversify taken at
time t it is likely to be correlated to the “rainfall memory”. Studies on farmers’ memory
of precipitations’ patterns in West Africa and the Sahel conﬁrm that it dates back to sev-
eral years, especially if the event took place during the rainy season (Tschakert et al., 2010;
Simelton et al., 2013). At the same time, a farmer’s per capita expenditure at time t it
is hardly aﬀected by past rainfall events unless, of course, there was a big shock; in fact,
according to the available data (table 2), with the notable exception of 2011, there is no sign
of such an event.

Results from the second-stage of the 2SLS estimation reported in Table 5 suggest that income
diversiﬁcation is positively inﬂuencing Nigerian farmers’ welfare. Nevertheless, as discussed
in section 2, it is possible that agents beneﬁt diﬀerently from diversifying and thus base their
decisions on their anticipated returns from it (Radchenko, 2014). In the speciﬁc context of
Nigeria, we believe that the events that took place in-between the two survey rounds, namely
the 2011 droughts and to some extent -but this is very diﬃcult to model and restricted to a
  12
     The selection of 2001 as a starting point is dictated by the availability of the geo-referenced high resolution
precipitation data from NOAA climate prediction center.
  13
     Referring to a common threshold employed in literature (Staiger and Stock, 1977), we consider a value
of the F-statistic above 10 from the test of joint signiﬁcance of the instruments in the ﬁrst-stage regression
as necessary to conclude that our instrument is suﬃciently strong.


                                                        10
few states.14 The increase in Boko Haram’s activity in the North East might have fostered
diﬀerences in farmers returns to diversiﬁcation. In a nutshell, these events could have pushed
low-skilled farmers to diversify into non-farm activities already occupied by more skilled ones
and resulting in very limited gains for them.

In the presence of heterogeneous responses to diversiﬁcation on which individuals act (select
into diversiﬁcation), a variety of “eﬀects” of diversiﬁcation can be deﬁned and conventional
intuitions about instrumental variable estimators break down (Carneiro, Heckman, and Vyt-
lacil 2000). A more detailed discussion of the inconsistency of the OLS and traditional IV
estimators of the eﬀect of diversiﬁcation on the outcome of interest is presented further in
this analysis.

For all these reasons, we take a step forward in our analysis and focus on modeling the major
constraints to the identiﬁcation of the eﬀect of diversiﬁcation on Nigerian farmers’ wellbeing,
which are:

1) Missing counterfactual (Blundell and Dias, 2009): we only observe per capita expendi-
ture in one or the other state (diversiﬁed/non-diversiﬁed), not both simultaneously for each
farmer.

2) Selection into diversiﬁcation (decision to diversify is endogenous): farmers may self-select
into diversiﬁcation based on unobservables. These same unobservables may, in turn, have
an impact on per capita expenditures so that the error terms in the per capita expenditure
and selection equation can be correlated.

3) Essential Heterogeneity: agents base their decision to diversify on these unobservables
as diﬀerent farmers might beneﬁt diﬀerently from diversiﬁcation. The gap in per capita
expenditures between diversifying and non-diversifying for a given farmer are individual-
speciﬁc and depend on diﬀerent returns to both observables (human capital; gender; physical
constraints; etc.) and unobservables (ability; entrepreneurship; family background; shocks).
Most importantly, since the returns to undobservables can diﬀer across the distribution and
can change over time as consequence of a shock as we document henceforth, using a panel
Fixed Eﬀect estimation leads to loose crucial information. The comparison of the two surveys
taken separately and the use of non-parametric techniques captures rather than disregard
this heterogeneity.
  14
     The full escalation of the insurgency, with mass displacement and heavy ﬁghting between insurgents
and Nigerian Army starts de facto in June 2013, few months after our data collection. Proof that, during
2013, households were only marginally aﬀected by the conﬂict is that in the third round of the panel survey
(2015/2016), most of the households residing in Borno and Adamawa states visited in 2013 could not be
re-interviewed due to the poor security situation.


                                                    11
Essential Heterogeneity


To identify the eﬀect of income diversiﬁcation on Nigerian farmers’ welfare given these iden-
tiﬁcation constraints, a non-parametric selection model is estimated by local instrumental
variables (Heckman and Vitlacyl, 1999; Heckman and Vitlacyl, 2001; Carneiro et al., 2001).
The methodology employed here accounts for heterogeneity and selection. It has been used
extensively in the analysis of the returns to schooling, nonetheless, in this instance, it is ap-
plied to the analysis of diversiﬁcation among farming households. The methodology which is
described below is based on the methodology described in Heckman and Li (2004), Carneiro
et al. (2011), and Radchenko (2014).

Households can be separated into those who diversify and those who do not diversify, Di = 1,
and Di = 0 respectively. Given these two groups, the returns in each option are given by:




                       ln Yi0 = β0 Xi + Ui0 if Di = 0; E (Ui0 |Xi ) = 0                      (2)
                       ln Yi1 = β1 Xi + Ui1 if Di = 1; E (Ui1 |Xi ) = 0                      (3)


Yi0 is the returns for households who have chosen to not diversify, Yi1 is the returns for those
households who have chosen to diversify. Xi is a vector of observable characteristics, that
might aﬀect the household’s expenditure per-capita and includes household characteristics
and,characteristics of the head of the household, among others. Finally, Ui0 and Ui1 are the
error terms.

The household’s choice to diversify is given by a standard discrete model of the form:


                                         ∗
                                        Di = θZi − Ui                                        (4)

                 ∗
In equation (5) Di is a latent variable, and may be considered a reduced form model for
diversiﬁcation. A household will choose to diversify if it expects positive returns given
unobservables, where:

                                           
                                           1
                                           
                                                if Ui < θZi
                                    Di =                                                     (5)
                                           0
                                           
                                                otherwise


                                                12
The equation can be re-written as:

                                            
                                            1
                                            
                                                  if vi < P (Zi )
                                     Di =                                                        (6)
                                            0
                                            
                                                  otherwise

Here Z is a vector of variables which may include some X , and are believed to aﬀect the
diversiﬁcation decision15 , and P (Z ) indicates the probability that household i will diversify.
Since Ui can have any density, then by construction vi ∼ U nif orm (0, 1)(Heckman and
Li. 2004). If P (Zi ) = Fu (θZi ) and vi = Fu (Ui ), then Fu is a cumulative distribution of Ui
(Carneiro et al., 2011). The smaller vi is, the more likely the household will diversify.

As noted above, the choice to diversify may be endogenously taken by households. Therefore,
at least one instrument must be included in the selection equation (Carneiro et al., 2011).
The instrument to be used is a variable denoting rainfall shocks.16 The assumption is that
if there are two households with similar characteristics, then, the rainfall shock measure is
correlated to the outcome considered only through the eﬀect it has on the choice to diversify.

The observed per-capita expenditures are the following:




                       Yi = Di ln Yi1 + (1 − Di ) ln Yi0                                         (7)
                          = Di (β1 Xi + Ui1 ) + (1 − Di ) (β0 Xi + Ui0 )                         (8)
                          = [(β1 − β0 ) Xi + (Ui1 − Ui0 )] Di + β0 Xi + Ui0                      (9)
                          = δi Di + γ0 Xi + Ui0                                                 (10)


where δi = [(β1 − β0 ) Xi + (Ui1 − Ui0 )] is the heterogeneous return to diversifying for each
household i. This δi is the parameter of interest. As it can be seen, the parameter has
two sources of heterogeneity. Observed heterogeneity comes in the form of (β1 − β0 ) Xi , and
unobserved heterogeneity in the form of (Ui1 − Ui0 ). Therefore, if (β1 = β0 ), there may be
observed heterogeneity, additionally, if E [X |D] = E [X ] , there may also be heterogeneity
(Radchenko, 2014). The other source of heterogeneity comes from unobservables (Ui1 − Ui0 ) .
If the considered household is able to discern what its idiosyncratic gains are from diversifying
this will play a role in their decision to diversify and thus Ui1 = Ui0 (Heckman and Li, 2004).
  15
     The variables included are those which have been noted to be relevant by Escobal (2001), Lanjouw
(2001), de Janvry et al. (2005), and Oseni and Winters (2009).
  16
     This is discussed in the data section.


                                                  13
The objective is to estimate the average treatment eﬀect (AT E ) of diversifying (E [δi |Xi ]),
as well as the average treatment eﬀect on the treated (diversiﬁed households) AT T, and on
the non-treated (non-diversiﬁed households), T N T . The potential endogeneity mentioned
above comes from the possibility that (E [U1i |Di = 1] − E [U0i |Di = 0]) does not equal zero,
therefore, ordinary least squares estimates of AT E will be biased:



               ˆols = E (Yi |Xi , Di = 1) − E (Yi |Xi , Di = 0)
               β                                                                          (11)
                    = E (β1 − β0 ) Xi + (E [U1i |Di = 1] − E [U0i |Di = 0])               (12)
                    =β¯(X ) + E (U1i − U0i |Di = 1) + E (U0i |Di = 1) − E (U0i |Di = 0)   (13)


Where E (U1i − U0i |Di = 1) is the sorting on the gain and comes from one’s anticipation
of the gains from diversifying, and E (U0i |Di = 1) − E (U0i |Di = 0) is the selection bias
(diﬀerence in non-diversiﬁcation unobservables for thise who do diversify and those who do
not). Furthermore, traditional instrumental variable methods will also fail to identify AT E ,
AT T , and T N T . Finding a variable which is correlated to the choice to diversify, and at
the same time is unrelated to the error term in Equation (11), is not suﬃcient to obtain
the parameters of interest (Heckman and Li, 2004). This last statement is made clear by
rearranging Equation 11:




                       Yi = (β1 − β0 ) Xi Di + β0 Xi + [(U1i − U0i ) Di + U0i ]           (14)
                            = (β1 − β0 ) Xi Di + β0 Xi + εi                               (15)


If an instrumental variable is to be used, it would instrument for the choice to diversify, D.
The instrument would be correlated to D, and it should not be correlated to ε. However,
this latter requirement will unlikely be met since ε is a function of D. Nevertheless IV could
work under some speciﬁc circumstances17 . The ﬁrst instance where IV would work is when
(U1i − U0i ) = 0, i.e. there is no heterogeneity and selection bias. The second instance is
the case when there is unobserved heterogeneity, but it is independent from the choice to
diversify, i.e. (U1i = U0i ) but (U1i − U0i )is independent from D.

In the presence of both selection and heterogeneity, OLS and IV will both convey inconsistent
estimates of the eﬀect of diversiﬁcation on the outcome of interest, and do not identify any
 17
      Assuming the instrument is related to D, but not to U0 .


                                                     14
relevant treatment eﬀect. Given this, in order to obtain AT E , AT T , and T N T it is necessary
to ﬁrst estimate the mean return to diversiﬁcation through the marginal treatment eﬀect
(M T E ). The marginal treatment eﬀect gives a simple characterization of heterogeneity in
returns by measuring the returns of diversiﬁcation for households with diﬀerent levels of
observables (X ), and unobservables (v ) (Carneiro et al., 2011). The MTE may be obtained
via local instrumental variables (Heckman and Li, 2004). Taking expectations of Equation
15:




            E [Y |X, P (Z ) = v ] = E [(β1 − β0 ) Xi Di + β0 Xi + [(U1i − U0i ) Di + U0i ]]                  (16)
                                     = (β1 − β0 ) Xp + β0 X + (U1 − U0 ) p + U0                              (17)
                                     = (β1 − β0 ) Xp + β0 X + K (p)                                          (18)


The diﬀerence between intercept terms of the equation cannot be estimated separately from
K (p) (Carneiro et al., 2011). Therefore, if we deﬁne the intercept terms to be α1 and α0 ,18
we get:


                K (p) = (α1 − α0 ) P + E (U1 − U0 |P (Z ) = P ) P + E (U0 |P (Z ) = p)                       (19)

In this context K (p) is a function of p which can be estimated via the partially linear
regression estimator illustrated by Robinson (1988)19 . Finally MTE is:



                                                           ∂E [Yi |Xi = x, Pi (Zi ) = p]
                     M T E (Xi = x, vi = Pi = p) =                                                           (20)
                                                                        ∂p
                                                                           ∂K (P )
                                                         = (β1 − β0 ) X +                                    (21)
                                                                            ∂P


A simple test for the heterogeneity coming from unobservables is whether ∂K    (P )
                                                                              ∂P
                                                                                    is ﬂat or
not (Carneiro et al. 2011). If it is ﬂat it implies that heterogeneity from unobservables is
not relevant in the model.

Finally, in order to obtain AT E , AT T , and T N T the M T E must be integrated across the
entire population (Radchenko, 2014):
 18
      In Equation 14, α0 intercept is considered within β0 X
 19
      For a detailed description on how ∂K
                                         ∂P
                                           (P )
                                                is obtained refer to Carneiro et al., (2011), or Radchenko (2014).


                                                        15
                                       ˆ    1                                      ˆ       1
                AT E (X ) =                     M T E (x, v )dv = (β1 − β0 ) x +               M T E v dv        (22)
                                        0                                              0


where M T E v is the portion corresponding to unobservables.

The eﬀect of diversifying for those who do diversify is equal to the treatment on the treated:

                           ˆ       1                                            ˆ      1
              T T (X ) =               M T E (x, v )wtt dv = (β1 − β0 ) x +                M T E v wtt dv        (23)
                           0                                                       0


where wtt weighs more heavily those observations which are more likely to be diversiﬁed and
is equal to:


                                                      P (P (Z ) > v |X = x)
                                           wtt = ´                                                               (24)
                                                      P (P (Z ) > v |X = x)dv

Finally, the eﬀect of diversifying on those who do not diversify is equal to the treatment on
the non-treated:

                           ˆ       1                                               ˆ       1
            T N T (X ) =               M T E (x, v )wtnt dv = (β1 − β0 ) x +                   M T E v wtnt dv   (25)
                               0                                                       0


where wtnt weighs more heavily those observations who are less likely to be diversiﬁed and
is equal to:


                                                       P (P (Z ) < v |X = x)
                                           wtnt = ´                                                              (26)
                                                       P (P (Z ) < v |X = x)dv

All treatment eﬀects shown are decomposed into a component due to observables, and a
component due to unobservables. Finally, the standard errors are estimated using bootstrap
methods following Radchenko (2014).




                                                             16
5. Results



Selection model


As indicated in the previous section, the ﬁrst step of the semi-parametric methodology em-
ployed is estimating the probability of a household diversifying. The probability is modeled
through a logit model (Maddala, 1983). Figures 2 (2010/11 round) and 3 (2012/13 round)
present the propensity scores for diversifying and non-diversifying households. As is evident
from the graphs there is almost full common support in our sample. The results for this
model are presented in Table 5, with columns labeled accordingly for each round of the
GHS-Panel survey. The values reported are the marginal eﬀects from the logit model.

The characteristics of the head of the household, such as marital status and years of com-
pleted education, are signiﬁcantly related to the diversiﬁcation choice. The head’s years of
education is positive and signiﬁcantly related to the probability of a household diversifying
in both years. This is possibly related to education allowing households to overcome barriers
to entry, and possibly have access to a broader range of options on which to diversify. The
gender of the head is signiﬁcant (1%) only for 2012/13, while the head’s age does not appear
to be signiﬁcant in both models.

As expected, higher infrastructural constraints limit the opportunities to diversify for farming
households (e.g. if the household is very distant from a bus stop or a market center, the
opportunity cost of diversifying may be too high for them to do so). Thus, it seems to be
the case that improved infrastructure may “pull” households towards diversiﬁcation, or at
least provide more options. The excluded instrument used for the participation equation is
statistically signiﬁcant. An increase in the average of the mean yearly precipitation during
the rainy season from 2001 up to 3 years before the survey interview for each household
is negative and signiﬁcantly related to diversiﬁcation. Households who experienced higher
than average rainfall during the rainy season in 2001-2007 (round 1) and 2001-2009 (round
2) were less likely to choose to diversify. Rainfall shocks potentially “push” households into
diversiﬁcation in order to cope with the shocks itself and to ensure smooth consumption
patterns. In this instance, a positive rainfall shock seems to make households more likely to
rely solely on agriculture, a ﬁnding which is consistent with the hypothesized eﬀect of the
2011 drought previously discussed.

As mentioned previously, one of the potential reasons of households’ decision to diversify is
due to decreasing marginal labor productivity in agriculture. Supporting this argument, we

                                              17
ﬁnd that an increase in family members signiﬁcantly increases the likelihood of diversiﬁcation,
provided that the additional member is part of the work force. Otherwise, as suggested by
the negative sign on the dependent variable, an additional member in dependency age will
trigger the opposite eﬀect, all else being equal. However, the amount of land owned by the
household is not signiﬁcantly related to the likelihood of diversifying. This is probably due
to the method of land acquisition in Nigeria where most households acquire land through
family or community distribution as opposed to outright purchase. Additionally, we do not
control for the quality of land owned which may prove to be more relevant.

The results suggest that households with more educated heads are more likely to diversify20 .
Additionally households with more members which are part of the labor force, all else being
equal, are signiﬁcantly more likely to diversify. The sign and signiﬁcance of the infrastruc-
ture index provides evidence that households that reside in areas with better than average
infrastructure are more likely to diversify. Finally, the chosen instrument is also signiﬁcant.
The sign and signiﬁcance of the coeﬃcients for rainfall variability, gives credence to the idea
that households may seek to diversify due to the uncertainty faced in rain-fed agriculture.


Treatment eﬀects - TT, ATE, TNT


The main outcome of the chosen methodology is presented in Table 6, and Figures 2 and 3.

In 2010/2011 returns from diversiﬁcation are positive for everyone, especially for those who
do diversify (Table 6 column 1); the average per capita expenditure anticipated gain among
those diversifying (TT) is 82 percent, while it is 37 percent for those who do not diver-
sify (TNT) and 60 percent for the average randomly selected farmer (ATE). Also, returns
from diversiﬁcation given observables are positive for everyone, especially for those already
diversifying (Table 6 column 2).

Although at the margin everyone would have beneﬁted from diversiﬁcation, these results sug-
gest that those not diversifying choose mainly on the basis of their observable characteristics.
This reveals a potentially segmented market, one where agents who would expect a gain from
participation do not participate (Radchenko, 2014). Diversifying appears to be not so much
a voluntary decision but a segment for the highly educated and “less constrained” farmers
which can successfully exploit diversiﬁcation opportunities as a consequence of observable
factors (e.g. household’s composition and human capital, initial endowments, infrastructural
 20
      However, education is potentially endogenous in this instance.


                                                      18
constraints, etc.). The 2010/2011 results suggest, therefore, the presence of barriers to entry
into diversiﬁcation that clearly prevent more constrained farmers from doing so. Figure 4
graphically displays this ﬁnding. Recalling equation (5) from the methods section, lower val-
ues of unobserved heterogeneity v correspond to a higher likelihood of diversiﬁcation due to
unobservables (Radchenko, 2014). M T E v orthogonal to unobserved heterogeneity v implies
no heterogeneity in returns due to unobservables that is, at the margin, diversiﬁed and non-
diversiﬁed farming households would have beneﬁted the same from diversiﬁcation. Figure 4
graphically represents the homogeneity of the returns given unobservables showing that the
M T E v is constant and positive along the propensity score distribution (except for the tails,
corresponding to farmers having particularly high or low propensity to diversify).

The comparison of the M T E v shapes in Figure 4 and Figure 5 highlights the changes in the
returns on unobservables occurred between the two survey rounds. More in details, while
the M T E v in 2010/2011 was ﬂat, in 2012/2013 it becomes negative and declining in v .
This implies that a) based on unobservables, the decision to diversify in 2012/2013 would
yield highly negative marginal returns to everyone; b) households with lower probability to
diversify (higher values of v ), if deciding to diversify, would be the most penalized by this
decision: total returns from diversiﬁcation are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero for those
who do not diversify (Table 6 column 4). The total anticipated gains are now positive only
for the average farmer and for those who do diversify; a result that is exclusively driven by
the returns on observables. In this instance, the gains from diversiﬁcation are mainly driven
by observable factors and competitive mechanisms are driving the allocation of farmers in
the diﬀerent economic activities.

We argue that the 2011 drought and, to a lesser extent, the incipient conﬂict may have
left many households struggling. As shown in Table 1, more households were pushed into
diversiﬁcation in the second survey round. This diversiﬁcation was mainly towards low-risk
and low-returns activities such as non-farm enterprises (in particular in the North). Farming
households sought to cope with the shock by massively entering into non-farm activities,
thus saturating the market. This saturation led to a decline in the returns to unobservables
(e.g. skills, entrepreneurial ability, connections, etc.) since households were possibly forced
to opt for activities which, under normal conditions, they would not consider.

The higher returns on observables in column 5 (Table 6) also suggests that having strong
endowments in times of crisis helps to buﬀer shocks quite substantially. More precisely,
having proper infrastructure to access opportunities and having suﬃciently able members in
the household to engage in activities outside of farming becomes important. All in all, the


                                              19
returns on observable override the unobservable losses, but only households which diversify
are better oﬀ and have positive total returns. Therefore, in times of crisis diversiﬁcation
becomes an important factor, yet, not every household is able to beneﬁt from it; house-
holds choosing to not diversify during round 2 of the survey, would not have gained from
diversifying.

This study has uncovered important results that would have been disregarded by the panel
analysis alone. Firstly, to estimate the impact of income diversiﬁcation in the presence of
identiﬁcation constraints such as selection and essential heterogeneity, the use of a non-
parametric estimation is warranted. Second, we can expect returns on diversiﬁcation to be
diﬀerent across an income distribution and, in presence of a shock that occurs between two
survey rounds, between the two survey rounds. Third and most important, a shock can
modify the returns on observables but also those on unobservables; in the case presented
here the diﬀerences in returns were mainly driven by changes in the return on unobservables
that a standard estimation process would have not captured.



Semi-parametric model results


In Table 7 the semi-parametric results for the natural log of per-capita expenditure are
presented. As indicated in the methods section, a selection of control variables is interacted
with the probability of diversifying obtained from the logit estimation (presented in Table
5). The coeﬃcients on these interactions are presented in the column under (β1 − β0 ). These
coeﬃcients provide the diﬀerence in returns between diversiﬁed and non-diversiﬁed farming
households. The column under β0 reports results for non-diversifying farming households.

Years of education in 2010/11 is signiﬁcant and positive for non-diversifying households,
while the diﬀerence in coeﬃcients between groups is not signiﬁcant. In 2012/13 years of
education is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero for non-diversifying households, while for
diversiﬁed households it is signiﬁcantly greater than that of the non-diversiﬁed. Nevertheless,
the variable in all likelihood is endogenous and thus the coeﬃcient is potentially biased
(Carneiro et al., 2011). Additionally, only the education of the household head is considered,
which may not be the best indicator since perhaps younger household members are the ones
working oﬀ the farm while the head tends to work on the household’s farm.

The gender of the household head is slightly signiﬁcant for non-diversiﬁers in 2012/13. In-
creases in household members is negative and signiﬁcantly related to per capita expenditure


                                              20
for the group of non-diversifying households, while it yields positive returns for those who
do diversify for both rounds. Finally, the eﬀect of land holdings per capita is possibly absent
for both groups, most likely as we do not control for land quality.

The results imply that diversifying households may obtain higher consumption due to ob-
servable factors. Especially due to households’ head characteristics and the household’s
composition. non-diversifying households would face decreased per-capita expenditures if
the number of household members increased, all else being equal. This eﬀect is reversed for
diversifying households, most likely due to the link between more members and the likelihood
of diversifying.



7. Conclusions


The study began with the premise that diversiﬁcation among Nigerian farmers is predom-
inant: about 60% of farmers do diversify away from subsistence farming into non-farm
activities and cash crops. Using a panel of farmers interviewed before and after a severe
drought that hit in particular Northern Nigeria in 2011, we ﬁnd that diversiﬁcation in-
creased substantially: throughout Nigeria from 60 to 64 percent and in the North from 58
to 63 percent.

In the course of the analysis we investigate this change in household activities and postulate
that diversiﬁcation brings considerable gains to those involved, and may bring gains to the
population at large. However, we ﬁnd support to the argument that the conditions under
which a household diversiﬁes matter substantially: gains are heterogeneous throughout the
income distribution and, after the drought, returns on unobservable characteristics turn form
positive to negative.

Before the shock, overall gains from diversiﬁcation tend to be higher among those already
diversifying and lower but positive among those not diversifying. This diﬀerence is mainly
driven by diﬀerences in returns to observable characteristics such as human capital, house-
hold’s composition and access to infrastructures; returns on unobservables characteristics
such as ability and entrepreneurship are always positive and rather homogeneous along the
propensity score (except for the tails corresponding to farmers having higher or low propen-
sity to diversify).

On the other hand, after the shock, we ﬁnd that those who are the least likely to diversify, due
to the changes in the returns on unobservables, would not obtain any gain by diversifying. We

                                              21
purport that the drought and, possibly, the intensiﬁcation of the conﬂict in the North of the
country, may have damaged many agricultural crops, pushing many low skilled households
to opt for activities which, under normal conditions, they would not consider. In this way,
many activities that had few barriers to entry would become saturated. The most common
method of diversiﬁcation among Nigerian farming households is on non- farm enterprises.
These household enterprises are often characterized by low productive activities that require
limited skills (Haggblade, 2007); nevertheless, these are often the only viable solution given
the lack of alternatives (Fox and Sohnensen, 2012).

Policy interventions should focus on ways to improve the productivity of non-farm enter-
prises. This may include increased vocational training or apprenticeships. Improved infras-
tructure and access to credit could also be beneﬁcial to non-farm enterprises. This does
not mean agriculture should be disregarded altogether, since it still may provide the bulk
of income for many households. Also, poor landless households are often ignored and the
gains they obtain from interventions in agriculture are possibly limited to lower food prices.
Any drastic shift away from agriculture, thus, may have detrimental eﬀects on the poor due
to increased food prices. Rural policies, therefore, should not focus on agriculture issues
alone but be holistic in nature in order to address the diﬀerent activities farming households
engage in, especially in time of need.




                                             22
References


Akpoveta, V. O., Osakwe, S. A., Ize-Iyamu, O. K., Medjor, W. O., & Egharevba, F. 2014. Post
Flooding Eﬀect on Soil Quality in Nigeria: The Asaba, Onitsha Experience. Open Journal of Soil
Science, 2014.

Angrist, Joshua D and Jörn-Steﬀen Pischke. 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion. Princeton university press.

Babatunde, Raphael O. 2012. "Assessing the Eﬀect of Oﬀ-Farm Income Diversiﬁcation on Agricul-
tural Production in Rural Nigeria."

Banerjee, Abhijit V and Esther Duﬂo. 2007. "The Economic Lives of the Poor." The journal of
economic perspectives: a journal of the American Economic Association, 21(1), 141.

Bardhan, Pranab and Christopher Udry. 1999. Development Microeconomics. Oxford University
Press.

Barrett, Christopher B; Mesﬁn Bezuneh and Abdillahi Aboud. 2001. "Income Diversiﬁcation,
Poverty Traps and Policy Shocks in Côte D’ivoire and Kenya." Food policy, 26(4), 367-84.

Barrett, Christopher B; Mesﬁn Bezuneh Clark; Daniel C Clay and Thomas Reardon. 2005. "Het-
erogeneous Constraints, Incentives and Income Diversiﬁcation Strategies in Rural Africa." Quarterly
journal of international agriculture, 44(1), 37-60.

Bjerge, Benedikte and Peter Fisker.      2014.   “How do Nigerian Small-scale Farmers React to
Droughts?”. Mimeo.

Blundell, Richard and Monica Costa Dias. 2009. "Alternative Approaches to Evaluation in Empir-
ical Microeconomics." Journal of Human Resources, 44(3), 565-640.

Carneiro, Pedro; James J Heckman and Edward Vytlacil. 2001. "Estimating the Return to Educa-
tion When It Varies among Individuals," Paper presented as the Economic Journal Lecture at the
Royal Economic Society meeting, Durham, England.

Carneiro, Pedro Manuel; Michael Lokshin; Cristobal Ridao-Cano and Nithin Umapathi. 2011.
"Average and Marginal Returns to Upper Secondary Schooling in Indonesia."

Corral, Paul; Vasco Molini and Gbemisola Oseni. 2015. "No Condition Is Permanent: Middle Class
in Nigeria in the Last Decade." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (7214).

Dabalen, Andrew; Stefano Paternostro and Gaëlle Pierre. 2004. The Returns to Participation in
the Non-Farm Sector in Rural Rwanda. World Bank Publications.

                                                  23
Davis, Benjamin; Paul Winters; Thomas Reardon and Kostas Stamoulis. 2009. "Rural Nonfarm
Employment and Farming: Household-Level Linkages." Agricultural Economics, 40(2), 119-23.

Davis, Benjamin; Stefania Di Giuseppe and Alberto Zezza. 2014. "Income Diversiﬁcation Patterns
in Rural Sub-Saharan Africa: Reassessing the Evidence." World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper, (7108).

De Janvry, Alain; Elisabeth Sadoulet and Nong Zhu. 2005. "The Role of Non-Farm Incomes in Re-
ducing Rural Poverty and Inequality in China." Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics,
UCB.

Dercon, Stefan. 2002. "Income Risk, Coping Strategies, and Safety Nets." The World Bank Re-
search Observer, 17(2), 141-66.

Ekpoh, I. J., & Nsa, E. (2011). Extreme climatic variability in North-western Nigeria: an analysis
of rainfall trends and patterns. Journal of Geography and Geology, 3(1), p51.

Escobal, Javier. 2001. "The Determinants of Nonfarm Income Diversiﬁcation in Rural Peru." World
Development, 29(3), 497-508.

Falola, Toyin and Matthew M Heaton. 2008. A History of Nigeria. Cambridge University Press.

Ferreira, Francisco HG and Peter Lanjouw. 2001. "Rural Nonfarm Activities and Poverty in the
Brazilian Northeast." World Development, 29(3), 509-28.

Filmer, Deon and Lant H Pritchett. 2001. "Estimating Wealth Eﬀects without Expenditure
Data—or Tears: An Application to Educational Enrollments in States of India*." Demography,
38(1), 115-32.

Fox, Louise and Thomas Pave Sohnesen. 2012. "Household Enterprises in Sub-Saharan Africa:
Why They Matter for Growth, Jobs, and Livelihoods." World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper, (6184).

Gordon, Ann and Catherine Craig. 2001. Rural Non-Farm Activities and Poverty Alleviation in
Sub-Saharan Africa. Natural Resources Institute, University of Greenwich.

Haggblade, Steven. 2007. "Alternative Perceptions of the Rural Non Farm Economy." Transforming
the rural non-farm economy: opportunities and threats in the developing world, 262-319.

Heckman, James J and Xuesong Li. 2004. "Selection Bias, Comparative Advantage and Hetero-
geneous Returns to Education: Evidence from China in 2000." Paciﬁc Economic Review, 9(3),
155-71.


                                               24
Heckman, James J and Edward J Vytlacil. 1999. "Local Instrumental Variables and Latent Variable
Models for Identifying and Bounding Treatment Eﬀects." Proceedings of the national Academy of
Sciences, 96(8), 4730-34.

Kilic, Talip; Calogero Carletto; Juna Miluka and Sara Savastano. 2009. "Rural Nonfarm Income
and Its Impact on Agriculture: Evidence from Albania." Agricultural Economics, 40(2), 139-60.

Marc, A., S. Verjee, and S. Mogaka. 2015. The Challenge of Stability and Security in West Africa.
Africa Development Forum Series. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0464-9.
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO.

Miguel, Edward; Shanker Satyanath and Ernest Sergenti. 2004. "Economic Shocks and Civil
Conﬂict: An Instrumental Variables Approach." Journal of political Economy, 112(4), 725-53.

Minot, Nicholas; Michael Epprecht; Tran Thi Tram Anh and Le Quang Trung. 2006. Income
Diversiﬁcation and Poverty in the Northern Uplands of Vietnam. Intl Food Policy Res Inst.

Mustapha, A. B., and Arshad, Adzemi Mat. 2014. “Coping Strategy of Rainfall Variability due
to Changing Climate in Dry Sub-Humid Region of Borno State of Nigeria”. Journal of Biology,
Agriculture and Healthcare, 4(16), 122–126.

Oseni, Gbemisola; Paul Corral; Markus Goldstein and Paul Winters. 2014. "Explaining Gender
Diﬀerentials in Agricultural Production in Nigeria." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper,
(6809).

Oseni, Gbemisola and Paul Winters. 2009. "Rural Nonfarm Activities and Agricultural Crop
Production in Nigeria." Agricultural Economics, 40(2), 189-201.

Pfeiﬀer, Lisa; Alejandro López-Feldman and J Edward Taylor. 2009. "Is Oﬀ-Farm Income Reform-
ing the Farm? Evidence from Mexico." Agricultural Economics, 40(2), 125-38.

Radchenko, Natalia. 2014. "Heterogeneity in Informal Salaried Employment: Evidence from the
Egyptian Labor Market Survey." World Development, 62, 169-88.

Reardon, T. (1997). Using evidence of household income diversiﬁcation to inform study of the rural
nonfarm labor market in Africa. World Development, 25(5), 735-747. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0305-
750X(96)00137-4

Reardon, Thomas; Julio Berdegué; Christopher B Barrett and Kostas Stamoulis. 2007. "Household
Income Diversiﬁcation into Rural Nonfarm Activities." Transforming the rural non-farm economy:
opportunities and threats in the developing world, 115-41.

Reuters, “Nigeria Floods Kill 137, Displace Thousands,” 2012.

                                               25
Robinson, Peter M. 1988. "Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression." Econometrica: Journal
of the Econometric Society, 931-54.

Stampini, Marco and Benjamin Davis. 2009. "Does Nonagricultural Labor Relax Farmers’ Credit
Constraints? Evidence from Longitudinal Data for Vietnam." Agricultural Economics, 40(2), 177-
88.

Winters, Paul; Timothy Essam; Alberto Zezza; Benjamin Davis and Calogero Carletto. 2010. "Pat-
terns of Rural Development: A Cross-Country Comparison Using Microeconomic Data." Journal
of Agricultural Economics, 61(3), 628-51.




                                             26
Tables and graphs


  Table 1: Diversiﬁcation strategies among farming households

                                 Nigeria                   North                     South
                         2010-2011 2012-2013       2010-2011 2012-2013       2010-2011 2012-2013
  (i) NFE                  33.67         40.83       37.59       47.79         26.49       28.76
  (ii) Non-farm wage        2.03          2.74        1.79        1.98          2.47        4.04
  (iii) Farm-wage           2.50          1.09        3.12        0.82          1.35        1.55
  (iv) Comm. crops          5.50          4.20        2.85        1.85         10.34        8.27
  (i ∩ ii)                  3.22          3.11        3.60        2.77          2.54        3.70
  (i ∩ iii)                 0.78          0.62        0.98        0.52          0.42        0.79
  (i ∩ iv)                  6.56          7.55        4.10        5.25         11.06       11.53
  (ii ∩ iii)                0.39          0.16        0.35        0.12          0.45        0.24
  (ii ∩ iv)                 0.56          0.46        0.17        0.00          1.28        1.24
  (iii ∩ iv)                0.52          0.12        0.56        0.00          0.44        0.32
  (i ∩ ii ∩ iii)            2.44          0.98        2.15        0.95          2.99        1.04
  (i ∩ ii ∩ iv)             0.19          0.75        0.05        0.30          0.45        1.52
  (i ∩ iii ∩ iv)            0.32          0.66        0.15        0.06          0.63        1.71
  (ii ∩ iii ∩ iv)           0.04          0.09        0.00        0.15          0.10        0.00
  (i ∩ ii ∩ iii ∩ iv)       0.20          0.41        0.00        0.08          0.57        0.97
  Farming only             41.09         36.24       42.54       37.34         38.43       34.33
  Total                     100           100         100         100           100         100
  Observations             2,232         2,232       1,445       1,445          787         787

  Note: (i) refers to households who diversify only on NFE. For example, (i ∩ ii ∩ iv) refers to the
  percentage of farming households who diversify by having a NFE, engaging in non-farm wage labor,
  and commercial cropping. Values are obtained using survey weights.




                                                  27
Figure 1: Temperature and precipitation patterns, Nigeria 2000-2013. Source: Bjerge and Fisker
2016.



                   1.50

                                                                                       1.22                                                   1.27

                   1.00                                                  1.04                                                      1.03
                                                                                                                        0.84

                                                                                                             0.56
                   0.50
                              0.32                                                                0.31                                                   0.33

                              0.08      0.07
                   0.00
                                                                                                  -0.07

                                        -0.32                                                                           -0.28
                                                                         -0.36
        z-scores




                   -0.50                                                                                     -0.46


                                                              -0.83
                   -1.00                                      -1.01
                                                                                       -1.06

                                                   -1.26
                                                   -1.38
                   -1.50
                                                                                                                                              -1.65


                   -2.00

                                                                                                                                   -2.23

                   -2.50
                           2002      2003       2004       2005       2006         2007        2008       2009       2010       2011       2012       2013
                                                                             Temp. (day)        Rain




                                                                                 28
     Table 2: Summary statistics, North and South by survey round

                                                                                 2010/11                                                                                                           2012/13
                                            Nigeria                               North                                  South                               Nigeria                                North                                 South
                               Non-diversiﬁed     Diversiﬁed         Non-diversiﬁed     Diversiﬁed         Non-diversiﬁed     Diversiﬁed         Non-diversiﬁed     Diversiﬁed         Non-diversiﬁed     Diversiﬁed         Non-diversiﬁed    Diversiﬁed
     Per capita expenditure       72,062           76,956      **       60,092           64,757       **       96,620          98,121               96,309          101,544               80,725           87,009              125,861         125,741
     Harvest value (Naira)       132,333          146,250              135,961          162,606      ***      124,890         117,872              155,971          184,148      **      168,752          214,241      ***     131,734         134,054
     Harvest per capita           30,693           27,423               27,871           25,891                36,482          30,080               33,361           31,723               33,981           32,298               32,185          30,766
     Male head                     0.88              0.92      ***       0.96              0.98      **         0.72            0.82       ***       0.86             0.91       ***       0.96             0.98        *        0.68            0.80       ***
     Head’s age                   50.97            49.86                47.42            46.46                 58.26           55.78       **       54.09            52.91                50.84            49.55                60.26           58.49
     Head is married               0.84              0.91      ***       0.92              0.97      ***        0.69            0.82       ***       0.80             0.90       ***       0.90             0.96       ***       0.62            0.80       ***
     Head’s education              3.73              4.88      ***       3.31              4.46      ***        4.58            5.61       ***       3.28             4.83       ***       2.80             4.31       ***       4.19            5.70       ***
     Household’s size              5.68              6.68      ***       6.10              7.47      ***        4.80            5.31        **       5.71             6.92       ***       6.24             7.77       ***       4.72            5.49       ***
     N. of dependents              2.91              3.39      ***       3.21              4.01      ***        2.30            2.32                 2.73             3.29       ***       3.11             3.96       ***       2.03            2.17
     Urban                         0.06              0.16      ***       0.05              0.11      ***        0.10            0.26       ***       0.07             0.16       ***       0.04             0.10       ***       0.12            0.26       ***
     Rainfall shock               184.19           176.93      ***      183.23           176.21      ***      186.17          178.19       ***      178.42          170.06       ***     178.23            170.45      ***      178.78          169.41      ***
     Infra. Index                  0.11             -0.08      ***       0.20             (0.15)     ***       -0.07            0.05                 0.14             -0.08      ***       0.15             -0.09      ***       0.11            -0.06       **
29




     Land ownings (Ha)             1.52              1.90                1.40              1.57                 1.76            2.48                 0.97             1.13        *        1.08             1.23        *        0.76            0.96
     Dist to road (km)            18.67            16.50       ***      21.75            19.84                 12.36           10.70       **        7.76             7.54                 8.54             8.71                 6.28            5.59
     Dist to pop center (km)      26.12            25.20                31.74            31.19                 14.60           14.79                23.72            21.48       ***      27.71            25.89       *        16.14           14.13       ***
     Dist to market (km)          69.48            71.40                71.44            71.77                 65.46           70.75                68.67            72.89        **      70.21            72.48                65.76           73.56       **
     Dist to border (km)          304.51           294.44               226.77           225.92               463.99           413.32      ***      324.93           292.20      ***      250.26           227.11      **       466.53          400.55      ***
     Observations                  949              1,283                622               823                  327             460                  851              1,381                555               890                 296              491
     Total Obs.                           2,232                                 1,445                                   787                                 2,232                                 1,445                                  787
     Note: All values are obtained using survey weights. *p<0.1; **p<0.05;***p<0.01
Table 3: First-stage results of Panel IV FE estimation

Dependent variable:                                      Diversiﬁed
Rainfall Shock                                          -0.00394***
                                                          (0.00136)
Infrastructural constraint index                           -0.00540
                                                           (0.0122)
Female headed                                                0.122
                                                           (0.0884)
Head’s age                                                  0.00262
                                                          (0.00562)
Head’s age (sq)                                           -1.77e-05
                                                         (4.97e-05)
Head is married                                              0.0491
                                                           (0.0463)
Head’s years of education                                   0.00154
                                                          (0.00314)
Household’s size                                         0.0501***
                                                          (0.00934)
Dependents                                                 -0.0170*
                                                          (0.00939)
Urban                                                        -0.131
                                                            (0.223)
Nat. log of hectares per capita                             0.0201*
                                                           (0.0107)
Nat. log of hectares per capita (sq)                      0.000258
                                                          (0.00157)
Dist. to market (km)                                     0.00944**
                                                          (0.00467)
Dist. to pop. center (km)                                 0.000717
                                                         (0.000581)
Dist. to border (km)                                      0.000286
                                                         (0.000532)
State FE                                                      Yes
Observations                                                 4,464
Number of households                                         2,232
Weak identiﬁcation test (F-stat)                             12.45
Endogeneity test (p-value)                                  0.00002
Robust standard errors clustered at the household-year level in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                    30
Table 4: 2SLS results of Panel IV estimation

Dependent variable:                                       ln pc exp.
HH diversiﬁes                                              4.164***
                                                            (1.081)
Infrastructural constraint index                           0.00498
                                                           (0.0363)
Female headed                                               -0.542*
                                                            (0.293)
Head’s age                                                  -0.0189
                                                           (0.0179)
Head’s age (sq)                                            0.000161
                                                         (0.000158)
Head is married                                            -0.364**
                                                            (0.151)
Head’s years of education                                  0.00379
                                                          (0.00991)
Household’s size                                          -0.264***
                                                           (0.0664)
Dependents                                                  0.0507
                                                           (0.0375)
Urban                                                        0.425
                                                            (0.753)
Nat. log of hectares per capita                          -0.0998***
                                                           (0.0385)
Nat. log of hectares per capita (sq)                       -0.00300
                                                          (0.00477)
Dist. to market (km)                                      -0.0490**
                                                           (0.0220)
Dist. to pop. center (km)                                -0.00461**
                                                          (0.00188)
Dist. to border (km)                                     0.00361**
                                                          (0.00172)
State FE                                                      Yes
Observations                                                 4,464
Number of households                                         2,232
Robust standard errors clustered at the household-year level in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                    31
Table 5: Selection equation, Logit MFX estimates

                                         2010/11          2012/13
Dependent variable:                   Diversiﬁed        Diversiﬁed
Rainfall shock                        -0.00187***       -0.00153**
                                       (0.000621)       (0.000682)
Infrastructural constraint index       -0.0632***       -0.0493***
                                         (0.0164)         (0.0151)
Female headed                             -0.0671        -0.142***
                                         (0.0530)         (0.0467)
Head’s age                                0.00633         0.000336
                                        (0.00524)        (0.00468)
Head’s age (sq)                         -7.69e-05        -8.04e-06
                                       (4.88e-05)       (4.13e-05)
Head is married                           0.108**         0.180***
                                         (0.0493)         (0.0469)
Head’s years of education               0.00662**        0.0125***
                                        (0.00259)        (0.00247)
Household’s size                        0.0347***        0.0309***
                                        (0.00705)        (0.00783)
Dependents                              -0.0188**         -0.0155*
                                        (0.00883)        (0.00926)
Urban                                      0.0777           0.0463
                                         (0.0504)         (0.0478)
Nat. log of hectares owned               -0.00279          0.00634
                                        (0.00982)         (0.0117)
Nat. log of hectares owned (sq)          -0.00153          0.00120
                                        (0.00226)        (0.00308)
State FE                                    Yes              Yes
Observations                               2,232            2,232
Standard errors clustered at village level in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                               32
Figure 2: Common support (2010/11)        Figure 3: Common support (2012/13)




                                     33
Table 6: Treatment eﬀects for 2010/11 and 2012/13

                      2010/11                                   2012/13
          (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)             (6)
         Total   Observables Unobservables        Total    Observables Unobservables
TT     0.825***    0.368***       0.457***      1.511***     2.929***       -1.419***
        (0.118)     (0.012)        (0.118)       (0.117)      (0.016)        (0.117)
AT E   0.595***    0.296***       0.298***      0.771***     2.840***       -2.070***
        (0.073)     (0.009)        (0.073)       (0.103)      (0.012)        (0.102)
TNT    0.368***    0.202***         0.165         0.101      2.696***       -2.595***
        (0.116)     (0.013)        (0.115)       (0.180)      (0.019)        (0.180)
       Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                         34
Figure 4:     M T E v with   95%   CI-        Figure 5:     M T E v with   95%   CI-
Expenditure (2010/11)                         Expenditure (2012/13)




                                         35
Table 7: Semi-parametric estimates

                                                          2010/11                                          2012/13
Dependent variable:                                       ln pc exp.                                       ln pc exp.
                                        Return from        Gap in divers.-non divers.    Return from        Gap in divers.-non divers.
                                       non-diversifying                 returns         non-diversifying                 returns
                                             β0                        β1 − β0                β0                        β1 − β0
Female headed                               0.196                       -0.470               0.297*                      -0.157
                                           (0.157)                      (0.291)             (0.156)                      (0.227)
Head’s age                                -0.00918                      0.0133             -0.0363**                 0.0725***
                                          (0.0127)                     (0.0229)             (0.0145)                    (0.0228)
Head’s age (sq)                           9.23e-05                     -0.000121           0.000329**              -0.000625***
                                         (0.000120)                 (0.000221)             (0.000131)                (0.000208)
Head is married                           -0.314**                       0.417              -0.264*                     0.00698
                                           (0.141)                      (0.274)             (0.140)                      (0.224)
Head’s years of education                 0.0197***                    0.000735             -0.0104                     0.0301**
                                          (0.00737)                    (0.0110)            (0.00989)                    (0.0142)
Household’s size                          -0.143***                    0.124***            -0.144***                    0.110***
                                          (0.0277)                     (0.0375)             (0.0242)                    (0.0310)
Dependents                                -0.00308                      -0.0551            -0.0785***                    0.0486
                                          (0.0303)                     (0.0426)             (0.0271)                    (0.0370)
Urban                                      -0.148                        0.288               -0.240                      0.359*
                                           (0.157)                      (0.228)             (0.161)                      (0.217)
Nat. log of hectares per capita            0.0692                       0.0356              0.138**                      -0.130
                                          (0.0507)                     (0.0763)             (0.0692)                     (0.106)
Nat. log of hectares per capita (sq)       0.00499                     0.00329               0.0186                      -0.0192
                                          (0.00835)                    (0.0130)             (0.0116)                    (0.0164)
Dist. to market (km)                      -3.61e-05                    -0.00146             -0.00143                    0.00104
                                         (0.000985)                    (0.00154)           (0.00100)                    (0.00141)
Dist. to pop. center (km)                 0.000577                     -0.00227            -0.00578*                    0.00175
                                          (0.00181)                    (0.00310)           (0.00308)                    (0.00455)
Dist. to border (km)                      0.00104**               -0.00124***              0.00153***              -0.000941**
                                         (0.000410)                 (0.000476)             (0.000416)                (0.000448)
State FE                                     Yes                         Yes                  Yes                         Yes
Observations                                2,232                        2,232               2,232                       2,232
R-squared                                   0.508                        0.508               0.425                       0.425
Standard errors clustered at village level in parentheses.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                             36
