                                                          WPS7874


Policy Research Working Paper                            7874




Does the Elimination of Export Requirements
 in Special Economic Zones Affect Export
               Performance?
             Evidence from the Dominican Republic

                                 Fabrice Defever
                                José-Daniel Reyes
                                Alejandro Riaño
                         Miguel Eduardo Sánchez-Martín




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
October 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7874


  Abstract
  Special economic zones, one of the most important instru-                         requirements. The findings show that entry increased
  ments of industrial policy in developing countries, often                         among firms in special economic zones, while the aver-
  feature export share requirements. That is, firms located in                      age value of export transactions fell for existing exporters
  these zones are obliged to export more than a certain stated                      following the reforms. At the same time, continuous export-
  share of their output to enjoy the wide array of incentives                       ers were unaffected by the policy change, possibly because
  available there, a practice prohibited by the World Trade                         these firms were not constrained by the export requirement.
  Organization. This paper exploits the staggered removal                           Overall, special economic zones became more important
  of export requirements across products and over time in                           with respect to the number of exporters based there but not
  the special economic zones of the Dominican Republic                              in terms of the value of exports. The findings suggest that
  to evaluate whether the importance of exports originating                         the elimination of performance requirements made it more
  from the zones was affected by the elimination of export                          attractive for firms to be based in special economic zones.




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at danielreyes@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
              Does the Elimination of Export Requirements in
            Special Economic Zones Aﬀect Export Performance?
                  Evidence from the Dominican Republic¦
                                               X Jos´
                                Fabrice Defever,                  Y
                                                                  ,
                                                     e-Daniel Reyes
                                         §
                          Alejandro Ria˜
                                       no, Miguel Eduardo S´          ın¶
                                                           anchez-Mart´




  ¦ We thank Thomas Farole, Michael Ferrantino, Justo Mirabal and participants at DEGIT XXI-Nottingham and
the UNIDO-Kiel Vienna Investment Conference for their thoughtful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors
are our own. The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors.
They do not represent the view of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
   X City, University of London, CEP, GEP and CESifo. f.defever@lse.ac.uk
   Y The World Bank.danielreyes@worldbank.org
   §
     University of Nottingham, GEP, CFCM and CESifo. alejandro.riano@nottingham.ac.uk
   ¶
     The World Bank.msanchezmartin@worldbank.org
1        Introduction

On July 31, 2007, the General Council of the World Trade Organization (WTO) set December 31st

2015 as the ﬁnal deadline for the elimination of export subsidies in the Dominican Republic and 18

other developing countries that had previously been exempted from complying with the Agreement

on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM).1 The majority of subsidy programs to be

scrapped were ﬁscal incentives available to ﬁrms operating in special economic zones (SEZ) —

geographically-bounded areas in which customs, tax and investment regulations are more liberal

than in the rest of the country (Farole and Akinci, 2011). Although SEZ are not explicitly forbidden

by the WTO, ﬁrms operating in them are often subject to export share requirements (ESR) (Defever

       no, 2016); that is, they are required to export at least a certain stated share of their output
and Ria˜

in order to be eligible to receive the incentives available in SEZ.2 The imposition of ESR makes an

SEZ contingent upon export performance, thereby falling under the category of prohibited subsidies

under the ASCM.3

        SEZ are pervasive across the world, and are one of the most important tools of industrial policy

in developing countries (Rodrik, 2004); Boyenge (2007) reports the existence of 3,500 (more recently,

The Economist (2015) puts this ﬁgure at 4,300) SEZ in 130 countries, accounting for approximately

US$ 200 billion worth of exports. These zones are crucially important for a small open economy like

the Dominican Republic, where exports originating from SEZ comprised 70% of aggregate exports

and 12% of GDP over the last decade, a period which was also characterized by a chronic trade

                                                              ublica Dominicana, 2014).
balance deﬁcit, averaging 8.4% of GDP (Banco Central de la Rep´

        Our objective in this paper is to investigate whether the removal of export share requirements

aﬀected export performance in the special economic zones of the Dominican Republic. To do

so, we use transaction-level data covering the period 2006-2014, and exploit the fact that the

elimination of ESR took place in a staggered fashion over time and across diﬀerent industries, in

order to identify the eﬀect of this reform on the importance of exports originating from SEZ. To
    1
     See: General Council decision of July 31, 2007 WT/L/691. The other beneﬁciaries of this extension were
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Costa Rica, Dominica, El Salvador, Fiji, Grenada, Guatemala, Jamaica,
Jordan, Mauritius, Panama, Papua New Guinea, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
and Uruguay. The notiﬁcation also lists the subsidy programs that needed to be reformed.
   2
     In fact, as Creskoﬀ and Walkenhorst (2009) point out, they are not mentioned explicitly in any WTO agreement.
   3
     Only least developed WTO members and countries whose per capita gross national product is below US$1,000
in 1990 dollars are currently exempt from the disciplines of the ASCM (Creskoﬀ and Walkenhorst, 2009).



                                                        1
be more precise, prior to 2007 all ﬁrms based in Dominican SEZ were subject to an 80% ESR —

i.e. they could sell at most 20% of their output in the Dominican customs territory. In May 2007,

law 56-07 ﬁrst amended the regulatory framework for SEZ by declaring the textiles, clothing and

accessories, hides and skins, footwear, and leather articles sectors to be of ‘national priority’, based

on their importance in terms of exports and employment. The 2007 reform eliminated ESR for

SEZ ﬁrms in national priority sectors only, and at the same time extended some of the tariﬀ and

tax incentives available to ﬁrms in SEZ to local producers outside the zones. In June 2011, law

139-11 fully eliminated ESR for all ﬁrms in SEZ regardless of their sector of operation. However,

and in contrast to the 2007 reform, the latter law did not extend any incentives to non-SEZ ﬁrms.

   Our empirical analysis is underpinned by a model of subsidies with ESR in a heterogeneous-

                                           no (2016). Based on this theoretical framework we
ﬁrm environment proposed by Defever and Ria˜

develop a set of predictions regarding the consequences of eliminating ESR on ﬁrms’ extensive and

intensive margins of exports, as well as on the share of exports originating from SEZ (both in terms

of values and number of exporters) within narrowly-deﬁned HS-6 products.

   The model shows that ESR reduce the proﬁtability of ﬁrms in SEZ which would have preferred

to sell a higher share of its sales in the domestic market than what the ESR allows — which we call

‘constrained exporters’. The model predicts that these ﬁrms would increase the prices they charge

abroad and thereby reduce export sales after the ESR is lifted. Conversely, ﬁrms that would have

chosen to export 80% or more of their output even in the absence of ESR — i.e. unconstrained

exporters — are unaﬀected by the reform. If, as it was the case in the Dominican Republic, the

reform of SEZ maintains the incentives available to ﬁrms based there, then the elimination of ESR

will make them more attractive locations for ﬁrms to be based. Since the latter goes in the opposite

direction as the eﬀect of the ESR removal on the intensive margin of exports for existing constrained

exporters, the question of the importance of the response of SEZ exports to the policy change is,

ultimately, an empirical one.

   Our results can be summarized as follows. In terms of the extensive margin, we ﬁnd that

in line with the predictions delivered by our model, export entry among ﬁrms in SEZ increased

after the removal of ESR — particularly so after the second wave of reform, which targeted ﬁrms

producing non-priority goods. Moreover, we also ﬁnd that the exit rate out of export markets

increased among non-SEZ ﬁrms in priority sectors, possibly due to more intense competition from

                                                   2
ﬁrms operating in the zones. Moving on to the intensive margin of exports, we ﬁnd that the value

of export transactions among SEZ ﬁrms fell following both waves of reform, as predicted by our

model. However, when restricting our analysis to the subset of ﬁrms that export in every year

throughout our period of study, we ﬁnd that the change in the value of exports after the policy

change becomes statistically insigniﬁcant. This result suggests that continuing exporters do not

ﬁnd the ESR constraint binding, whereas more sporadic exporters seem to have reallocated their

sales towards the domestic market once this alternative became feasible.

   Examining the impact of the removal of ESR on the share of exports — both in terms of value

and number of exporting ﬁrms — at the product level paints a similar picture to that conveyed

by our analysis of export margins. We ﬁnd that the removal of ESR increased the share of SEZ

exporters within HS-6 products by 5.4-7 percentage points relative to the situation in which per-

formance requirements were in place. At the same time, the share of export value accounted for by

SEZ does not change signiﬁcantly after the reforms. As the requirements to operate in SEZ were

eased, more exporters chose to locate there; however, the bulk of export value originating from

SEZ seems to be accounted for by ﬁrms that were based there with the clear objective to export

the majority of their output, and were therefore not aﬀected by the removal of ESR.

   As noted above, the ﬁrst wave of SEZ reforms implemented in 2007 sought to level the playing

ﬁeld between SEZ and non-SEZ ﬁrms by lowering the tariﬀs imposed on key inputs utilized by

producers in priority sectors (ﬁrms in SEZ do not pay tariﬀs on intermediate inputs). Thus, with

a view to assess the eﬀectiveness of this element of the Dominican reform strategy, we investigate

if the share of these liberalized products purchased by SEZ declined after 2007. Our conclusions

in this dimension are univocally negative; we do not ﬁnd any substantial change in the share of

imports of these goods accounted for by SEZ after the trade liberalization. Thus, although a large

number of goods were made duty-free (126 HS-6 products), the ones that were primarily imported

by non-SEZ ﬁrms were, for the most part, general purpose rather than inputs speciﬁc to priority

sectors. This rendered the tariﬀ cuts ineﬀective as an instrument to foster the expansion of ﬁrms

outside the zones in these sectors.

   Taken altogether, our results suggest that the removal of ESR without eliminating the ﬁscal

incentives available to ﬁrms in SEZ has increased the attractiveness of operating in special economic

zones. Achieving a greater degree of compliance with the WTO disciplines on subsidies has not

                                                 3
substantively reduced the Dominican Republic’s reliance on SEZ – if anything, the removal of ESR

has helped in cementing their importance in the country’s export basket, at least in the short-run.

       Achieving compliance with WTO disciplines on subsidies poses a complex challenge for policy

makers in countries that rely intensively on exports originating from SEZ in the face of large and

chronic trade deﬁcits. Opening up the domestic market to ﬁrms based in SEZ can result in unduly

intense competition for local ﬁrms given the tax advantages available in the zones. Curbing these

concessions, however, entails the risk that multinational ﬁrms would decide to relocate their oper-

ations to countries oﬀering more generous incentive packages. Alternatively, equalizing incentives

inside and outside SEZ might not be feasible from a ﬁscal policy standpoint (FIAS, 2008; World

Bank, 2014). Thus, taking stock of the Dominican Republic’s experience with eliminating export

requirements can help to shed light on the future role of SEZ as an export promotion policy oper-

ating within a regulatory framework compatible with the WTO agreements.


Related Work. Export performance requirements have been studied from a theoretical perspec-

tive by Davidson et al. (1985), Rodrik (1987) and Chao and Yu (2014), with the aim of determining

under which circumstances these measures can improve welfare in countries enacting them. The

main conclusion arising from this body of work is that ESR can operate as second-best policies,

improving domestic welfare in the presence of pre-existing distortions.4 For instance, ESR can shift

rents towards the enacting country that would otherwise accrue to foreign-owned ﬁrms, or can also

lessen the overproduction distortion caused by tariﬀs imposed in import-competing sectors. More

                         no (2015, 2016), have studied how the use of subsidies with ESR aﬀects
recently, Defever and Ria˜

the intensity of competition and welfare using a quantitative model calibrated to evaluate the Chi-

nese experience with this class of incentives. We contribute to this literature by focusing on the

microeconomic eﬀects of export share requirements on export performance. Moreover, evaluating

the consequences of ESR in the context of the reforms undertaken by the Dominican Republic

                                                                            no (2015, 2016) —
has the advantage — relative to the case of China studied by Defever and Ria˜

that the set of ﬁrms facing ESR are readily identiﬁable with our data and are only subject to one
   4
    The theoretical literature on SEZ has also reached similar conclusions. See e.g. Hamada (1974), Young and
Miyagiwa (1987), Young (1991), Devereux and Chen (1995). Heid et al. (2013), on the other hand, show that an
expansion of export-oriented maquiladoras (i.e. ﬁrms exporting all their output) increases labor informality and lowers
aggregate welfare.




                                                          4
such requirement.5 Additionally — and quite importantly — the fact that ESR were eliminated

in a staggered way across diﬀerent sectors provides valuable variation across time and sectors that

allows us to identify the consequences of this policy change.

      The Dominican Republic being one of the pioneers, and arguably, most successful exponents

of the use of SEZ in the Western Hemisphere, stands at the heart of a long-standing debate over

their desirability as an industrial policy to foster economic development (Volpe Martincus, 2010).

On the one hand, Kaplinsky (1993) argues that SEZ induced the Dominican Republic to specialize

in unskilled labor-intensive production, which due to declining terms-of-trade has resulted in im-

miserizing growth. Willmore (1995), on the contrary, argues that judged by its ability to promote

exports without threatening local producers, the Dominican SEZ program has been an unqualiﬁed

success. Sanchez-Ancochea (2006) and Schrank (2008) qualify this assertion and suggest that the

success of SEZ beyond export promotion hinges on the extent to which they have integrated with

                                                  ıguez-Clare (1996). Our paper contributes
the local economy — an argument formalized by Rodr´

to this discussion by assessing how recent policy eﬀorts aimed at promoting a new wave of SEZ

that goes beyond the low-skill-intensive enclaves of the past, have aﬀected export outcomes —

arguably, one of the key performance dimensions for SEZ. Crucially, it does so by utilizing highly

detailed transaction-level micro data which allow us to elucidate the eﬀect of the policy changes

while controlling for confounding factors that would contaminate the results obtained using only

aggregate data.

      Our paper is related to work by Bagwell and Staiger (2006) studying the implications of GATT-

WTO rules on subsidies on economic outcomes, as well as to broader eﬀorts to quantify the con-

sequences of eliminating “murky” forms of protectionism such as export subsidies, local content

requirements, and public procurement measures (Baldwin and Evenett, 2009; Evenett and Wer-

melinger, 2010). To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst in carrying out an empirical

assessment of whether policy reforms aimed at achieving compliance with WTO rules on subsi-

dies have aﬀected trade outcomes. This is an issue of tremendous importance, since the inherent

diﬃculty in deﬁning and measuring export subsidies, combined with a lack of comparable cross-

country data has resulted in fewer empirical studies investigating them than any other instrument
  5
                                no (2016) document a wide range of often overlapping policy measures subject to
    In contrast, Defever and Ria˜
diﬀerent ESR thresholds in China.



                                                      5
of commercial policy under the aegis of the World Trade Organization (World Trade Organization,

2006). Our paper also contributes to a small, but ﬂourishing empirical literature that investigates

the eﬀect of SEZ and export processing regimes on exports (Ianchovichina, 2007; Fernandes and

Tang, 2012; Wang and Yu, 2012; Alder et al., 2013; Wang, 2013; Davies and Mazhikeyev, 2015;

 ucer and Siro¨
Y¨            en, 2016).

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the regulations governing

SEZ in the Dominican Republic and the changes introduced by laws 56-07 and 139-11, which

mandated the elimination of ESR. Section 3 sketches a simple model of trade with heterogeneous

ﬁrms featuring subsidies subject to export share requirements and outlines predictions regarding

how the elimination of ESR would aﬀect export performance at the ﬁrm and product level. Section

4 describes our data and provides a set of stylized facts characterizing export patterns in the

Dominican Republic, comparing ﬁrms in SEZ and those exporting through the national customs

regime as well as ﬁrms in national priority sectors and other industries. Section 5 discusses our

empirical strategy and presents our results. Section 6 concludes.



2    Regulatory Changes in the Special Economic Zones of the

     Dominican Republic

In this section we provide a brief summary of the incentives and performance requirements faced

by ﬁrms operating in SEZ in the Dominican Republic; we then discuss the reforms introduced by

laws 56-07 and 139-11 in 2007 and 2011 respectively.

    Law 8-90 of January 1990 established the regulatory framework governing SEZ (Zonas Francas )

in the Dominican Republic. According to the law, its key objectives were to attract local and foreign

investment, provide training, and foment the transfer of technology and know-how in order to create

employment, particularly in economically deprived areas, such as the border with Haiti. Law 8-90

sought to encourage the expansion of SEZ by providing a generous array of ﬁscal incentives to

ﬁrms located there: these included duty-free access to imported inputs and capital goods, and a

15-year (20 years for ﬁrms located in border zones) 100% exemption of registration, construction,

gross sales and transfer of industrial goods taxes. In order to be eligible for these concessions, ﬁrms

operating in SEZ faced an 80% export share requirement (ESR), while ﬁrms located outside SEZ


                                                  6
and exporting through the national customs regime were not subject to any performance obligations

regarding their export behavior. SEZ ﬁrms were also required to pay the corresponding full import

duty on the goods sold in the Dominican Republic.

   Until 2007 the ESR applied equally to all SEZ ﬁrms regardless of their sector of operation as can

be seen in the ﬁrst row of Table 1. Law 56-07 signed in May 2007 amended law 8-90 and declared

the textile, footwear and leather industries ‘national priority’ sectors. The law’s motivation noted

that worldwide structural change in the textile, footwear and apparel industries driven by China’s

increasing preponderance in the world economy and changes in WTO agreements such as end of

the MFA agreement have eroded the competitiveness of these sectors in the Dominican Republic.

Due to their importance in terms of job creation, the law sought to provide support to producers

in these industries in the face of adverse external circumstances. Besides this objective, law 56-07

also aimed at fostering the convergence between SEZ and non-SEZ ﬁrms in view of the country’s

agreement to eliminate performance requirements under the CAFTA-DR trade agreement and the

ASCM. This constituted a gradual ﬁrst step forward towards the SEZ regime achieving compliance

with the ASCM — following on the footsteps of China, Vietnam, Mauritius and Costa Rica (Waters,

2013; World Bank, 2014).

              Table 1: Changes in SEZ Regulations in the Dominican Republic, 2006-2014

                           Period              National Priority Sectors                              Non-priority Sectors
                                        80% ESR; duty-free imports of intermediate inputs and capital goods; full exemption of gross
                           2006-07      sales, registration, construction and transfer of industrial goods (ITBIS) taxes for 15 years (20
                                                                         years for firms in border SEZ)
           SEZ firms




                                     ESR fully removed; duty-free access to             80% ESR remains; duty-free access on domestic
                           2008-11                                                      sales if product is not produced in DR or has at
                                     domestic market
                                                                                        least 25% of local input content
                                     Domestic sales remain free of import duties but ESR fully removed; Domestic sales are subject to
                           2012-14 are subject to a 3.5% tax on gross sales and      import duty, 3.5% tax on gross sales and 18%
                                     18% VAT                                         VAT

                           2006-07                               No ESR; subject to national customs regime
           Non-SEZ firms




                                     Duty-free access to 126 'priority' intermediate
                           2008-11 inputs; exemption of tax on transfer of              No change
                                     industrial goods (ITBIS)
                           2012-14                                                 No change


Source: Law 56-07 (available in Spanish at https://www.dgii.gov.do/legislacion/leyesTributarias/Documents/
56-07.pdf) and law 139-11 (available in Spanish at https://www.dgii.gov.do/legislacion/leyesTributarias/
Documents/139-11.pdf).




                                                                          7
    The second and ﬁfth rows of Table 1 outline the main policy changes brought about by law

56-07 for SEZ and non-SEZ ﬁrms in priority and non-priority sectors. SEZ ﬁrms in priority sectors

saw the full removal of ESR, which meant that they could now sell all their output in the Dominican

Republic if they wished to do so; moreover, these domestic sales were not subject to import duties.

Priority-sector ﬁrms operating outside SEZ received tax concessions similar to those available to

their SEZ counterparts and enjoyed duty-free access to 126 HS-6 key imported inputs.

    The 2007 reform maintained the 80% ESR for SEZ ﬁrms producing non-priority goods but

oﬀered them duty-free access to the domestic market provided that either the good in question was

not produced in the Dominican Republic or, that it incorporated at least 25% of locally-sourced

intermediate inputs in value terms. Tax concessions available to SEZ ﬁrms in both priority and

non-priority sectors did not change with this reform. Firms producing non-priority goods and

located outside SEZ were not directly aﬀected by law 56-07.

    Law 139-11 (June 2011) completely eliminated export share requirements for all SEZ ﬁrms

regardless of their sector of operation in accordance to the compromises signed under the CAFTA-

DR free trade agreement. SEZ ﬁrms in priority sectors retain their duty-free access to the Dominican

market whereas their non-priority counterparts need to pay the customary import tariﬀs mandated

by the national customs regime. All SEZ ﬁrms are required to pay a 3.5% gross sales tax and 18%

VAT on their domestic sales (see row 3 of Table 1), while non-SEZ ﬁrms were not directly aﬀected

by this law.



3    How Does Eliminating Export Share Requirements Aﬀect Ex-

     port Performance?

In order to understand how the elimination of export share requirements for ﬁrms in special eco-

nomic zones aﬀects export performance, we use a theoretical framework developed by Defever and

   no (2016), which is in turn based on the workhorse Melitz (2003) model of international trade
Ria˜

with heterogeneous ﬁrms, to guide our empirical analysis. However, since our focus lies on indi-

vidual ﬁrm and product-level eﬀects of the policy change, we abstract from general equilibrium

considerations.

    To ﬁx ideas, consider an environment with two countries, Home (H ), which we take to be the


                                                 8
Dominican Republic, and Foreign (F ), which represents the rest of the world. There is a continuum

of ﬁrms operating at Home, each of which produces a unique diﬀerentiated good ω using labor as the

sole input. We assume, for simplicity, that all ﬁrms are homogenous in terms of their productivity,

which implies that all producers have a constant marginal cost, c.6 The demand function faced by

a ﬁrm selling product ω in market i  tH, F u, is:


                                            qi pω q  Ai pω qpi pω q¡σ ,                                        (1)


where σ        ¡ 1 denotes the elasticity of demand and pipωq is the price charged by ﬁrm ω in market
i.7       The term Ai pω q encompasses both aggregate variables such as a country’s GDP and price level

— both of which are common across all producers — as well as product appeal factors that are

ﬁrm-destination-speciﬁc. Including the latter is necessary to produce a non-degenerate distribution

of export intensity. As discussed below, this implies that some ﬁrms will export the majority of

their output even without export share requirements.

          We assume that ﬁrms can sell domestically without incurring any additional cost, but face

a ﬁxed cost fx and an iceberg transport cost τ              ¥ 1 if they export.    Crucially, ﬁrms can choose

to sell their output abroad either through the national customs regime or via a special economic

zone. Non-SEZ ﬁrms are free to sell however much they want domestically but do not receive any

incentives. On the other hand, ﬁrms located in SEZ stand to receive a subsidy sr on their sales

or marginal costs (e.g. duty-free access to imported inputs, corporate income tax exemptions or

lower utility rates) and/or a subsidy sf on their ﬁxed costs (e.g. lower registration costs or access

to better port infrastructure) provided they export more than a fraction η of their sales, which

prior to 2007 would have been set at 0.8 for all ﬁrms in Dominican SEZ. We explain the proﬁt

maximization problem of ﬁrms operating in these two regimes below.

          All ﬁrms sell some of their output domestically. As it is well known, given the demand function

(1), ﬁrms set a price at Home, pH pω q        σc
                                               ¡ which is a constant mark up above their marginal cost,
                                              σ 1,
                                                 σ¡1 ¨σ¡1
thus generating domestic sales rH pω q          σc          AH pω q, which are increasing in the domestic de-
      6
     Assuming instead that ﬁrms diﬀer in terms of productivity, as is standard in the literature, does not alter
the conclusions of the analysis that follows. This is the case because ﬁrm-level export intensity is independent of
productivity when demand functions are iso-elastic.
   7
     Such a demand function would obtain if individuals have love-for-variety Dixit-Stiglitz utility functions as in
Krugman (1980) or Melitz (2003).



                                                         9
mand shifter. Domestic proﬁts are in turn given by πH pω q  κAH pω q, where κ  pσ ¡1qσ¡1 σ ¡σ c1¡σ .

       Let us now consider the problem of an exporter selling its output through the national customs

regime. Since the marginal cost of production is constant, this ﬁrm will choose to export if the proﬁt

from selling abroad exceeds the ﬁxed cost fx ; otherwise it would prefer to only sell domestically.

A non-SEZ exporter sets price pF pω q              τ pH pωq in the foreign market; its export sales are given
                   1¡σ σ ¡1 σ ¡1
                           ¨
by rF pω q    τ         σc            AF pω q, and export proﬁts are πF pω q  κτ 1¡σ AF pω q ¡ fx . It follows

that only ﬁrms with suﬃciently high foreign demand appeal choose to export; that is, those for

which AF pω q  ¥ A¦ F  pfx {κqτ
                                   σ ¡1 . Total proﬁts for non-SEZ exporters are therefore given by

                                  ¨
π pω q  κ AH pω q   τ 1¡σ AF pω q ¡ fx .

    Deﬁne the ‘natural’ export intensity of an exporter, η pω q, as the share of its total sales accounted

for by exports in the absence of subsidies or ESR:

                                                    rF pω q             τ 1¡σ AF pω q
                                    η pω q                         A pω
                                               rH pω q   rF pω q          q   τ 1¡σ AF pωq .                                      (2)
                                                                      H


It is straightforward to show that any deviations from (2) would reduce ﬁrms’ proﬁts by distorting

the necessary condition that marginal revenue has to be equalized across markets. As (2) makes

clear, ﬁrms can operate at very high export intensities in the absence of ESR, for instance, if they

conduct assembly operations as a link in a global value chain, if they produce highly sophisticated

products with little domestic demand (medical instruments would be a relevant example for the

Dominican Republic) or have built an extensive network of foreign customers.8

       The proﬁt maximization problem of a ﬁrm located in the SEZ facing an ESR η                                      p0, 1s and
receiving subsidies psr , sf q is:

                  5
                                                                                    %                                                     $
                                                      1¡σ                      1¡σ                                ¡σ   τ A pωq ppz pωqq¡σ
  pz
        max
        p q p q
          z
                   p1 sr q        AH p ω q pp z
                                              H pω qq       AF pω q pp z
                                                                       F pω qq       ¡c       AH p ω q pp z
                                                                                                          H pω qq         F      F
   H ω ,pF ω
                                      C
                                                                                                1¡σ
                                                                                        F pω qq
                                                                              AF pω q ppz
                   ¡ p1 ¡ sf qfx               subject to:                           ¨1¡σ                           ¨1¡σ   ¥ η,   (3)
                                                                            H pω q
                                                                   AH pω q pz                   AF pω q    F pω q
                                                                                                          pz

                                                                                no (2016) show
where the superscript z indexes variables for ﬁrms based in SEZ. Defever and Ria˜

that the solution to problem (3) involves two types of ﬁrms operating in SEZ, which we denote
   8
     If ﬁxed costs associated with selling domestically were included in the model, then ‘pure exporters’, i.e. ﬁrms
selling all their output abroad, would arise when domestic proﬁts are not suﬃciently high to cover the domestic ﬁxed
cost.


                                                                   10
unconstrained and constrained exporters.

    Unconstrained exporters are those that do not ﬁnd the ESR constraint binding; i.e. ﬁrms

with natural export intensity of at least η . These ﬁrms do not need to distort their allocation

of sales across domestic and foreign markets to receive the subsidies available in SEZ. Thus,

                    H pω q                   ¡ and pF pωq                       H pω q and realize total proﬁts π pω q    
                                        1    σc
they charge prices pz                    
                                       1 sr σ 1
                                                     z                         τ pz                                z

                                         ¨
p1   sr qσ κ   AH pω q   τ 1¡σ AF pω q       ¡ p1 ¡ sf qfx.            For unconstrained exporters in SEZ any incen-

tive conditioned on ESR operates in the same way as a standard unconditional production subsidy.

This means that they charge lower prices, both domestically and abroad, and earn higher proﬁts

than in the absence of subsidies, while still operating at their natural export intensity.

    Constrained exporters, on the other hand, are ﬁrms with natural export intensity strictly below

the ESR threshold, but that nevertheless choose to alter their export intensity in order to be eligible

to operate in the SEZ and receive the subsidies available there. These ﬁrms curtail domestic sales, by

increasing prices at Home while at the same time increasing export sales until they reach an export

                                                 no, 2016, Proposition 1). Therefore, constrained
intensity exactly equal to η (see Defever and Ria˜

exporters in SEZ set prices,

                                                                                               '
                                  p1 ¡ η q             η ¡ τ A H pω q
                                              ¡ AF pω q σ¡1
                                              σ               1           σ
                                                                                          ¡
                                                                                           1

                       pω q                                                                          1     σc
                                             σ 1                         σ 1              σ 1
                    pz
                                                                                                    1   sr σ ¡ 1
                                                                                                                 ,         (4)
                     H
                                         p1 ¡ η q ¡ AF p ω q ¡1
                                                             σ 1
                                                                               1
                                                                             σ 1

                                                                                               '
                                p1 ¡ ηq ¡ AF pωq ¡   η ¡ τ AH pωq
                                              σ               1           σ
                                                                                          ¡
                                                                                           1


                     F pω q 
                                             σ 1             σ 1         σ 1              σ 1
                                                                                                      1     σc
                    pz
                                                                                                    1   sr σ ¡ 1
                                                                                                                 ,         (5)
                                            η ¡ AH pω q ¡
                                                        1                1
                                                       σ 1              σ 1




which result in proﬁts:

                                                                                      ¨
                         π z pω q  κp1   sr qσ Θ AH pω q, AF pω q, η, τ                  ¡ p1 ¡ sf qfx,                   (6)


where Θ, is deﬁned as:

                                                             AH pω qAF pω q
                           Θ                                                                      % σ ¡1 .               (7)
                                      p1 ¡ η q     ¡ AF pω q σ¡1
                                                   σ
                                                 σ 1
                                                                   1
                                                                         η     ¡ τ AH pω q σ¡1
                                                                               σ
                                                                              σ 1
                                                                                                1




The proﬁt shifter term Θ is strictly concave in η reaching a global maximum at a ﬁrm’s natural

export intensity, η pω q. Thus, ﬁrms with relatively high natural export intensity — yet lower than



                                                                   11
the ESR threshold — are more likely to operate as constrained exporters in SEZ.

       Based on the characterization of optimal ﬁrm behavior above, we can establish a set of pre-

dictions delivered by the model in response to the reforms introduced by laws 56-07 and 139-11.

These predictions are based on a comparative static exercise which entails a marginal reduction

in the ESR threshold η .9 We ﬁrst note that unconstrained SEZ exporters would not modify their

pricing or sales choices if the ESR constraint was relaxed, since they are already operating at their

natural export intensity. Constrained SEZ exporters would, however, seize the opportunity to in-

crease their domestic sales, and would do so by redirecting some of their output to be sold at Home.

Thus, constrained exporters would simultaneously lower domestic prices and increase export prices,

thereby either achieving their natural export intensity, or, at the very least, operating at the newer

lower ESR threshold.


Prediction 1 Relaxing the ESR constraint (i.e. a reduction in η ), everything else equal, would

induce constrained SEZ exporters to lower domestic prices and increase export prices. This in

turn implies an increase in domestic sales and a reduction in export sales for this group of ﬁrms.

Unconstrained exporters do not change their prices nor their sales in either market in response to

the policy change.


       Lowering the ESR threshold increases the proﬁtability of being based in SEZ for constrained

exporters if the incentives available to SEZ ﬁrms are maintained after the reform — as laws 56-07

and 139-11 did — thereby making SEZ more attractive locations for ﬁrms to operate from. This

yields our second prediction,


Prediction 2 Relaxing the ESR constraint, everything else equal, would induce some ﬁrms export-

ing through the national customs regime to operate in SEZ.


       Taking Predictions 1 and 2 together implies an ambiguous response of exports originating from

SEZ to a relaxation of the ESR constraint. On the one hand, export sales of constrained exporters
   9
    A full elimination of the ESR while maintaining the incentives to SEZ in the model would imply that all ﬁrms
would prefer to operate in SEZ. This would not happen in reality because there is a limited supply of locations in
industrial parks in which SEZ are established and also because ﬁrms that wish to operate in SEZ need gain the
approval of the Consejo Nacional de Zonas Francas de Exportaci´  on, a public-private body that regulates SEZ. In
the context of the model, a ﬁxed cost associated with changing a ﬁrm’s status from the national customs regime to
SEZ would prevent an equilibrium in which all ﬁrms choose to operate in SEZ; following this route would leave our
conclusions unchanged.


                                                       12
fall in response to a reduction in η . On the other hand, new entry into SEZ would increase total

export sales from SEZ. The combination of these two eﬀects, therefore, yields our third prediction:


Prediction 3 A relaxation of the ESR, everything else equal, has an ambiguous eﬀect on the value

of exports originating from SEZ.


    The magnitude of the overall eﬀect depends on the relative importance of constrained exporters

                     a-vis unconstrained exporters, as well as on the share of non-SEZ exporters
operating in SEZ vis-`

that would ﬁnd proﬁtable to switch to SEZ after the ESR is relaxed, a feature that depends crucially

on the distribution of demand shifters Ai pω q across ﬁrms. In the remainder of the paper we set out

to investigate whether the predictions delivered by our model bear out in the data.



4    Data and Stylized Facts

In this section we ﬁrst describe the data used in the paper and provide summary statistics illus-

trating the broad export and import patterns observed over our period of analysis. We next shift

focus towards documenting the importance of SEZ and national priority sectors in the Dominican

Republic’s export basket and examine whether there are any discernable changes in export perfor-

mance, at least at the aggregate level, following the reforms implemented in 2007 and 2011. We

conclude by exploring the extent to which the tariﬀ concessions mandated by law 56-07 aﬀected

priority-sector ﬁrms outside the SEZ.

    Our study exploits detailed ﬁrm-level customs data provided by the Dominican Republic Cus-

                    on General de Aduanas, DGA). The data contains all export and import
toms Agency (Direcci´

transaction values by product at the HS 6-digit level and by origin/destination for the period 2006-

2014. Throughout this period, the universe of ﬁrms consists of 29,682 ﬁrms reporting at least

one positive export transaction in at least one of 4,466 HS-6 digit products to at least one of 230

customs territories. Crucially, our data identiﬁes trade ﬂows that originate or reach ﬁrms located

in SEZ.

    The Dominican Republic is one of the world’s pioneers in the use of SEZ with a program

ongoing for more than 40 years (Burgaud and Farole, 2011). Figure 1 shows that SEZ exports

account for more than half of aggregate export value throughout our period of interest — although


                                                13
their importance has dwindled both in terms of value and number of exporters.10 Conversely, SEZ

ﬁrms comprise a substantially smaller share of the country’s imports and constitute less than 2%

of all importing ﬁrms. This striking diﬀerence underscores the signiﬁcance of the SEZ regime at

the macroeconomic level for the Dominican Republic — the foreign exchange earnings generated

by SEZ exports plays a key role in enabling the import ﬂows required by the rest of the economy.

              Figure 1: Importance of SEZ on Export and Import Transactions, 2006-2014

                                 Export Transactions                                         Import Transactions
                  80                                                           80
                                                  Value                                                      Value
                                                  Number of firms                                            Number of firms
                  70                                                           70


                  60                                                           60


                  50                                                           50
              %




                                                                           %
                  40                                                           40


                  30                                                           30


                  20                                                           20


                  10                                                           10


                  0                                                            0
                  2006    2008          2010           2012    2014            2006   2008          2010           2012    2014
                                        Year                                                        Year


          Source: Authors’ calculations based on customs transaction data from the DGA.




      Zooming in into ﬁrm-level export and import performance, Table 2 shows that SEZ ﬁrms diﬀer

substantially from ﬁrms trading through the national customs regime. SEZ ﬁrms are larger in terms

of the value of their export and import transactions, export and import more products, sell to more

destination markets and acquire imported inputs from a wider range of countries than non-SEZ

ﬁrms. These diﬀerences remain when we compare median performance outcomes, which help to

ensure that the results are not driven by outliers. These ﬁgures are in line with those reported by

Fernandes et al. (2016) for countries at a similar stage of development.
 10
      Schrank (2008) reports that the share of aggregate exports accounted for by SEZ exceeded 80% in the early 2000s




                                                                      14
            Table 2: Importance of SEZ on Export and Import Transactions, 2006-2014

                                                                                            Special Economic Zones                   National Customs Regime
                                                                                            Exports     Imports                      Exports      Imports
  Transaction value per ﬁrm                                                       Mean       44.98       54.05                        5.62          3.32
                                                                                  Median     0.27         4.99                        0.05          0.04
  Products per ﬁrm                                                                Mean        6.38       46.32                        4.03          9.91
                                                                                  Median     1.00        20.00                        1.00          2.00
  Destinations/origins per ﬁrm                                                    Mean       2.58         4.82                        1.61          1.47
                                                                                  Median     1.00         2.00                        1.00          1.00

Source: Authors’ calculations based on customs transaction data from the DGA. Export and import transaction
values are denominated in hundreds of thousands US Dollars. Figures are averaged across the period 2006-2014.



Export Performance across SEZ and National Priority Status. We now provide a ﬁrst look

at aggregate export performance according to ﬁrms’ SEZ status and whether they operate or not

in national priority sectors, which experienced an earlier removal of ESR. Following the discussion

in Section 2 regarding the reforms of the SEZ regime in the Dominican Republic, we consider three

periods of analysis: pre-reform (2006-07), introduction of national priority sectors (2008-12) and

full ESR elimination reform (2012-14).

                                                     Figure 2: Export Performance across SEZ and National Priority Status

                                                     7000

                                                            SEZ firms    Non-SEZ firms

                                                     6000
            Total Exports (Millions of US Dollars)




                                                     5000



                                                     4000



                                                     3000



                                                     2000



                                                     1000



                                                        0
                                                            Priority         Non-Priority   Priority             Non-Priority   Priority        Non-Priority

                                                                        2006-07                        2008-11                             2012-14


                                         Source: Authors’ calculations based on customs transaction data from the DGA.



                                                                                                   15
   Figure 2 shows very minor change in total export sales between 2006-07 and 2008-12, both

for priority and non-priority sectors and SEZ and non-SEZ ﬁrms. This stability of course masks

a signiﬁcant fall in exports during the global ﬁnancial crisis in 2008-09, which was subsequently

followed by a rapid recovery in 2010. The textiles and apparel, leather and footwear industries

accounted for approximately one-ﬁfth of the Dominican Republic’s aggregate exports, almost all of

which originated from SEZ throughout our period of study. The importance of national priority

products in the Dominican export basket has declined secularly since 2000, both because of the

erosion of trade preferences and more intense competition by low-wage producers at the regional

(e.g. Haiti, Honduras and Nicaragua) and global level (e.g. Bangladesh, China and Vietnam). These

two channels have resulted in Dominican exporters experiencing substantial market share losses,

particularly in the US market. Non-SEZ ﬁrms account for a larger share of export value in non-

priority sectors, with their importance increasing over time — a pattern consistent with a long-term

trend of greater export dynamism for ﬁrms operating outside SEZ identiﬁed by Burgaud and Farole

(2011) and World Bank (2014).

   At ﬁrst pass, the elimination of the ESR for SEZ ﬁrms and the extension of ﬁscal incentives

to non-SEZ ﬁrms in priority sectors mandated by law 56-07 does not appear to have had a strong

impact on aggregate export ﬂows in national priority sectors. SEZ ﬁrms still account for the

overwhelming majority of priority sector exports in terms of value, with the share of non-SEZ

exports increasing by only 1 percentage point, from 1.5 to 2.5%, after the 2007 reform. Extending

the ﬁscal incentives available on SEZ to ﬁrms exporting through the national customs regime does

not appear to have reoriented exports away from SEZ in priority sectors.

   The fall in the share of aggregate exports originating in SEZ presented in Figure 1, however,

understates their continuing preponderance in the Dominican Republic’s international trade. Table

3 presents the top 20 HS-2 export products during our sample period, as well as the number of

exporting ﬁrms and the share of exports originating in SEZ. For only one out of the top-10 exported

products is the average share of SEZ exports below 40%, and in fact, for 7 out of 10 broadly deﬁned

sectors, this share exceeds 90%. Thus, even though the export portfolio of the Dominican Republic

has gradually diversiﬁed over the last decade (World Bank, 2014), its main comparative advantage

sectors are still highly reliant on SEZ.



                                                16
                            Table 3: Top-20 Export Products, 2006-2014

             HS-2 Sector                                     Export       #       % Exported
                                                             Value      Firms      from SEZ
             Optical and medical instruments                 690.33     368.00        96
             Precious metals and jewelry                     615.27     390.22        42
             Electrical machinery and equipment              539.83     492.11        94
             Iron and steel                                  526.37     150.22         5
             Tobacco                                         450.96     233.56        95
             Apparel and clothing                            396.13     336.67        99
             Plastics                                        263.41     591.33        61
             Cotton                                          263.32      88.56        99
             Knitted goods                                   251.70     266.22        99
             Footwear                                        225.77     114.67        98
             Tin articles                                    178.14     567.67         8
             Pharmaceutical products                         154.50     177.89        89
             Cocoa                                           153.88      80.00        39
             Sugar confectionaries                           132.10     100.67         5
             Beverages                                       125.33     161.22         9
             Paper                                           113.84     300.11        78
             Mineral fuels                                   108.34      68.00         2
             Misc. edible preparations                        87.15     134.00        43
             Salt, earth and cement                           85.30     115.22         1
             Nuclear reactors and related machinery           83.50     617.78        63

            Source: Authors’ calculations based on customs transaction data from the DGA. Export
            and import transaction values are denominated in millions of US Dollars. Figures are
            averaged across the period 2006-2014. Shaded rows indicate national priority sectors.




   Although both Figure 2 and Table 3 clearly illustrate the fact that SEZ account for the lion’s

share of exports in national priority sectors, Table 4 shows that there is still substantial hetero-

geneity — both in terms of export performance and the importance of SEZ — across individual

products. In terms of export values, SEZ account for the majority of exports across priority prod-

ucts, with the exception of special yarns and carpets (HS 56 and 57 respectively) — both of which

have quite low export sales. The number of non-SEZ ﬁrms is also more important in low export

value products, such as leather goods, yarns and crocheted ﬁbres (HS 42, 56 and 60 respectively).




                                                     17
                             Table 4: Exports of National Priority Sectors

                                   Special   Economic Zones            National    Customs Regime
          Sector        HS 2     Export         #       %              Export         #      %
                        code     Value       Firms Exports             Value       Firms Exports
          Leather        41       11.49      14.44     66               5.83       29.33     34
          goods          42       10.03      47.78     93               0.79       74.89      7
                         43        0.02        1.57    60               0.01        1.80     40
                         50        0.47        2.89    88               0.06        5.56     12
                         51        0.41        7.89    80               0.10        3.89     20
                         52      261.07       60.56    99               2.25       28.00      1
                         53        0.12        6.00    63               0.07        5.11     37
                         54        3.09       17.63    94               0.19        8.78      6
          Textiles       55       4.17       42.67     96               0.16       15.89      4
          and            56        0.53       12.78    32               1.12        36.56    68
          textile        57       0.02        2.67     35               0.04       10.11     65
          articles       58       6.67       51.44     92               0.57        36.89     8
                         59        0.52        8.11    96               0.02        9.89      4
                         60        7.29       21.11    65               3.87       139.89    35
                         61      249.14      151.33    99               2.56       114.89     1
                         62      392.28      188.67    99               3.86         148      1
                         63       42.54       73.33    90               4.54       163.33    10
          Footwear       64      221.12      37.33     98               4.65       77.33      2

       Source: Authors’ calculations based on customs transaction data from the DGA. Export and import
       transaction values are denominated in millions of US Dollars. Figures are averaged across the period
       2006-2014.




   Law 56-07 also provided duty-free access for 126 imported inputs to ﬁrms in national priority

sectors operating outside SEZ. Table 5 presents the top 20 HS-6 liberalized inputs in terms of

import value as well as the share of value imported destined to SEZ and the percentage of imports

purchased by national priority exporters outside SEZ. This table suggests that the reduction in

tariﬀs mandated by law 56-07 was likely to have a minor impact on non-SEZ ﬁrms in priority

sectors, given that the most important inputs liberalized were almost exclusively imported by SEZ

ﬁrms — which could already purchase these products duty-free. The last column of Table 5 also

shows that the majority of import value of products that are primarily purchased by non-SEZ

ﬁrms (with the exception of ammonium sulphate) is accounted for by exporters selling products

other than textiles, leather and apparel. Thus, it seems that the liberalized products were either

mostly imported by SEZ ﬁrms, or were general-purpose rather than inputs speciﬁc to priority sector

producers.

                                                       18
                             Table 5: Top 20 HS-6 ‘Priority Input’ Imports

 HS-6 Product                                                     HS6 code      Import       % SEZ       % of non-SEZ
                                                                                 Value      Imports     Imports used in
                                                                                                        Priority Sectors
 White spirit                                                       271011      1437.24         1               4
 Plastic articles nes                                               392690       278.8         90               2
 Soles and heels for footwear of rubber or plastic                  640620       22.71         96               2
 Bovine leather, vegetable pre-tanned                               410411        18.1         99               0
 Cartons, boxes & cases, of corrugated paper                        481910       16.12         78               2
 Other bovine leather, vegetable pre-tanned                         410449       14.26         98               1
 Footwear uppers and parts thereof, except stiﬀeners                640610       12.64         99               0
 Ammonium sulphate                                                  310221        12.4          0              52
 Pigments and preparations based on titanium dioxide                320611       11.63          2              15
 Cotton sewing thread for retail                                    520420       11.56         99               1
 Pesticides, rodenticides                                           380892        11.4          1              23
 Composition leather, in slabs, sheets or strip                     411510       11.27         99               1
 Parts of footwear nes, gaiters and leggings                        640699       10.05         99               0
 Cartons, boxes & cases, folding, non-corrugated paper              481920        7.55         65               6
 Sheet etc, cellular of polyurethane                                392113        7.52         85               7
 Finishing agents, dye carriers, dressing, mordants                 380991        7.18         81               1
 Knitted non-pile fabrics                                           600330        7.03         94               1
 Chemical products and preparations                                 382490        6.93         10              17
 Goat or kid skin leather                                           410622         6.9         95               2
 Buckles and clasps                                                 830890        6.71         83               3
 Chemical colouring matter                                          320416        5.79         98               0
 Adhesives based on rubber                                          350691        5.61         38              12
 Cotton sewing thread (¤ 85%)                                       520419        5.44         86              11
 Tulles and other net fabric                                        580410        5.24         98               0
 Made up articles of textile material                               630790         5.2         57               9

Source: Authors’ calculations based on customs transaction data from the DGA. Import values are denominated in
millions of US Dollars. Figures are averaged across the period 2006-2014. Shaded rows indicate HS-6 products that
are primarily imported by non-SEZ ﬁrms.




5    Empirical Analysis and Results

Our main objective in this paper is to determine whether the removal of export share requirements

in SEZ, ﬁrst in national priority sectors and subsequently across all other industries, aﬀected the

prevalence of SEZ in the exports of the Dominican Republic. We will also evaluate whether the

input tariﬀ reduction experienced by non-SEZ ﬁrms in priority sectors had an impact on the import

behavior of these ﬁrms.



                                                       19
   Our identication strategy relies on the comparison between priority and non-priority sectors,

which experienced the removal of ESR at diﬀerent points in time. We ﬁrst describe the construc-

tion of our key explanatory variables related to the removal of the ESR for ﬁrms in SEZ, which

occurred in July 2007 (law 56-07) and June 2011 (law 139-11). As we noted in Section 4 above,

we can consider three distinctive periods in our analysis: 2006-2007, when the ESR is in place for

SEZ ﬁrms in both priority and non-priority sectors, 2008-2011, when the ESR was lifted only for

SEZ ﬁrms operating in priority sectors and, 2012-2014, when the ESR had been removed for all

ﬁrms based in the zones regardless of their sector of operation. Since is likely that ﬁrms required

some time to adapt their behavior to changes stipulated in the two laws, we aggregate the data

at a yearly frequency and consider the impact of the ﬁrst and second regulatory changes starting

from the beginning of 2008 and 2012 respectively. Thus, we deﬁne the variable POST08t as taking

the value 1 from 2008 onwards and 0 otherwise, and likewise, POST12t is a dummy variable that

turns on from 2012 onwards.


Did the removal of ESR aﬀect the Extensive and Intensive Margin of Exports at the

Firm-level? We ﬁrst investigate if the elimination of export performance requirements aﬀected the

export entry and exit behavior of ﬁrms within HS-6 products over time, i.e. the extensive margin

of exports. Our identication strategy relies on the comparison between priority and non-priority

sectors and the diﬀerent time in which they were subject to the elimination of ESR. We aggregate

our data at the ﬁrm-product-location-year level, with products being deﬁned at the HS-6 digit level

and location indicates whether a ﬁrm is located or not in an SEZ. We then estimate the impact of

the two waves of reform separately for ﬁrms located in SEZ and outside them. Our OLS estimating

equation for the extensive margin of exports is therefore given by:


  Entry/Exitij    β1pPost08t ¦ Priorityj ¦ SEZ q   β2pPost08t ¦ Priorityj ¦ non-SEZ q 
                 t


                                                                                          jt   εij t ,
β3 pPost12t ¦ Non-Priorityj ¦ SEZ q  β4 pPost12t ¦ Non-Priorityj ¦ non-SEZ q  fj   f t   T˜

                                                                                                     (8)


where i indexes ﬁrms, j , HS-6 products, , locations, and t, years. Entryij     t   is a dummy variable

that takes the value 1 if a ﬁrm-product-location combination reports a positive export value at time



                                                  20
t but not in the previous year. Similarly, Exitij t takes the value 1 if a ﬁrm-product-location exports

in year t but does not report any export sales in year t   1. As noted above, SEZ is a dummy

that takes value 1 if a ﬁrm is located in a special economic zone and 0 otherwise, while non-SEZ

                        jt is an HS-2-product-speciﬁc linear trend which intends to control for
is the opposite image. T˜

broadly-deﬁned time-varying sectoral supply and demand shifts. We estimate the eﬀect of policy

changes within and outside the zone independently. To this end, the set of HS-6 digit product ﬁxed

eﬀects fj and year ﬁxed eﬀects f t , are set to be speciﬁc to location . Including this battery of

location-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects allows for diﬀerential average eﬀects on export performance according

to ﬁrms’ SEZ status as well as controlling for time-varying diﬀerences within and outside the zones.

The standard errors in regressions (8) and (9) below are clustered at the HS-6 product level.

   Table 6 presents our ﬁndings regarding the eﬀect of laws 56-07 and 139-11 on the extensive

margin of exports for ﬁrms according to their SEZ and national priority status. Prediction 2

suggests that inasmuch as the removal of ESR induces more ﬁrms to locate in SEZ, we should expect

a positive eﬀect on export entry among ﬁrms located in SEZ. At the same time, ﬁrms’ relocation

towards SEZ might also increase the exit rate among ﬁrms exporting through the national customs

regime. The results reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 provide support for this hypothesis.

Export entry increased for SEZ ﬁrms in both priority and non-priority sectors after the removal

of the ESR constraint — although the eﬀect is statistically signiﬁcant only for SEZ producers in

non-priority sectors. The entry rate into exporting for these ﬁrms increased by 10 percentage points

following the reform implemented in 2011. We also observe an increase in the exit rate of ﬁrms

exporting through the national customs regime in priority sectors after 2008 (column 2). This is

expected as eliminating the export requirement would intensify the competition faced by non-SEZ

ﬁrms. Nevertheless, it is somewhat puzzling to observe this response following the 2007 reform, since

the government extended some of the tax incentives available in SEZ to priority sector producers

outside the zones; in contrast, law 139-11 did not provide any incentives to non-SEZ ﬁrms. As we

discuss in more detail below when we investigate the input tariﬀ reduction mandated by law 56-07,

this dimension of the SEZ reform was largely ineﬀective in providing incentives to ﬁrms outside

SEZ.

   We next investigate the response of the intensive margin of exports. More speciﬁcally, we

explore how the export value of ﬁrms operating in a given location, selling a given HS-6 product,

                                                  21
was aﬀected by the elimination of ESR for each of the four types of ﬁrms considered in our analysis

of the extensive margin above. Equation (9) presents our OLS estimating equation for the intensive

margin, where the dependent variable is the log of export value by ﬁrm i exporting HS-6 product

j from location       in year t, and all other variables have been deﬁned above:


  ln Yij   t    β1pPost08t¦Priorityj ¦SEZ q β2pPost08t¦Priorityj ¦non-SEZ q β3pPost12t¦Non-Priorityj ¦SEZ q
                                                                                       jt   εij t . (9)
                                 β4pPost12t ¦ Non-Priorityj ¦ non-SEZ q   fij   f t   T˜

The results reported in column (3) of table 6 show that ﬁrms operating in SEZ experienced a

reduction in the value of individual export transactions at the HS-6 product level after ESR were

eliminated, with the magnitude of the eﬀect being quite similar for SEZ ﬁrms independently of their

sector of operation. Firms exporting through the national customs regime were, on the other hand,

largely unaﬀected along this margin. This result is consistent with Prediction 1 from our model.

After the limit on domestic sales was lifted, constrained exporters increase export prices lowering

exports sales. However, this average eﬀect encompasses both the change in behavior of constrained

exporters, which were previously forced to export 80% of their output, as well as unconstrained

exporters, which would have been unaﬀected by the elimination of the export requirement. In order

to disentangle these two diﬀerent responses, we re-estimate regression (9) on the set of continuing

exporters, i.e. those ﬁrms that have conducted export transactions in every year of our sample.11

                                                                                      ek´
We do so with the view that perennial exporters are more likely to be unconstrained (B´ es and

     ozy, 2012).12 The results reported in column (4) show that although the negative eﬀect of the
Murak¨

removal of ESR on the intensive margin of exports for SEZ ﬁrms remains, it becomes statistically

insigniﬁcant as we expected. Lastly, we do not ﬁnd any evidence that the removal of ESR had any

discernable eﬀect on the size of export transactions sold by non-SEZ exporters.
  11
     Notice that since we do not observe the value of ﬁrms’ domestic sales, we cannot directly distinguish constrained
and unconstrained exporters in SEZ.
  12
     Interviews with managers at several ﬁrms in SEZ carried out in December 2015, reveal that large foreign-owned
ﬁrms that export permanently sell almost all their output abroad, perhaps with the exception of defective orders
that are sometimes sold locally. Interestingly, some of these large multinationals even choose to serve the Dominican
market via aﬃliates located in other CAFTA-DR country members, since by doing so they avoid paying import tariﬀs
that they would otherwise face if they were to sell directly from their SEZ plant.




                                                         22
Table 6: Response of Firm-level Intensive and Extensive Margins of Exports to the Removal of
ESR

                                                          Extensive   margin       Intensive   margin
                                                           Entry        Exit        Value       Value
                                                            [1]          [2]         [3]          [4]
           Post08t ¦ Priorityj    ¦ SEZ                    0.035       -0.024     -0.234**      -0.146
                                                          (0.025)     (0.020)      (0.102)     (0.361)
           Post08t ¦ Priorityj    ¦ non-SEZ                0.010      0.040**       0.106        0.579
                                                          (0.021)     (0.026)      (0.108)     (0.824)
           Post12t ¦ Non-Priorityj      ¦ SEZ            0.097***      -0.039     -0.218**      -0.148
                                                          (0.021)     (0.026)      (0.098)     (0.286)
           Post12t ¦ Non-Priorityj      ¦ non-SEZ          0.002       -0.016       0.183       -0.331
                                                          (0.019)     (0.022)      (0.151)     (0.440)
           Observations                                   188,623     170,991      203,137      3,672
           R2                                              0.047        0.019       0.010        0.090

          ***, signiﬁcant at the 1% level; **, signiﬁcant at the 5% level; *, signiﬁcant at the 10% level.
          All regressions are estimated by OLS. Robust standard errors clustered at the HS-6 product
          level. Speciﬁcations [1] and [2] include HS-6 product ¢ location and year ¢ location ﬁxed
          eﬀects, as well as HS-2 product-speciﬁc linear trends. Speciﬁcations [3] and [4] include ﬁrm ¢
          HS-6 product ¢ location, year ¢ location ﬁxed eﬀects and HS-2 product-speciﬁc linear trends.
          Column [3] includes all ﬁrms, whereas the regression reported in column [4] is restricted to
          only include ﬁrms that have conducted export transactions in a given HS-6 product in every
          year of our sample.



Did the elimination of ESR aﬀect the importance of exports originating from SEZ? We

now present our main conclusion concerning the change in the importance of exports originating

from SEZ after the elimination of ESR. As we discussed in Section 3, if the constraint on domestic

sales is lifted for SEZ ﬁrms and the level of ﬁscal incentives available in the zones remains unchanged,

we would expect that more ﬁrms ﬁnd proﬁtable to be based in SEZ, and this in turn should increase

the share of SEZ exports for a given HS-6 product (Prediction 2). On the other hand, if a substantial

number of ﬁrms in SEZ were constrained by the 80% ESR, we would expect that the elimination of

ESR would induce these producers to reallocate some of their sales towards the domestic market,

thereby reducing the importance of exports originating from the SEZ (Prediction 1). Therefore,

Prediction 3 tells us that, overall, the SEZ reform is expected to have an ambiguous eﬀect on the

share of SEZ exports.

   We now aggregate our data at the HS-6 product-year level and use as our dependent variable

the shares of export value originating from SEZ and the number of exporters located in SEZ in a

given HS-6 product. We are interested in gauging the eﬀect that the 2007 and 2011 reforms had in

                                                        23
products belonging to priority and non-priority sectors. Thus, we focus in the coeﬃcients β1 and

β2 in the following OLS regression equation:


    ShrSEZjt                                                                          jt   εjt ,
                β1pPost08t ¦ Priorityj q   β2pPost12t ¦ Non-Priorityj q   fj   ft   T˜            (10)


where j indexes HS-6 products and t indexes years as before; fj and ft denote product and year

ﬁxed eﬀects respectively. This set of ﬁxed eﬀects and product trends control both for time-invariant

characteristics that aﬀect the attractiveness of exporting a particular product from SEZ, as well as

for time-varying secular changes at the sectoral level, which could confound the interpretation of

the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences coeﬃcients. As in our previous regressions, robust standard errors in

regression (10) are clustered at the HS-6 product level.

   Table 7 presents our estimates of regression (10). Our results conﬁrm the initial impression

provided by Table 6 and are also consistent with Predictions 2 and 3 of our model. The share

of exports accounted for by SEZ did not change signiﬁcantly after the reforms. Conversely, we

ﬁnd that scrapping the ESR had a positive and signiﬁcant eﬀect on the share of exporting ﬁrms

operating in SEZ. More precisely, the share of ﬁrms in priority sectors exporting through SEZ

increased by 7 percentage points on average relative to the situation with ESR, while law 139-11

led to an increase of 5.4 percentage points in the share of SEZ exporters in non-priority sectors.

The fact that the increase in the share of SEZ exporters is slightly higher in priority sectors suggests

that the eﬀorts to extend the incentives available in SEZ to ﬁrms based outside them were largely

ineﬀective. Overall, the results reported in Table 7 suggest that the eﬀect of the elimination of

ESR on the attractiveness of locating in SEZ dominated the negative eﬀect on the intensive margin

of constrained exporters. Thus, granting access to the domestic market to ﬁrms in the zones has

helped in consolidating their importance in the export basket of the Dominican Republic — at

least in the short term.




                                                   24
     Table 7: Share of SEZ in Export Value and Number of Firms at the HS-6 Product-level

                                                   Export Value       Number of Firms
                                                        [1]                  [2]
                    Post08t ¦ Priorityj               0.033              0.069***
                                                     (0.024)              (0.019)
                    Post12t ¦ Non-Priorityj           0.039               0.054**
                                                     (0.031)              (0.025)
                    Observations                      19,141              19,145
                    R2                                0.055                0.109

                  All regressions are estimated by OLS and include HS-6 product and year
                  ﬁxed eﬀects as well as HS-2 product-speciﬁc linear trends. Robust standard
                  errors clustered at the HS-6 product level. ***, signiﬁcant at the 1% level;
                  **, signiﬁcant at the 5% level; *, signiﬁcant at the 10% level.



Input Tariﬀ Reductions for Non-SEZ Firms in Priority Sectors. Lastly, we investigate

whether the tariﬀ cuts mandated by law 56-07 had any signiﬁcant impact on the share of imports

of these products accounted for by SEZ across HS-6 products, both in terms of value and number

of importing ﬁrms. Thus, our estimating equation is given by:


                  ShrSEZjt                                                  jt   εjt ,
                               β1pPost08t ¦ Priority Inputj q   fj   ft   T˜                    (11)


where Priority Inputj takes the value 1 if HS-6 product j import tariﬀ was set to zero under law

56-07, and all other control variables have been deﬁned previously. Notice that since law 139-11

did not extend any import tariﬀ reductions, equation (11) does not include an interaction term for

liberalized inputs after 2012.

   As we discussed in Section 4, Table 5 shows that the most important goods (in terms of total

import value) that were made duty-free for non-SEZ ﬁrms operating in national priority sectors

were either almost exclusively imported by SEZ ﬁrms, or, general-purpose inputs imported by a

large number of ﬁrms in priority and non-priority sectors alike. Thus, we examine whether there is

a diﬀerence in the share of imports destined to SEZ depending on the importance of these goods

in the production of national priority sectors. Since we do not have an input-output table that

would allow us to categorize inputs as speciﬁc to priority sectors or general-purpose, we follow an

alternative strategy and classify each of the 126 HS-6 products liberalized as speciﬁc, if the ﬁrst

two digits of their product nomenclature correspond to those of a national priority product. Thus,


                                                      25
for instance, the HS-6 product ‘bovine leather’ is classiﬁed as a priority input because its ﬁrst two

digits correspond to the leather goods sector, which is listed as a priority sector. Conversely, ‘white

spirit’, which is also a priority input, is instead considered to be a non-priority product. Columns

(3) and (4) of Table 8 present estimates of the following OLS regression that modiﬁes equation

(11):


  ShrSEZjt    β1pPost08t ¦ Priority Inputj ¦ Priority Productj q 
                                                                                      jt   εjt ,
                 β2 pPost08t ¦ Priority Inputj ¦ Non-Priority Productj q   fj   ft   T˜                     (11’)


Column (1) of Table 8 shows an insigniﬁcant reduction in the share of liberalized inputs imported

by SEZ ﬁrms after 2008, and similarly, column (2) reveals that there is no change in the share of

SEZ ﬁrms importing these goods either. Column (3), however, shows that the reduction in the

share of imports of priority inputs destined to SEZ occurred primarily among products that were

not used speciﬁcally by ﬁrms in the apparel, textiles and leather industries. If — as the results in

Table 8 imply — non-SEZ ﬁrms did not receive a suﬃcient boost in incentives after the removal of

ESR, tougher competition from SEZ ﬁrms in the domestic market could contribute to the rise in

the share of SEZ exports after the elimination of ESR.


        Table 8: Share of SEZ in Import Value and Number of Firms at HS-6 Product-level

                                                    Import Value      # Firms      Import Value      # Firms
                                                         [1]             [2]           [3]             [4]
  Post08t ¦ Priority inputj                            -0.033          -0.004
                                                      (0.021)         (0.015)
  Post08t ¦ Priority inputj    ¦ Priorityj                                             -0.019           0.034
                                                                                      (0.043)         (0.036)
  Post08t ¦ Priority inputj    ¦ Non-Priorityj                                        -0.040*          -0.022
                                                                                      (0.022)         (0.013)
  Observations                                          40,770         40,784          40,770         40,784
  R2                                                     0.018         0.029            0.018          0.029

All regressions are estimated by OLS and include HS-6 product and year ﬁxed eﬀects as well as HS-2 product-speciﬁc
linear trends. Robust standard errors clustered at the HS-6 product level. ***, signiﬁcant at the 1% level; **,
signiﬁcant at the 5% level; *, signiﬁcant at the 10% level.




                                                       26
6    Conclusions

For more than four decades the Dominican Republic has relied extensively on providing ﬁscal

incentives to ﬁrms located in special economic zones to promote exports. An instrumental element

of this developmental strategy was the requirement that ﬁrms located in SEZ had to export at least

80% of their output, thus limiting the extent of competition faced by local producers outside the

zones. The impending deadline to make the SEZ program compliant with the disciplines stipulated

by the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures by December 2015, led to the

elimination of export share requirements in the SEZ. A distinctive feature of the reform strategy

pursued by the Dominican Republic — which we take advantage of in order to identify the impact

of the removal of ESR on the export performance of SEZ — was that the requirements were

eliminated in a staggered fashion over time and across diﬀerent industries. Namely, the export

share requirement was ﬁrst removed for producers of leather, textiles and apparel and leather, the

so called ‘national priority’ sectors in 2007, and afterwards for all SEZ producers in 2011.

    From a theoretical standpoint, ESR distort the allocation of sales across domestic and export

markets for exporters taking advantage of the incentives available in SEZ, but that would prefer

to sell a higher share of their output locally than what the export requirement allows them to. On

the one hand, eliminating the constraint on domestic sales would induce these exporters to increase

the prices they charge abroad in order to reach their undistorted export intensity, thus reducing

export sales. On the other hand, removing the ESR while retaining the incentives available in SEZ,

would encourage ﬁrms to locate there, thereby increasing the share of exports originating from SEZ

for a given product. Since these two mechanisms work in opposite directions, the question of how

did the ESR reform aﬀect the importance of SEZ exports — which is the focus of this paper — is

ultimately, an empirical one.

    Our results show that removing the ESR in SEZ has made them a more attractive location

for ﬁrms to operate from in the Dominican Republic. Our empirical assessment of the response

of export margins to the elimination of ESR shows, in line with our theoretical framework, that

the reforms promoted entry into export markets within SEZ, while at the same time producing

a reduction in the value of export shipments for existing exporters in SEZ (although the latter

eﬀect stops being signiﬁcant when we focus on continuing exporters). When we look at how the


                                                 27
importance of SEZ exports in narrowly-deﬁned HS-6 products was aﬀected by the two waves of

elimination of ESR, we ﬁnd that the share of exporters from SEZ increased between 5.5 to 7

percentage points relative to the situation with ESR, whereas the increase in the share of export

value after the reforms was largely insigniﬁcant. These ﬁndings suggest that the lion’s share of

exports (in terms of value) originated in SEZ is accounted for by unconstrained exporters that did

not ﬁnd the ESR constraint binding. Nevertheless, the entry of new exporters after the removal

of export requirements more than compensated the reduction in the value of individual export

shipments by established constrained exporters, and therefore, we see that the importance of SEZ

in terms of the number of exporting ﬁrms for a given product, increased following the reforms. In

regard to the objective of harmonizing the incentives between ﬁrms inside and outside SEZ, we ﬁnd

that the tariﬀ reductions introduced by law 56-07 did not provide a suﬃciently strong boost, in

terms of the import behavior of ﬁrms relying on the national customs regime, to elicit a signiﬁcant

change in the composition of exports in the Dominican Republic.

   Overall, we conclude that at least in the short-run, making the special economic zones regime

compatible with WTO rules on export subsidies has not signiﬁcantly diminished the Dominican

Republic’s reliance on the zones.


References
Alder, S., L. Shao, and F. Zilibotti (2013): “Economic Reforms and Industrial Policy in a
 Panel of Chinese Cities,” UBS Center Working Paper Series, Working Paper No. 5.
Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger (2006): “Will International Rules on Subsidies Disrupt the
 World Trading System?” American Economic Review, 96, 877–895.
Baldwin, R. and S. Evenett (2009): “The Collapse of Global Trade, Murky Protectionism,
 and the Crisis: Recommendations for the G20,” VoxEU.org Publication.
Banco Central de la Repu   ´ blica Dominicana (2014): “El Reto de las Zonas Francas con el
                                           alisis de Coyuntura Internacional No. 29.
 Cambio en las Reglas de Juego en 2015,” An´
 ´ke
Be ´s, G. and B. Murako   ¨ zy (2012): “Temporary trade and heterogeneous ﬁrms,” Journal of
 International Economics, 87, 232–246.
Boyenge, J. P. S. (2007): “ILO Database on Export Processing Zones, Revised,” International
 Labour Organization.
Burgaud, J.-M. and T. Farole (2011): “When Trade Preferences and Tax Breaks are no
 Longer Enough: The Challenges of Adjustment in the Dominican Republics Free Zones,” in
 Special Economic Zones: Progress, Emerging Challenges and Future Directions, ed. by T. Farole
 and G. Akinci, World Bank.

                                                28
Chao, C.-C. and E. S. H. Yu (2014): Trade-Related Investment Measures: Theory and Appli-
 cations, London: Imperial College Press.

Creskoff, S. and P. Walkenhorst (2009): “Implications of WTO Disciplines for Special
 Economic Zones in Developing Countries,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4892.

Davidson, C., S. J. Matusz, and M. E. Kreinin (1985): “Analysis of Performance Standards
 for Direct Foreign Investments,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 18, 876–890.

Davies, R. B. and A. Mazhikeyev (2015): “The Impact of Special Economic Zones on Exporting
 Behavior,” University College Dublin Working Paper 15/28.

Defever, F. and A. Rian ˜ o (2015): “Gone for Good? Subsidies with Export Share Requirements
 in China: 2002-2013,” World Bank Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 29, S125–S144.

——— (2016): “Protectionism through Exporting: Subsidies with Export Share Requirements in
 China,” CEP Working Paper 1431.

Devereux, J. and L. L. Chen (1995): “Export Zones and Welfare: Another Look,” Oxford
 Economic Papers, 47, 704–713.

Evenett, S. J. and M. Wermelinger (2010): “A snapshot of contemporary protectionism: how
 important are the murkier forms of trade discrimination?” in Rising Non-Tariﬀ Protectionism
 and Crisis Recovery, United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc
 (ESCAP).

Farole, T. and G. Akinci (2011): Special Economic Zones: Progress, Emerging Challenges and
  Future Directions, Washington DC: The World Bank.

Fernandes, A. M., C. Freund, and M. D. Pierola (2016): “Exporter behavior, country
  size and stage of development: Evidence from the exporter dynamics database,” Journal of
  Development Economics, 119, 121–137.

Fernandes, A. P. and H. Tang (2012): “Determinants of Vertical Integration in Export Pro-
  cessing: Theory and Evidence from China,” Journal of Development Economics, 99, 396–414.

FIAS (2008): Special Economic Zones: Performance, Lessons Learned, and Implications for Zone
  Development, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hamada, K. (1974): “An Economic Analysis of the Duty Free Zone,” Journal of International
 Economics, 4, 225–241.
                              ˜ o (2013): “The Rise of the Maquiladoras: A Mixed Blessing,”
Heid, B., M. Larch, and A. Rian
 Review of Development Economics, 17, 252–267.

Ianchovichina, E. (2007): “Are Duty Drawbacks on Exports Worth the Hassle?” Canadian
  Journal of Economics, 40, 881–913.

Kaplinsky, R. (1993): “Export Processing Zones in the Dominican Republic: Transforming man-
 ufactures into commodities,” World Development, 21, 1851–1865.

Krugman, P. (1980): “Scale Economies, Product Diﬀerentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
 American Economic Review, 70, 950–959.


                                            29
Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Productivity,” Econometrica, 71, 1695–1725.

    ıguez-Clare, A. (1996): “Multinationals, Linkages, and Economic Development,” Ameri-
Rodr´
 can Economic Review, 86, 852–873.

Rodrik, D. (1987): “The Economics of Export-Performance Requirements,” The Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 102, 633–650.

——— (2004): “Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century,” CEPR Discussion Paper 4767.

Sanchez-Ancochea, D. (2006): “Development trajectories and new comparative advantages:
  Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic under Globalization,” World Development, 34, 996–
  1015.

Schrank, A. (2008): “Export Processing Zones in the Dominican Republic: Schools or Stopgaps?”
  World Development, 36, 1381–1397.

The Economist (2015): “Special Economic Zones: Not so Special,” April 3, 2015.

Volpe Martincus, C. (2010): Odyssey in International Markets: An Assessment of the Eﬀective-
 ness of Export Promotion in Latin America and the Caribbean, Washington, DC: Inter-American
 Development Bank.

Wang, J. (2013): “The Economic Impact of Special Economic Zones: Evidence from Chinese
 Municipalities,” Journal of Development Economics, 101, 133–147.

Wang, Z. and Z. Yu (2012): “Trading Partners, Traded Products, and Firm Performance: Evi-
 dence from China’s Exporter-Importers,” The World Economy, 35, 1795–1824.

Waters, J. J. (2013): “Achieving World Trade Organization Compliance for Export Process-
 ing Zones while Maintaining Economic Competitiveness for Developing Countries,” Duke Law
 Review, 63, 481–524.

Willmore, L. (1995): “Export processing zones in the Dominican Republic: A comment on
 Kaplinsky,” World Development, 23, 529–535.

World Bank (2014): How to Sustain Export Dynamism by Reducing Duality in the Dominican
 Republic, Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Trade Organization (2006): World Trade Report 2006: Exploring the Links Between
 Subsidies, Trade and the WTO, Geneva: World Trade Organization.

Young, L. (1991): “Unemployment and the optimal export-processing zone,” Journal of Devel-
 opment Economics, 37, 369–385.

Young, L. and K. F. Miyagiwa (1987): “Unemployment and the formation of duty-free zones,”
 Journal of Development Economics, 26, 397–405.
                         ¨n (2016): “Trade Performance of Export Processing Zones,” The
 ¨ cer, A. and J.-M. Siroe
Yu
 World Economy.




                                             30
