                                                   WPS7937


Policy Research Working Paper                     7937




Foreign Banks and International Transmission
            of Monetary Policy
          Evidence from the Syndicated Loan Market

                             Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
                              Bálint L. Horváth
                               Harry Huizinga




Development Research Group
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7937


  Abstract
 This paper uses loan-level data from 124 countries over                            in the borrowing country on the transmission of mone-
 1995–2015 to examine the transmission of monetary policy                           tary policy is robust to controlling for borrower-country
 through the cross-border syndicated loan market. The                               economic and financial development, and a range of
 results show that the expansion of monetary policy increases                       borrower and lender country policies and institutions,
 cross-border credit supply especially to weaker firms. How-                        including the strength of bank regulation and supervision,
 ever, greater foreign bank presence in the borrower country                        exchange rate flexibility, and restrictions on capital flows.
 appears to reduce the potentially destabilizing impact of                          The findings qualify the characterization of international
 lower policy interest rates on cross-border lending, as it                         banks as sources of credit instability, and suggest that for-
 attenuates increases in loan volume and maturity while                             eign bank entry can improve the stability of cross-border
 magnifying increases in collateralization and covenant                             credit in the face of international monetary policy shocks.
 use. The mitigating effect of foreign banking presence




  This paper is a product of the Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
  access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working
  Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at Ademirguckunt@
  worldbank.org; balint.horvath@bristol.ac.uk; H.P.Huizinga@uvt.nl.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
      Foreign Banks and International Transmission of Monetary Policy:
                Evidence from the Syndicated Loan Market1

                                            Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
                                                World Bank

                                             Bálint L. Horváth
                                            University of Bristol

                                             Harry Huizinga
                                      Tilburg University and CEPR




Keywords: Cross-border lending; Monetary transmission; Banking FDI; Bank regulation;
Capital controls

JEL classification: E44; E52; F34; F38; F42; G15; G20




1
  This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. We thank Mintra
Dwarkasing, Jan Pieter Krahnen and seminar participants at the Luxembourg School of Finance, the
Portsmouth-Fordham Conference on Banking & Finance, the 2nd Empirical Financial Intermediation Workshop
in Brussels, the 25th International Rome Conference on Money, Banking and Finance in Rome, the Financial
Intermediation in Emerging Markets conference in Cape Town, and the 4th Bordeaux Workshop in International
Economics and Finance for useful comments.
1.     Introduction

       International banks operate in foreign countries through local affiliates and cross-

border lending. They offer opportunities to promote economic development as they bring in

capital, liquidity, expertise, and new technologies, which can promote greater competition

and improved resource allocation. International banks also have a risk sharing role which

implies that they help host countries stabilize their credit supply during a local downturn and

that they shift resources back to the home country when conditions there worsen. This risk

sharing role can also expose host countries to greater volatility from time to time, and in the

aftermath of the financial crisis, academics and policy makers have voiced concerns that

monetary policies pursued by lending countries can have negative spillovers on emerging

markets’ financial stability (Rey, 2013; Rajan, 2014; Fischer, 2014).

       Consistent with these arguments, recent studies find significant evidence of

international transmission of monetary policy through its effect on the supply of cross-border

loans. Using a VAR framework, Bruno and Shin (2015a) estimate that a contractionary shock

to US monetary policy leads to a decrease in cross-border bank lending, as international

banks reduce their leverage. Micro studies provide additional evidence on how international

monetary policy shocks affect bank lending to borrowers in particular countries. Morais,

Peydró and Ruiz (2015), for instance, investigate the impact of monetary policy in three

financial centers (the US, the UK, and the Eurozone) on the provision of credit by

subsidiaries of banks from these centers to corporations in Mexico, finding a positive supply

effect of a lower monetary policy interest rate, especially towards riskier borrowers.

       The impact of monetary policy on the international supply of bank credit, however, is

likely to differ not only across borrowers with different risk profiles, but also across different

borrower and lender countries, depending on their level of economic and financial

development and on a range of economic policies and institutions. The transmission of


                                                2
monetary policy, for instance, is potentially affected by the foreign bank penetration in the

borrower country (c.f. De Haas and Van Lelyveld, 2006; Claessens and Van Horen, 2012;

Ongena et al., 2015), the quality of bank supervision and regulation in borrower and lender

countries (Ongena et al., 2013), the exchange rate system of the borrower country, and also

the existence of restrictions on capital inflows into the borrower country (Rey, 2016).

       In this paper, we investigate the role of foreign banks in the international transmission

of monetary policy through the cross-border syndicated loan market using loan level data in

124 countries over the 1995-2015 period. Use of loan level data for multiple lender and

borrower countries has two main advantages. First, including borrower*time fixed effects

allows us to control for time-varying loan demand at the individual borrower level. Second,

examining multiple countries allows us to investigate the impact of varying borrower and

lender country policies and institutions on the transmission of lender-country monetary

policy. Identification of an effect of monetary policy on loan supply volume and other loan

terms is achieved by considering variation in the monetary policies relevant for banks in

different countries that lend to the same firm in the same time period.

       Our main finding is that the transmission of lender-country monetary policy through

the cross-border syndicated loan market depends importantly on the existence of banking FDI

in the borrowing country. Specifically, greater foreign banking presence reduces the

sensitivity of the international loan supply to lender-country policy interest rates. This may to

some extent reflect that an international bank with a local presence in the borrower country

can substitute local funding for more expensive international funding if the lender-country

monetary policy interest rate rises. Consistent with this, we find that the mitigating impact of

banking FDI on the international transmission of monetary policy to loan volume is weaker if

the borrower-country policy interest rate is higher, since this reduces the ability of a

multinational bank to substitute borrower-country funding for lender-country funding. Our


                                                3
findings are robust to controlling for a range of country-level institutional and policy

variables, such as the strength of bank regulation and supervision, exchange rate flexibility

and restrictions on capital flows.

       Our main contribution in this paper is to investigate the role of the structure of the

international banking market in the international transmission of monetary policy. The

literature on the effect of monetary policy on cross-border lending builds on several papers

investigating the bank lending channel domestically. Bank balance sheet strength (Jiménez et

al., 2012a; Jiménez et al., 2014b; Gambacorta, 2005) and bank risk (Altunbas et al., 2010)

have been shown to affect the impact of monetary policy on bank credit supply. Further, low

monetary policy rates induce risk taking (e.g. Jiménez et al., 2014a; Ioannidou et al. 2015),

and there is evidence of a portfolio rebalancing channel as well (den Haan et al., 2007).

       The paper most closely related to ours is Cerutti, Claessens and Ratnovski (2014),

who study drivers of cross-border bank flows using aggregate, bilateral credit flow data

published by the BIS. They find that these flows are largely driven by global factors (e.g.

VIX volatility and the slope of the US yield curve). These authors also find that the

transmission of monetary policy to cross-border credit is affected by certain borrowing

country policies, such as exchange rate flexibility, capital controls and bank regulation. Our

paper differs from Cerutti et al. (2014) in several ways. First, we control for credit demand at

the borrower firm level, so our findings are more likely to reflect supply side conditions.

Second, our main interest is the effect of monetary policy in the relevant lender countries on

cross-border lending. Finally, we provide a more comprehensive picture of cross-border

lending by also studying non-volume loan terms.

       Our paper is also related to the literature showing how banks reduce cross-border

lending in response to non-policy funding shocks at home. Peek and Rosengren (1997), in

particular, exploit the Japanese stock market crash in the 1990s, while various papers look at


                                                4
the effect of the global financial crisis on cross-border lending (Aiyar, 2012; Cetorelli and

Goldberg 2011; Cetorelli and Goldberg, 2012b; Gambacorta and Marques-Ibanez, 2011;

Giannetti and Laeven, 2012a,b; de Haas and van Horen, 2011; de Haas and van Horen, 2013;

Ivashina et al., 2015).

          Our results are broadly consistent with Morais et al. (2015) who find that monetary

easing in the US, the UK and the Eurozone lowers loan rates and lengthens loan maturities in

Mexico, with an offsetting risk-reducing effect through more stringent collateral

requirements. Consistent with this, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) find evidence of a

“global financial cycle”, showing that cross-border credit flows are to a large extent driven

by US monetary policy. Several additional papers (Kim, 2001; Bruno and Shin, 2015a;

Temesvary et al., 2015) also find that cross-border lending increases when US monetary

policy eases. Furthermore, Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012a) show that US global banks

actively reallocate capital from their foreign affiliates to their headquarters when US

monetary policy tightens.

          All of these various studies show a potentially destabilizing role for international

banks, as monetary policy changes in their countries of residence are transmitted as

international credit supply shocks to borrowing countries. Consistent with a destabilizing role

for international banks, Bertay, Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga (2015) also find that lending by

foreign-owned banks in a country tends to be relatively procyclical compared to domestic

banks. Our paper importantly qualifies the picture that emerges of international banks as

sources of credit instability, since we find that foreign banking presence in the form of

banking FDI reduces the sensitivity of cross-border loan supply to lender-country monetary

policy. Cross-border credit is an important source of funding for many countries, and for

these countries additional banking FDI may well serve to stabilize the overall supply of

credit.


                                                  5
       In the remainder, section 2 discusses the data. Section 3 presents evidence of the

transmission of monetary policy to loan volumes and other credit terms, and on how this

transmission depends on borrower creditworthiness. Section 4 considers the role of banking

FDI and other country-level institutional and policy variables in the international

transmission of monetary policy. Section 5 concludes.



2.     Data

       Our cross-border lending data come from the Loan Pricing Corporation’s (LPC)

Dealscan database, which contains detailed data on syndicated loans originated all around the

world. The database contains information on individual loan volume, pricing, as well as other

loan terms and conditions. LPC collects this information from SEC filings and public

documents, loan syndicators and other sources. Our data set comprises lenders in 50

countries, and borrowing non-financial firms in 124 countries over the 1995-2015 period.

Table A1 in the appendix shows the number of lenders and loans by lender country, while the

number of borrowers and loans by borrower country is shown in Table A2.

       A feature of the data is that loans are organized by packages and facilities. A package

is a loan agreement signed by a borrower and one or more lenders, and each of them may

contain one or more facilities. The basic level of observation in Dealscan is a facility. A

further characteristic of syndicated loans is that lenders may assume different roles in a deal.

Most importantly, lead arrangers are responsible for negotiating the terms with borrowers,

and they are also responsible for monitoring borrowers. Several papers provide extensive

information about the syndicated loan market as well as LPC’s Dealscan, see e.g. Chava and

Roberts (2008).

       As a first main independent variable we create Volume, which is the natural logarithm

of the dollar amount of a bank’s share in syndicated lending aggregated at the borrower-


                                                6
lender-time level (see Table A3 in the appendix for variable descriptions and data sources).

The sample includes only non-financial borrowing companies. Throughout the analysis we

use a monthly frequency in the time series dimension. If the information about a bank’s share

in a loan is missing, the loan is discarded in constructing the volume variable. In addition, we

exclude the years before 1995, because Dealscan contains significantly fewer observations in

these years. Our sample spans the period from January 1995 to March 2015. Since we focus

on cross-border lending, we also exclude observations if the borrower’s and lender’s country

of location coincide. Following the literature, e.g. de Haas and van Horen (2012), we define

the nationality of a bank based on the location of the ultimate parent. Table 1 shows that the

average borrower-lender loan volume is US$55.6 million and ranges between US$1 million

and US$410 million. As seen in Figure 1, the total volume of cross-border syndicated loans

rose rapidly before the crisis, fell back substantially during 2008-2009, and subsequently

recovered to pre-crisis levels towards the end of the sample period.

           We also examine various non-volume terms of the loan contracts. First, Maturity is

the maturity of a facility in months. In Table 1 we can see that the average maturity of loans

in our sample is 60.6 months, or about 5 years. Next, Spread is the loan spread over the

reference rate in basis points for drawn credit of a facility with a sample average of 245.7

basis points. The next loan characteristic variable is Collateral, which is a dummy variable

indicating that a loan is collateralized.2 Table 1 reports that about 81.7% of loans are

collateralized in our sample. Finally, Covenant is a dummy variable indicating that there is a

net worth or financial ratio covenant in the loan contract. About 29% of loans to non-

financial companies have at least one of these covenants. Unlike the volume regressions,




2
    The observation is dropped in collateral regressions if the “secured” field in Dealscan is empty.

                                                           7
other loan term regressions are at the level of facility (in the case of Maturity, Spread and

Collateral) or package (in the case of Covenant). Since a loan may have several lenders, we

aggregate lender characteristics by taking their unweighted average, including the

characteristics of the countries where lenders reside.3

        We matched Dealscan with monetary policy rates from the International Financial

Statistics (IFS) database of the IMF. Our main dependent variable, IR, is the lender-country

central bank policy rate (replaced by the discount rate at which commercial banks can borrow

from the central bank against eligible securities in case of a few countries where the central

bank policy rate data was missing). Similarly, IR (Borrower) is the borrower-country central

bank policy rate or the discount rate. In some specifications we use deviations from an

estimated Taylor rule type monetary policy rate for the lender country as an alternative

measure of the stance of monetary policy in this country. To calculate this variable, called

Taylor residual, we regress the monetary policy rate, IR, on real GDP growth and the

inflation rate separately for each country, and then take the errors from these regressions.

According to Table 1, the average monetary policy rate, IR, over the whole sample period

was 2.48%, while Taylor residuals averaged -0.005. An additional lender-country monetary

policy variable is QE, which indicates that a quantitative easing program was in place in a

lender country in a given month. This variable reflects that the Fed, the European Central

Bank, Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan implemented various quantitative easing

programs at different points in time (see the appendix for the exact dates4) in efforts to




3
  By taking the unweighted average of lender characteristics we avoid the problem of missing loan volume
contributions. For example, using non-missing loan shares as weights would reduce the number of loans from
92,191 to 18,133 in the first maturity regression in Table 4. In addition, unweighted averages are less affected
by endogenous changes in loan contributions.
4
  In the reported regressions we do not distinguish between the different rounds of QE in the United States. The
results are robust, however, to specifying the QE to reflect the three periods corresponding to QE1, QE2 and

                                                       8
simulate depressed and stagnant economies. CPI and GDP stand for lender-country consumer

price inflation and real GDP growth and are obtained from the IFS.

        Next, we also matched Dealscan with Worldscope to obtain data on a borrower’s

equity-to-assets ratio (Borrower E/A).5 This variable is calculated as the lagged book value of

common equity over total assets. To exclude the impact of outliers we winsorized all

continuous borrower and loan level variables (i.e., Volume, Spread, Maturity and Borrower

E/A) at the 1st and 99th percentiles. After this adjustment the average borrower equity-to-

assets ratio is 0.387.

        Next, several variables capture the relationships that international banks have

developed with borrower countries through the ownership of local banks or through the prior

provision of syndicated loans. Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower represents the assets of

foreign-owned banks located in the borrower country as a share of total banking system

assets (this variable is taken from Barth et al., 2013). On average, foreign-owned banks hold

16.5% of banking system assets in borrower countries. Alternatively, FDI is the number of

subsidiaries in the borrower country owned by banks in the lender country based on data

collected by Claessens and van Horen (2015). The average number of foreign-owned banks

in a lender country-borrower country relationship is 1.6. A bank’s own experience in the

borrowing country is captured by the experience variable, which is the natural logarithm of 1

+ the number of loans extended by the relevant lender in the country of the borrower in the

three years prior to the loan. In addition, subsidiaries is a dummy variable that equals one if




QE3, as follows: December 2008 to March 2010, November 2010 to June 2011, and September 2012 to
December 2013.
5
  We thank Ferreira and Matos (2012) for sharing their link between Dealscan and Worldscope identifiers.


                                                      9
the lender company has at least one subsidiary in the borrower country during the sample

period and it is zero otherwise. The subsidiaries variable has a mean of 0.7.

       Next, we consider a set of bank regulatory variables for the borrower and lender

countries (from Barth et al., 2013) as potential determinants of syndicated loan volume.

Official supervisory power, borrower (lender), measures the extent to which the supervisory

authorities in the borrower’s (lender's) country have the authority to take specific actions to

prevent and correct problems. This variable ranges between 0 and 16, with higher values

indicating greater power, and has a mean of 11.7 in borrowers’ countries and 10.2 in lenders’

countries. Overall capital stringency, borrower (lender), is a variable that measures whether

the capital requirement in the borrower’s (lender's) country reflects certain risk elements and

deducts certain market value losses from capital before minimum capital adequacy is

determined. This variable is an index ranging between 0 and 7, with higher values indicating

greater stringency. Overall capital stringency, borrower (lender) has a sample mean of 4.4

(4.3). As a final regulatory variable, Overall restrictions on banking activities, borrower

(lender) measures the extent to which banks in the borrower’s (lender’s) country can engage

in securities, insurance and real estate activities. This variable ranges between 3 and 12, with

higher values indicating more restrictions; the average Overall restrictions on banking

activities index is 7.2 for borrower countries, and 6.1 for lender countries.

       The next country characteristic we include in the regressions is ER flexibility, which

is a dummy variable indicating that a borrower's country has a flexible exchange rate regime.

In particular, it takes the value of one if a country’s exchange rate regime falls in one of the

following categories in the database compiled by Ilzetzky, Reinhart and Rogoff (2011): pre-

announced crawling band that is wider than or equal to +/-2%; de facto crawling band that is

narrower than or equal to +/-5%; moving band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2% (i.e.,

allows for both appreciation and depreciation over time); managed floating; and freely


                                               10
floating. Table 1 shows that 78.5% of borrowers are located in countries with flexible

exchange rates. Next, Credit constraints (in), is a dummy variable indicating the presence of

restrictions on the inflow of commercial credit in the country of the borrower based on the

data from Fernández, Klein, Rebucci, Schindler and Uribe (2015). A share of 14.6% of

borrowers face credit constraints on credit inflows into their countries.

       In some specifications, we control for proxies of economic and financial

development. Among these, GDP per capita is GDP per capita calculated at constant 2005

US dollar prices with a sample mean of US$31,363. Next, Credit is domestic credit to the

private sector by banks as a percentage of GDP with a mean of 81.8%; Domestic credit is

domestic credit provided by the financial sector relative to GDP with a mean of 153.1%;

Market cap is the market capitalization of listed companies relative to GDP with a mean of

115.9%; and Turnover ratio is the total value of shares traded during the period as a

percentage of the average market capitalization for the period with a mean of 119.3%. These

variables are from the WDI database. Finally, the rate of inflation and the rate of GDP growth

are macroeconomic control variables.



3.     The transmission of monetary policy and borrower creditworthiness

       This section presents empirical evidence of the impact of lender-country monetary

policy on the volume of cross-border syndicated lending and on other credit terms. We

specifically present results on how his transmission depends on borrower creditworthiness.

Loan volume and other credit terms are considered in turn.

3.1    Loan volumes

       In the loan volume regressions, the dependent variable is the logarithm of the amount

of cross-border lending to a particular firm by a particular bank. The regressions include

borrower*time fixed effects to control for variation in firm-level loan demand. The main


                                               11
monetary policy variable is the lender-country policy interest rate, IR. The inclusion of

borrower*time fixed effects implies that we can identify the impact of the lender-country

monetary policy interest rate on the supply of credit from banks in different lender countries.

Identification relies on variation in policy interest rates among creditor countries in a

particular month. The regressions in addition include lender fixed effects to control for

invariant lender characteristics, for instance a lender’s general proclivity to provide cross-

border syndicated lending. The rates of inflation and real GDP growth in the lender country

are added as control variables. Errors are clustered at the lender company and borrower

country levels to allow for commonality in shocks to a bank’s lending to firms in a particular

borrowing country.

       Table 2 presents the basic results. In regression 1, the policy interest rate obtains a

negative coefficient suggesting that a lower policy interest rate increases credit supply, but

the coefficient is statistically insignificant. Regression 2 includes an interaction of the policy

interest rate with the borrowing firm’s equity-to-assets ratio as an index of its

creditworthiness. In this regression, the policy interest rate and its interaction with equity-to-

assets obtain negative and positive coefficients that are both significant at 10%. These results

suggest that a lower policy interest rate causes banks to increase credit, especially to riskier

borrowers.

       In recent years central banks have actively conducted nonconventional monetary

policies, most importantly in the form of asset purchases that expanded the money supply and

also central banks’ balance sheets. The Federal Reserve, for instance, started a program of

quantitative easing in January 2009. Next, we control for such policies by including a dummy

variable (QE) that distinguishes periods of quantitative easing by major lender-country

central banks. Specifically, we additionally include the QE variable in regressions 1-2 of

Table 2, and report the results as regressions 3-4.


                                                12
       In regression 3, the IR and QE variables obtain coefficients of -0.818 and -0.0713 that

are significant at 5% and 1%, respectively. The estimated coefficient of -0.818 for the IR

variable suggests that a reduction in the monetary policy rate by 1 percentage point increases

cross-border lending supply by 0.818%, which is a sizeable effect and is well within the

range of 0.3-3.7% that Morais et al. (2015) find for banks located in the US, Euro area, or the

UK. All the same, changes in monetary policy interest rates can explain only a small part of

the overall variation in cross-border lending, as a one-standard-deviation increase in the

monetary policy rate of 0.0214 (from Table 1) reduces cross-border lending by 1.5%

(=0.0214*-0.818/1.162) of its standard deviation. The negative estimated coefficient for the

QE variable is likely to reflect that central banks undertook quantitative easing at times of

economic weakness and bank fragility. Hence, the QE variable de facto is a dummy variable

that signals economic and financial crisis and hence is associated with lower lending

volumes.

       In regression 4, the magnitudes of the estimated coefficients for the IR variable and its

interaction with borrower capitalization are similar to those of the corresponding coefficients

in regression 2, but controlling for crisis periods associated with QE allows the coefficients to

be estimated more precisely: the coefficient for IR is significant at 1%, and the coefficient for

IR * Borrower E/A is significant at 5%. In this regression, QE has a negative and significant

coefficient.

       Overall the results of Table 2 indicate that the supply of cross-border loans is

negatively related to lender-country policy interest rates, especially for highly leveraged

borrowers, and that cross-border loan supply was lower in periods when lending-country

central banks were implementing a program of quantitative easing.

       Policy interest rates in lender countries can reasonably be assumed to be exogenous to

economic developments in foreign borrower countries. All the same, policy interest rates


                                               13
that reflect economic developments in lender countries may be correlated with economic

developments in borrower countries to the extent that business cycles are correlated across

countries. Such a potential correlation, however, does not pose a problem for our

identification strategy, as we control for borrower-country economic conditions by including

borrower*time fixed effects.

       Somewhat less straightforwardly, the business cycle in lender countries could

simultaneously affect lender-country policy interest rates and the demand for syndicated

loans from a particular lender country in case there are perceived to be synergies between the

provision of syndicated loans by banks from that lender country and the provision of trade

credit by the same banks in order to finance business-cycle dependent trade between the

pertinent borrower and lender countries. To counter this potential challenge to our

identification strategy, we next replace the actual lender-country policy interest rate by the

component of the policy interest rate that is exogenous to the lender-country business cycle,

estimated as the Taylor-rule residual of regressions of the policy interest rates on lender-

country GDP growth and inflation rates.

       Table 3 presents the results of regressions including the Taylor residual that are

otherwise analogous to the regressions of Table 2. In regressions 2, 3 and 4, the IR variable

obtains negative coefficients that are significant at 1%, while in regressions 2 and 4 the

interaction of IR with borrower capitalization obtains positive coefficients that are similarly

significant. In regressions 3-4, the QE variable receives negative and significant coefficients.

Overall, the results of Table 3 confirm a negative impact of the lender country interest rate

variable on cross-border credit supply especially to highly leveraged borrowers in line with

the results of Table 2.




                                               14
3.2    Non-volume credit terms

       If credit were homogeneous, then a credit supply increase triggered by lower policy

interest rates would simply result in higher credit volume and a lower interest rate as

measured by the interest spread. Cross-border syndicated loans, however, are not only

characterized by their volume and their spread, but also by other credit terms such as loan

maturity, whether a loan is collateralized, and whether the loan contract includes covenants

based on, for example, net worth or financial ratios. Borrowers and lenders have different

preferences of potential combinations of these various credit terms, and it is generally unclear

how lower policy interest rates will affect any one of these individual credit terms. If lower

policy interest rates give rise to longer maturity loans, then this may, for instance, be

accompanied by higher spreads, as longer-term loans generally command higher spreads.

Similarly, if spreads fall, then covenant use may increase in order to compensate lenders for

the lower spreads. This subsection presents empirical evidence on how lender-country policy

interest rates affect several key non-volume credit terms: loan maturity, the spread, whether a

loan is collateralized, and whether the loan contract contains a net worth or financial ratio

covenant.

       Table 4 presents the results. The regressions include borrower country-industry*time

fixed effects to control for varying loan demand (with industries defined at the 2-digit SIC

level), and errors are clustered at the borrower country level. Since all lenders face the same

terms for a given loan and most borrowers have only one loan in a month we cannot include

borrower-time fixed effects in the regressions. In the maturity regression 1, the policy interest

rate obtains a coefficient that is negative and significant. This suggests that a lower policy

interest rate may cause lenders to take on additional credit risk, as longer-maturity loans tend

to be riskier. In regression 2, we include an interaction term of the policy interest rate and the

borrower’s equity-to-assets ratio to test for a potentially different impact of the policy interest


                                                15
rate change on the loan maturity offered to borrowers with different capitalization rates. This

interaction term obtains a coefficient that is positive and insignificant.

       Turning to the spread, we see that the policy interest rate has a negative and

significant coefficient in regression 3, perhaps because of the increased risk associated with

lending at longer maturities as evident from regression 1. In regression 4, the policy interest

rate obtains a negative coefficient that is significant at 1%, while its interaction with

Borrower E/A obtains a positive coefficient that is significant at 5%. This suggests that a

lower policy interest rate is associated with a high loan spread, especially for under-

capitalized borrowers.

       In regression 5, the collateral dummy is negatively and significantly related to the

policy interest rate, indicating that a lower policy interest rate increases loan collateralization.

In regression 6, collateralization is positively and significantly related to the policy interest

rate, while it is negatively and significantly related to the interaction of the policy rate and

Borrower E/A. Hence, a lower policy interest rate is estimated to increase collateralization

relatively little for highly leveraged borrowers.

       Finally, regressions 7 and 8 relate the policy interest rate to the covenant dummy.

Regression 7 shows a positive, insignificant coefficient for the policy interest rate; regression

8 shows a negative, significant coefficient for this variable, while its interaction with

Borrower E/A is negative and insignificant. Hence, there is some evidence that a lower policy

interest rate increases covenant use, which by itself should reduce the riskiness of cross-

border syndicated loans.

       Overall, we find evidence that a lower policy interest rate increases loan maturity

which by itself is likely to increase credit risk. At the same time, a lower policy rate gives rise

to a higher loan spread and more collateralization, which may reduce credit risk. Borrower

heterogeneity, however, is important: a lower policy interest rate increases the loan spread


                                                16
especially for under-capitalized borrowers, while it increases collateralization especially for

better capitalized borrowers.



4.      Foreign banks and the transmission of monetary policy

        Our evidence so far indicates that changes in lender-country policy interest rates are

transmitted to borrower countries as shocks to credit supply volumes and other credit terms.

As business cycles internationally do not necessarily move in tandem, these credit supply

shocks may serve to destabilize rather than stabilize borrower firms and economies. The

potential for such credit supply shocks to be destabilizing is larger, the larger is the sensitivity

of lender banks’ credit supply to lender-country policy interest rates.

        Policy makers in borrower countries generally have an interest in mitigating the

transmission of lender-country monetary policy to their economies. Hence, it is useful to

know how key economic institutions and financial policies affect monetary policy

transmission through the provision of cross-border loans.

        Of particular interest is the foreign ownership of local banks, as credit provided by

local foreign banks in principle can substitute for cross-border loan provision.6 A priori, the

impact of foreign banking presence on the sensitivity of cross-border loan provision to

lender-country monetary policy is ambiguous. On the one hand, a local foreign bank presence

makes it easier for international banks to gain experience with local borrowers and to be

more informed about them. This could increase the value of local credit relationships to

international banks, providing lender banks with an incentive to make cross-border loan

provision less sensitive to lender-country monetary policy rates (de Haas and van Horen,




6
 Overall foreign bank presence and international syndicated loan provision are complements as indicated by a
positive correlation between the foreign-owned banks and loan volume variables of 0.17 which is significant at
1%.

                                                      17
2013). On the other hand, multinational banks may be inclined to reallocate capital from

foreign subsidiaries to headquarters when monetary conditions tighten (Cetorelli and

Goldberg, 2012), rendering the provision of international syndicated loans more sensitive to

lender-country policy interest rates. This section provides evidence on how foreign bank

presence affects the transmission of lender-country monetary policy to loan volume and other

loan credit terms in the syndicated loan market.

       To start, Table 5 provides evidence on how foreign bank presence affects the

relationship between the volume of loans to non-financial firms and lender-country monetary

policy. In Panels A and B of the table, foreign bank presence is represented by the Foreign-

Owned Banks, borrower and FDI variables, respectively. The loan volume regression 1 of

Panel A, in particular, includes the IR variable and an interaction of this variable with the

foreign-owned banks variable. These variables receive negative and positive coefficients,

respectively, that are both significant at 1%. This suggests that foreign bank presence

mitigates the negative impact of higher lender-country policy interest rate on cross-border

loan volume.

       Next, we consider whether this result is robust to the inclusion of a range of other

policy and institutional variables. Regressions 2-4, in particular, contain interest rate

interactions with lender-country bank supervisory and regulatory indices (supervisory power,

capital stringency, and restrictions), yielding a negative and significant coefficient for the

interaction of IR with the Overall Capital Stringency, lender variable in regression 3.

Stringent capitalization policies in the lender country thus are estimated to amplify the impact

of policy interest rates on credit supply, potentially because such policies make banks

stronger so that they have the capacity to increase their loan supply more in case policy

interest rates decline. Regressions 5-7 include interactions with analogous supervisory and

regulatory indices for the borrower country that are all estimated with insignificant


                                                18
coefficients. Regressions 8 and 9 include interactions of the IR variable with the ER

flexibility and Credit Constraint (in) variables, respectively, that also receive insignificant

coefficients. The IR variable itself is estimated with negative and significant coefficients in

regressions 1, 4, 6, 8, and 9, while its interactions with the foreign-owned banks variable

obtain positive and significant coefficients throughout the panel. Foreign bank presence thus

is shown to mitigate the transmission of lender-country policy interest rates to loan volume in

a range of regressions where we control for other institutional and policy variables that could

affect monetary policy transmission.

       The regressions of Panel B include the FDI variable as a proxy for foreign bank

presence and are otherwise analogous to those of Panel A. In regression 1, the IR variable

obtains a negative and significant coefficient, while the FDI variable obtains a positive and

significant coefficient. The latter result suggests that foreign bank presence and cross border

loan provision complement each other. In this regression the interaction of IR and FDI

obtains a positive coefficient that is insignificant. In regressions 3, the Overall Capital

Stringency, lender variable enters with a negative and significant coefficient similarly to

regression 3 in Panel A. In regression 4, the Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities,

lender variable obtains a positive and significant coefficient. Thus banks that face more

restrictions on their activities are found to increase cross-border lending relatively less

following a reduction of policy interest rates. This may reflect that banks that are subject to

more restrictions have less leeway to adjust the volumes and riskiness of all their overall

activities, making cross-border lending less responsive to interest rate changes. In regression

8, the interaction variable of the policy interest rate with a dummy variable indicating that the

borrower country has a flexible exchange rate regime obtains a negative and significant

coefficient. Hence, a lower policy interest rate increases loan supply relatively more to

borrowers located in countries with flexible exchange rate regimes. Potentially, this reflects


                                                19
that a lower lender-country policy rate causes an appreciation of borrower-country’s currency

vis-à-vis the lender-country’s currency, which increases the valuation of the borrower firm in

lender-country currency and hence its capacity to borrow internationally. This provides

additional support for the results in Bruno and Shin (2015b), who find that local currency

appreciation is a driver of banking capital inflows. In regressions 2-9, the IR, IR * FDI, and

FDI variables receive negative, positive and positive coefficients, respectively, in those

regressions where they are significant. The results of both panels of Table 5 thus imply an

attenuating impact of foreign bank presence on the sensitivity of cross-border loans to lender-

country policy interest rates.

       Next, we recognize that foreign bank could possibly be related to the borrower

country’s overall economic and financial development (Claessens and van Horen, 2014). In

panel C of Table 7, we investigate whether the mitigating role of foreign bank presence in the

transmission of monetary policy is robust to controlling for various proxies of economic and

financial development. Regressions 1-5 include the foreign ownership variable to proxy for

foreign bank presence, while regressions 6-10 include the FDI variable. In regressions 1, 3, 4

and 5 the interactions between IR and alternatively GDP per capita, Domestic credit, Market

cap and Turnover ratio obtain positive and significant coefficients, providing some evidence

that borrower-country economic and financial development mitigates the transmission of

monetary policy via the syndicated loan market. In regressions 1-5, IR and its interaction

with Foreign-owned banks, borrower, obtain negative and positive significant coefficients,

respectively, that are significant. This suggests that the mitigating role of foreign bank

presence in the monetary transmission process does not simply reflect borrower-country

economic and financial development. In regressions 6 to 10, the interactions of IR and FDI

have positive and insignificant coefficients similar to regression 1 of Panel B.




                                               20
       Foreign bank presence may matter for the transmission of monetary policy through

the cross-border loan market either because it is correlated with the lender bank’s own

experience and local presence in the borrower country, or alternatively because of the role

played by other foreign banks in the borrower country, for instance through improving the

quantity and quality of information that is available on potential new borrowers.

       In regression 1 of Table 6, we examine whether there remains an influence of foreign-

owned banks on the monetary transmission process after we control for the experience that a

lender bank itself has in providing loans in the borrower country. Specifically, we include the

experience variable and its interaction with IR in regression 1 of Panel A of Table 5, yielding

positive and significant coefficients for these two variables. This implies that a bank’s own

experience in the borrower country mitigates the monetary transmission process, perhaps

because a bank’s prior experience in a borrower country provides it with incentives to shield

its existing customers from changes in the lender-country policy interest rate. In this

regression, the IR * Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower variable obtains a positive coefficient

that is significant at 10%, which suggests that foreign-owned banks affect the monetary

transmission process independently from the bank’s own lending experience in the borrower

country. In the analogous regression 2, the IR * FDI variable similarly is estimated with a

positive and significant coefficient, while the IR * Experience variable is estimated with a

negative and insignificant coefficient.

       Regression 4 examines the role of foreign-owned banks in the monetary transmission

process while controlling for whether the lender bank itself has had a subsidiary in the

borrower country. In this regression, the subsidiary variable and its interaction with IR

receive positive significant and positive insignificant coefficients, respectively, while the IR

* Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower variable is estimated with a positive and significant

coefficient. These results suggest that foreign bank presence in general rather than a bank’s


                                               21
own local presence in a borrower country weakens the transmission of lender-country

monetary policy. Regression 5 in addition includes a triple interaction of the IR, Subsidiaries,

and Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower variables, which is insignificant. Regression 7 includes

the FDI variable and is otherwise analogous to regression 5. In this regression, the estimated

coefficient for the double interaction IR * FDI is 0.534, while the estimated coefficient for

the triple interaction IR * Subsidiaries * FDI is -0.409, with both of these coefficients being

significant at 5%. These estimated coefficients imply that the mitigating impact of banking

FDI on monetary policy is reduced but not eliminated when we control for a bank’s own

subsidiary presence in a borrower country.

       So far, we have considered loan volume as aggregated at the level of the parent bank

even if this parent bank has foreign subsidiaries. For these foreign subsidiaries, however, the

relevant monetary policy rate may be the policy rate of their respective host countries rather

than the policy rate of the country where the parent resides. To allow for this, we next

disaggregate a multinational bank’s cross-border loans into lending stemming from the parent

country, and lending coming from any of the foreign countries where the multinational bank

has at least one foreign subsidiary. Lending coming from the various countries where a

multinational bank operates are then treated as separate observations and related to the

monetary policy rate of a lending unit’s country of location. Regressions 8 and 9 of Table 6

report results analogous to regressions 1 of the two panels of Table 5. In these regressions,

the IR variable obtains negative and significant coefficient, while the interactions IR *

Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower and IR * FDI included in regressions 8 and 9, respectively,

obtain positive and significant coefficients. Thus our finding of a mitigating impact of foreign

bank presence on monetary policy transmission is robust to disaggregating a multinational

bank’s lending to the respective host countries where its constituent lending units reside.




                                               22
       Following a higher lender-country policy interest rate, an international bank that has a

subsidiary in the borrowing country has the option to substitute local funding for parent-

country funding that has become more expensive. This could explain why foreign bank

presence reduces the sensitivity of syndicated loan supply to the lender-country policy

interest rate. Next, we consider the sensitivity of syndicated loan supply to the lender-country

policy interest rate while controlling for the effect of the borrower country policy interest

rate. Specifically, regression 1 of Table 7 relates loan volume to the lender-country policy

rate and an interaction of the policy interest rates in lender and borrower countries. The

interaction variable receives a negative coefficient, consistent with a heightened sensitivity of

loan volume to the lender-country policy interest rate in borrower countries with high policy

interest rates, but the coefficient is insignificant. Regression 2 adds the IR * Foreign-Owned

Banks, borrower variable which receives a positive and significant coefficient, while the IR *

IR (Borrower) variable receives a negative and significant coefficient. These results suggest

that higher foreign bank presence and borrower country interest rates reduce and increase the

transmission to loan volume of lender-country monetary policy, respectively. Regression 3 in

addition includes the triple interaction variable IR * IR (Borrower) * Foreign-Owned Banks,

borrower, which is estimated with an insignificant coefficient. Regressions 4 and 5 include

the FDI variable as a proxy for foreign bank presence and otherwise are analogous to

regressions 2 and 3. In regression 5, the triple interaction variable IR * IR (Borrower) * FDI

receives a negative and significant coefficient, indicating that foreign bank presence mitigates

the sensitivity of the loan volume to the lender-country policy interest rate less if the

borrower-country policy rate is relatively high. This likely reflects that a multinational’s

borrower-country and lender-country funding are less substitutable if the borrower-country

policy interest rate is relatively high (as in that instance lender-country funding may be much

cheaper).


                                                23
       Lending provided through an international bank’s borrower-country subsidiaries

strictly speaking is not cross-border lending. Next, we consider how an international bank’s

loan supply net of the loan supply through local subsidiaries is affected by lender-country

policy interest rates. Specifically, regression 6 relates loan volume net of lending by

borrower-country subsidiaries to the lender country policy rate and its interaction with the

foreign-owned banks variable. The interaction variable is estimated with a positive and

significant coefficient analogously to regression 1 in Panel A of Table 5, implying an

attenuating influence of foreign bank presence on the sensitivity of truly cross-border loans to

the lender-country monetary policy rate. Regression 7 includes an interaction of the lender-

country policy interest rate with FDI in a similar regression yielding an insignificant

coefficient for this interaction variable comparable to regression 1 in Panel B of Table 5.

       Overall, our results suggest that foreign bank presence renders the cross-border loan

volume of international banks to non-financial borrowers less sensitive to lender-country

policy interest rates. There is some evidence that the attenuating effect of overall banking

FDI in a country on loan volume is reduced but not eliminated by a multinational bank itself

having a subsidiary in the borrower country, which suggests that the impact of banking FDI

on the transmission of lender-country monetary policy partly results from other banks having

subsidiaries in the borrower country and partly from an international bank having a

subsidiary in the borrower country itself. Furthermore, there is evidence that the mitigating

impact of banking FDI on the international transmission of monetary policy to loan volume is

weaker if the borrower-country policy interest rate is higher, since this is likely to reduce the




                                               24
ability of a multinational bank to substitute borrower-country funding for lender-country

funding.7



5.      Conclusion

        This paper investigates the role of foreign banks in the international transmission of

monetary policy changes to foreign countries through the market for cross-border syndicated

loans. Our data set includes lenders in 50 countries, and borrowers in 124 countries. The

inclusion of multiple lender and borrower countries has two main advantages. First, we can

include borrower*time fixed effects to control for potentially time-varying loan demand at

the individual borrower level. Second, the inclusion of multiple borrower countries enables

us to investigate the impact of varying borrower-country policies and institutions on the

transmission of lender-country monetary policy.

        We find that an expansion of monetary policy through a lower policy interest rate

increases cross-border credit supply especially to weaker firms as measured by the equity-to-

assets ratio in line with earlier research.

        Our main result is that foreign ownership of banking in the borrower country reduces

the tendency for loan volume to increase following a lender-country policy interest rate

reduction. This finding is robust to controlling for the level of economic and financial

development in the borrower country, and for a range of financial policies and institutions in




7
  We also explored how foreign bank presence affects the transmission of lender-country monetary policy to
non-volume credit terms. These results are unreported, but can be summarized as follows. A regression relating
loan maturity to the IR variable and an interaction of this variable with the FDI variable yields negative and
positive coefficients, respectively, that are both significant. This suggests that foreign banking presence
mitigates the tendency of lower policy interest rates to engender longer loan maturity. In addition, we find that
foreign bank presence as measured by FDI strengthens the tendency for lower policy interest rates to lead to
greater collateralization and covenant use.

                                                       25
the borrower and lender countries, including the strength of bank regulation and supervision,

exchange rate flexibility and restrictions on capital flows.

       A local presence of a multinational bank in a borrower country is found to reduce, but

not eliminate, the attenuating effect of overall banking FDI on the transmission of monetary

policy to loan volume. This suggests that the impact of banking FDI on the transmission of

lender-country monetary policy partly results from other banks having subsidiaries in the

borrower country as well as from the international bank having a subsidiary in the borrower

country itself. Moreover, the mitigating impact of banking FDI on the international

transmission of monetary policy to loan volume is weaker, if the borrower-country policy

interest rate is higher. This potentially reflects that a multinational’s local and international

funding are less substitutable, if the borrower-country interest rate is higher.

       Our finding that banking FDI in borrower countries could stabilize the international

supply of cross-border loans importantly qualifies the picture of international banks as

sources of credit instability in borrower countries that transmit international monetary policy

changes in the form of international credit supply shocks. Our evidence also suggests that

countries that currently restrict the foreign ownership of local banks can potentially obtain a

more stable supply of cross-border credit in the face of international monetary policy shocks

if they allow additional foreign bank entry.




                                                26
References

       Aiyar, S. (2012). From financial crisis to great recession: The role of globalized

banks. American Economic Review, 102(3):225–230.

       Altunbas, Y., Gambacorta, L., and Marques-Ibanez, D. (2010). Bank risk and

monetary policy. Journal of Financial Stability, 6(3):121–129.

       Barth, J. R., Caprio Jr, G., and Levine, R. (2013). Bank regulation and supervision in

180 countries from 1999 to 2011. Journal of Financial Economic Policy, 5(2):111–219.

       Bertay, A., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and H. Huizinga (2015), Bank ownership and credit

over the business cycle: Is lending by state banks less procyclical?, Journal of Banking and

Finance 50, 326-339.

       Bruno, V., and Shin, H. S. (2015a). Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of

monetary policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 71:119–132.

       Bruno, V., and Shin, H. S. (2015b). Cross-border banking and global liquidity. Review

of Economic Studies, 82(2):535–564.

       Cetorelli, N., and Goldberg, L. S. (2011). Global banks and international shock

transmission: Evidence from the crisis. IMF Economic Review, 59(1):41–76.

       Cetorelli, N. and Goldberg, L. S. (2012a). Banking globalization and monetary

transmission. Journal of Finance, 67(5):1811–1843.

       Cetorelli, N., and Goldberg, L. S. (2012b). Liquidity management of US global banks:

Internal capital markets in the great recession. Journal of International Economics,

88(2):299–311.

        Chava, S., and Roberts, M. R. (2008). How does financing impact investment? The

role of debt covenants. Journal of Finance, 63(5):2085–2121.

       Claessens, S. and Van Horen, N. (2012). Being a foreigner among domestic banks:

Asset or liability? Journal of Banking and Finance, 36(5):1276–1290.


                                              27
        Claessens, S., and van Horen, N. (2014), Foreign banks: Trends and impact. Journal

of Money, Credit and Banking, 46: 295–326.

        Claessens, S., and van Horen, N. (2015). The Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on

Banking Globalization. IMF Economic Review, 63(4):868–918.

        de Haas, R., and van Horen, N. (2012). International shock transmission after the

Lehman Brothers collapse: Evidence from syndicated lending. American Economic Review

Papers & Proceedings, 102(3):231–237.

        de Haas, R., and van Horen, N. (2013). Running for the exit? International bank

lending during a financial crisis. Review of Financial Studies, 26(1):244–285.

        De Haas, R. and Van Lelyveld, I. (2006). Foreign banks and credit stability in Central

and Eastern Europe. A panel data analysis. Journal of Banking and Finance, 30(7):1927–

1952.

        den Haan, W. J., Sumner, S. W., and Yamashiro, G. M. (2007). Bank loan portfolios

and the monetary transmission mechanism. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(3):904–924.

        Fernández, A., Klein, M. W., Rebucci, A., Schindler, M., and Uribe, M. (2015).

Capital control measures: A new dataset. NBER Working Papers 20970, National Bureau of

Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

        Ferreira, M. A., and Matos, P. (2012). Universal banks and corporate control:

Evidence from the global syndicated loan market. Review of Financial Studies, 25(9):2703–

2744.

        Fischer, S. (2014). The Federal Reserve and the global economy. Speech by Vice

Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System delivered as the Per

Jacobson Foundation Lecture 2014 Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and

the World Bank Group Washington D.C.




                                              28
       Gambacorta, L. (2005). Inside the bank lending channel. European Economic Review,

49(7):1737–1759.

       Gambacorta, L., and Marques-Ibanez, D. (2011). The bank lending channel: lessons

from the crisis. Economic Policy, 26(66):135–182.

       Giannetti, M., and Laeven, L. (2012a). The flight home effect: Evidence from the

syndicated loan market during financial crises. Journal of Financial Economics, 104(1):23–

43.

       Giannetti, M., and Laeven, L. (2012b). Flight home, flight abroad, and international

credit cycles. American Economic Review, 102(3):219–224.

       Ilzetzki, E., Reinhart, C. M., and Rogoff, K. S. (2011). The country chronologies and

background material to exchange rate arrangements into the 21st century: Will the anchor

currency hold. Mimeo.

       Ioannidou, V., Ongena, S., and Peydró, J.-L. (2015). Monetary policy, risk-taking,

and pricing: Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment. Review of Finance, 19(1):95–144.

       Ivashina, V., Scharfstein, D. S., and Stein, J. C. (2015). Dollar funding and the

lending behavior of global banks. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1241:1281.

       Jiménez, G., Ongena, S., Peydró, J.-L., and Saurina, J. (2012a). Credit supply and

monetary policy: Identifying the bank balance-sheet channel with loan applications.

American Economic Review, 102(5):2301–2326.

       Jiménez, G., Ongena, S., Peydró, J.-L., and Saurina, J. (2014a). Hazardous times for

monetary policy: What do twenty-three million bank loans say about the effects of monetary

policy on credit risk-taking? Econometrica, 82(2):463–505.

       Kim, S. (2001). International transmission of US monetary policy shocks: Evidence

from VAR’s. Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(2):339–372.




                                              29
       Miranda-Agrippino, S., and Rey, H. (2015). World asset markets and the global

financial cycle. NBER Working Papers 21722, National Bureau of Economic Research,

Cambridge, MA.

       Morais, B., Peydró, J.-L., and Ruiz, C. (2015). The international bank lending channel

of monetary policy rates and quantitative easing: credit supply, reach-for-yield, and real

effects. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 7216.

       Ongena, S., Peydró, J.-L., and Van Horen, N. (2015). Shocks abroad, pain at home?

Bank-firm-level evidence on the international transmission of financial shocks. IMF

Economic Review, 63(4):698–750.

       Ongena, S., Popov, A., and Udell, G. F. (2013). “When the cat’s away the mice will

play”: Does regulation at home affect bank risk-taking abroad? Journal of Financial

Economics, 108(3):727–750.

       Peek, J., and Rosengren, E. S. (1997). The international transmission of financial

shocks: The case of Japan. American Economic Review, 87(4):495.

       Rajan, R. (2014). Competitive monetary easing: Is it yesterday once more? Speech at

the Brookings Institution, April 10, 2014.

       Rey, H. (2013). Dilemma not trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary olicy

independence. Paper presented at “Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy,”

Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank, August 22-24.

       Rey, H. (2016). International channels of transmission of monetary policy and the

Mundellian trilemma. IMF Economic Review, 64(1):6–35.

       Temesvary, J., Ongena, S., and Owen, A. L. (2015). A global lending channel

unplugged? Does US monetary policy affect cross-border and affiliate lending by global US

banks? MPRA Paper, 65913, University Library of Munich, Germany.




                                              30
Appendix

Table A1: List of lender countries


  Country                 Number of lenders        Number of loans      Country              Number of lenders   Number of loans
  Austria                                     21                 815    Korea, Rep.                         24                 734
  Belgium                                      8               2,143    Luxembourg                           3                 122
  Brazil                                       3                 121    Malaysia                             8                 392
  Canada                                      16               8,034    Mauritius                            2                   13
  Chile                                        3                  19    Mexico                               1                    2
  China                                       25               1,774    Morocco                              3                   21
  Colombia                                     1                    6   Netherlands                         15               3,165
  Cyprus                                       2                    7   Norway                               6               1,446
  Denmark                                      8                 598    Philippines                         13                   74
  Egypt, Arab Rep.                             4                  18    Portugal                             6                 386
  Finland                                      4                  25    Qatar                                3                   38
  France                                      20               9,670    Romania                              1                    5
  Germany                                     36               9,907    Russian Federation                   4                   16
  Greece                                       4                   47   Saudi Arabia                         4                   22
  Hong Kong SAR, China                        22                 812    Singapore                           16               2,417
  Hungary                                      1                    2   Slovenia                             1                    2
  Iceland                                      2                   14   South Africa                         6                 173
  India                                       20                 506    Spain                               19               2,864
  Indonesia                                    5                 106    Sri Lanka                            1                    2
  Iran, Islamic Rep.                           1                    2   Sweden                               6                 559
  Ireland                                      5                 564    Switzerland                         19               3,754
  Israel                                       3                 423    Thailand                             9                 231
  Italy                                       19               3,712    Turkey                               3                   26
  Japan                                       81              16,967    United States                      103               6,550
  Jordan                                       1                   61   United Kingdom                      26              13,856
                                                                        Total                              617              93,223



                                                                            31
Table A2: List of borrower countries


  Country                  Number of borrowers     Number of loans       Country                Number of borrowers     Number of loans
  Algeria                                      3                    16   Denmark                                   23                   217
  Angola                                       2                    60   Ecuador                                    2                     4
  Argentina                                   22                   158   Egypt, Arab Rep.                           5                    88
  Australia                                  483                 4,088   El Salvador                                1                     3
  Austria                                     16                   168   Estonia                                    5                    23
  Azerbaijan                                   3                    28   Finland                                   58                   574
  Bahamas                                      9                    38   France                                   178                 2,291
  Bahrain                                      5                    42   Gabon                                      2                    16
  Bangladesh                                   8                    60   Georgia                                    1                     2
  Barbados                                     2                    22   Germany                                  139                 1,435
  Belarus                                      1                     7   Ghana                                      5                   172
  Belgium                                     53                   466   Gibraltar                                  1                     3
  Bermuda                                     59                   837   Greece                                    41                   198
  Bolivia                                      1                    12   Guinea                                     1                     6
  Botswana                                     1                     4   Hong Kong SAR, China                     518                 5,958
  Brazil                                      71                   681   Hungary                                   14                   160
  British Virgin Islands                      26                   349   Iceland                                    8                   105
  Brunei                                       3                    23   India                                    194                 2,024
  Bulgaria                                     6                    16   Indonesia                                291                 2,671
  Cambodia                                     2                     9   Iran, Islamic Rep.                         5                    36
  Cameroon                                     2                    10   Ireland                                   37                   237
  Canada                                     147                 1,105   Israel                                    12                   110
  Cayman Islands                              39                   174   Italy                                    104                   794
  Chile                                       33                   328   Côte d’Ivoire                              4                    11
  China                                      407                 2,865   Jamaica                                    1                     2
  Colombia                                    17                    85   Japan                                     79                   743
  Congo                                        1                     2   Jordan                                     3                     6
  Costa Rica                                   1                     7   Kazakhstan                                14                    91
  Croatia                                     17                   108   Kenya                                      4                    13
  Cyprus                                      15                   109   Korea, Rep.                              226                 2,480
  Czech Republic                              19                   179   Kosovo                                     1                     3




                                                                              32
Country                Number of borrowers     Number of loans       Country                Number of borrowers     Number of loans
Kuwait                                     7                    38   Qatar                                     19                   239
Lao PDR                                    5                    32   Romania                                   31                   121
Latvia                                     3                     8   Russian Federation                        84                   847
Liberia                                    6                    35   Rwanda                                     1                     2
Lithuania                                  3                     8   Saudi Arabia                              13                    94
Luxembourg                                31                   398   Serbia                                     1                     6
Macau                                     14                   183   Singapore                                251                 2,045
Malawi                                     1                     3   Slovak Republic                           16                    91
Malaysia                                 141                 1,043   Slovenia                                   3                    19
Mali                                       1                     4   South Africa                              28                   413
Malta                                      3                    21   Spain                                    297                 2,926
Mauritius                                  9                    85   Sri Lanka                                  2                     9
Mexico                                    84                   973   Sweden                                    82                 1,076
Moldova                                    1                     9   Switzerland                               60                 1,353
Monaco                                     2                     5   Taiwan, China                            196                 1,274
Mongolia                                   2                     4   Tanzania                                   3                    23
Morocco                                    5                    30   Thailand                                 167                 1,350
Netherlands                              191                 2,149   Trinidad and Tobago                        2                    11
Netherlands Antilles                       1                     5   Tunisia                                    5                    33
New Zealand                               49                   333   Turkey                                    37                   288
Nicaragua                                  1                     4   Turkmenistan                               3                     7
Nigeria                                    6                    27   United States                          2,996                36,162
Norway                                    82                   632   Ukraine                                   19                   103
Oman                                       9                    76   United Arab Emirates                      42                   384
Pakistan                                  25                   149   United Kingdom                           349                 3,365
Panama                                    33                   158   Uruguay                                    1                     2
Papua New Guinea                           8                    92   Uzbekistan                                 4                    22
Peru                                      17                   119   Venezuela, RB                              6                    46
Philippines                               63                   904   Vietnam                                   42                   240
Poland                                    31                   298   Yemen                                      1                    16
Portugal                                  30                   289   Zambia                                     3                    10
                                                                     Total                                  9,079                93,223




                                                                             33
Table A3: Variable definitions

 Variable                  Description                                                 Source
 Volume                    Natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a banks’ share    Dealscan
                           in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the borrower-lender-
                           time level
 Maturity                  Maturity of a facility in months                            Dealscan
 Spread                    Loan spread over the reference rate in basis points for     Dealscan
                           drawn credit of a facility
 Collateral                Dummy variable indicating that a loan is collateralized.    Dealscan
                           Takes the value of one if Dealscan indicates "Yes" in
                           the "Secured" field , 0 in case of a "No" answer, and
                           missing otherwise
 Covenant                  Dummy variable indicating that there is a net worth or      Dealscan
                           financial ratio covenant in the loan contract
 IR                        The central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the    IFS
                           lender's country
 IR (Borrower)             The central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the    IFS
                           borrower's country
 Taylor residual           Error from a regression of the monetary policy rate (IR)    IFS
                           on the real GDP growth rate and the inflation rate (CPI)
                           separately for each lender country
 QE                        Dummy variable indicating that a quantitative easing
                           program was in place in the following economies and
                           periods: U.S.: 2009M1 to 2015M12; Eurozone:
                           20015M3 to 2015M12;U.K.: 2009M3 to 2015M12; and
                           Japan: 2001M3 to 2006M3 and 2013M4 to 2015M12
 Borrower E/A              Book value of common equity to book value of total          Worldscope
                           assets, lagged by one year
 Foreign-Owned Banks,      Fraction of the banking system's assets in the borrower’s   World Bank Regulation
 borrower                  country that is foreign owned, in percentage points         and Supervision Survey
                                                                                       (Barth et al. (2013))
 FDI                       Number of subsidiaries in the country of the borrower       Claessens and van
                           owned by banks in the lender's country                      Horen (2015)
 Experience                Natural logarithm of 1 + the number of loans extended       Dealscan
                           by the lender in the country of the borrower in the three
                           years prior to the loan
 Subsidiaries              Dummy variable that equals one if the lender company        Dealscan
                           has at least one subsidiary in the borrower country
                           during the sample period and zero otherwise
 Official Supervisory      Index of the power of the supervisory authorities in the    World Bank Regulation
 Power, borrower           borrower’s country to take specific actions to prevent      and Supervision Survey
                           and correct problems in banks, with higher values           (Barth et al. (2013))
                           indicating greater power
 Overall Capital           Index measuring the stringency in determining               World Bank Regulation
 Stringency, borrower      minimum capital adequacy in the borrower's country,         and Supervision Survey
                           with higher values indicating greater stringency            (Barth et al. (2013))
 Overall Restrictions on   Index of the extent to which banks in the borrower’s        World Bank Regulation
 Banking Activities,       country can engage in securities, insurance and real        and Supervision Survey
 borrower                  estate activities, with higher values indicating more       (Barth et al. (2013))
                           restrictions
 Official Supervisory      Index of the power of the supervisory authorities in the    World Bank Regulation
 Power, lender             lender's country to take specific actions to prevent and    and Supervision Survey
                           correct problems in banks, with higher values indicating    (Barth et al. (2013))
                           greater power
 Overall Capital           Index measuring the stringency in determining               World Bank Regulation
 Stringency, lender        minimum capital adequacy in the lender's country, with      and Supervision Survey
                           higher values indicating greater stringency                 (Barth et al. (2013))
Overall Restrictions on   Index of the extent to which banks in the lender’s           World Bank Regulation
Banking Activities,       country can engage in securities, insurance and real         and Supervision Survey
lender                    estate activities, with higher values indicating more        (Barth et al. (2013))
                          restrictions
ER flexibility            Dummy variable indicating that the borrower's country        Ilzetzky, Reinhart and
                          has a flexible exchange rate regime. It takes the value of   Rogoff (2011)
                          one if a country’s exchange rate regime falls in one of
                          the following categories: pre-announced crawling band
                          that is wider than or equal to +/-2%; de facto crawling
                          band that is narrower than or equal to +/-5%; moving
                          band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2% (i.e., allows
                          for both appreciation and depreciation over time);
                          managed floating; and freely floating
Credit Constraints (in)   Dummy variable indicating the presence of restrictions       Fernández, Klein,
                          on the inflow of commercial credit in the borrower's         Rebucci, Schindler and
                          country                                                      Uribe (2015)
GDP per capita            GDP per capita in constant 2005 US dollars                   WDI
Credit                    Domestic credit to the private sector by banks as a          WDI
                          percentage of GDP
Domestic credit           Domestic credit provided by the financial sector as a        WDI
                          percentage of GDP
Market cap                Market capitalization of listed companies as a               WDI
                          percentage of GDP
Turnover ratio            Total value of shares traded during the period as a          WDI
                          percentage of the average market capitalization for the
                          period in percentage points
CPI                       Annual percentage change of the consumer price index         IFS
                          in the lender's country
GDP growth                Annual percentage change of real GDP in the lender's         IFS
                          country




                                                   35
Figure 1: Total cross-border syndicated lending




Note: This graph shows the total amount of cross-border lending to non-financial borrowers over the sample
period. The graph excludes 2015 because the sample period does not cover the whole year.




                                                     36
Table 1: Descriptive statistics
Volume is the natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a banks’ share in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the
borrower-lender-time level. Maturity is the maturity of a facility in months. Spread is the loan spread over the
reference rate in basis points for drawn credit of a facility. Collateral is a dummy variable indicating that a loan
is collateralized. Covenant is a dummy variable indicating that there is a net worth or financial ratio covenant in
the loan contract. IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. IR (Borrower) is
IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the borrower’s country. Taylor residual is a variable
containing the errors from regressions of monetary policy rates (IR) in the lender’s country on the real GDP
growth rate and the inflation rate (CPI) separately for each lender country. QE is a dummy variable indicating
that a quantitative easing program was in place in the lender’s country. Borrower E/A is the book value of
common equity to the book value of total assets, lagged by one year. Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower is the
fraction of the banking system's assets in the borrower’s country that is foreign owned, in percentage points.
FDI is the number of subsidiaries in the country of the borrower owned by banks in the lender's country.
Experience is the natural logarithm of 1 + the number of loans extended by the lender in the country of the
borrower in the three years prior to the loan. Subsidiaries is a dummy variable that equals one if the lender
company has at least one subsidiary in the borrower country during the sample period and zero otherwise.
Official Supervisory Power, borrower is an index of the power of the supervisory authorities in the borrower’s
country to take specific actions to prevent and correct problems in banks, with higher values indicating greater
power. Overall Capital Stringency, borrower is an index measuring the stringency in determining minimum
capital adequacy in the borrower's country, with higher values indicating greater stringency. Overall Restrictions
on Banking Activities, borrower is an index of the extent to which banks in the borrower’s country can engage
in securities, insurance and real estate activities, with higher values indicating more restrictions. ER flexibility is
a dummy variable indicating that the borrower's country has a flexible exchange rate regime. Credit Constraints
(in) is a dummy variable indicating the presence of restrictions on the inflow of commercial credit in the
borrower's country. GDP per capita is GDP per capita in constant 2005 US dollars. Credit is domestic credit to
the private sector by banks as a percentage of GDP. Domestic credit is domestic credit provided by the financial
sector as a percentage of GDP. Market cap is the market capitalization of listed companies as a percentage of
GDP. Turnover ratio is the total value of shares traded during the period as a percentage of the average market
capitalization for the period. QE is a dummy variable indicating that a quantitative easing program was in place
in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual percentage change of the consumer price index in the lender's country.
GDP growth is the annual percentage change of real GDP in the lender's country. Except for Maturity, Spread,
Collateral and Covenant, all summary statistics are for the sample used in regression 1 of Table 2. The summary
statistics of Maturity, Spread, Collateral, and Covenant are for the samples used to estimate regressions 1, 3, 5,
and 7 of Table 4.

                                                              Obs        Mean           SD           Min         Max
 Volume (in millions of USD)                                  93223      55.638       72.394          1          410
 Volume                                                       93223      17.21        1.162         13.82       19.83
 Maturity                                                     65318       60.57       32.16           6          284
 Spread                                                       67704       245.7        158.4         15          825
 Collateral                                                   34243       0.817       0.387           0           1
 Covenant                                                     43390       0.290       0.454           0           1
 IR                                                           93223      0.0248       0.0214      -0.00250      0.480
 IR (Borrower)                                                82660      0.0393       0.0472      -0.00250      1.500
 Taylor residual                                              85189     -0.00509      0.0171       -0.0879      0.128
 QE                                                           93223       0.121       0.326            0          1
 Borrower E/A                                                 49073       0.387       0.169         0.0269      0.942
 Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower                                66345       16.51       19.67            0         100
 FDI                                                          93223      1.565         1.859          0          22
 Experience                                                   73540      4.241         2.101          0         7.627
 Subsidiaries                                                 93223      0.686         0.464          0           1
 Official Supervisory Power, borrower                         86243      11.69         2.214          4          16
 Overall Capital Stringency, borrower                         81954      4.405         1.611          0           7



                                                         37
Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, borrower        85760    7.223     2.133      3        12
Official Supervisory Power, lender                          83646    10.20     2.333      4        16
Overall Capital Stringency, lender                          84477    4.271     1.655      1        7
Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, lender          84609    6.116     2.334      3        12
ER flexibility                                              70833    0.785     0.411      0         1
Credit Constraints (in)                                     84386    0.146     0.353      0         1
GDP per capita                                              90472   31363.3   16448.9   162.9    87772.7
Credit                                                      80301    81.81     46.41     2.521    305.0
Domestic credit                                             80285    153.1     62.85    -27.96    349.0
Market cap                                                  80922    115.9     83.16     0.139    606.0
Turnover ratio                                              80880    119.3     74.77       0      497.4
CPI                                                         93223    1.761     1.501    -5.258    46.22
GDP growth                                                  93223    2.382     2.461    -9.274    19.30




                                                       38
Table 2: Monetary policy and cross-border lending volume
The dependent variable in all regressions is Volume, which is the natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a
banks’ share in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the borrower-lender-time level. IR is the central bank policy
rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. Borrower E/A is the book value of common equity to the book
value of total assets, lagged by one year. QE is a dummy variable indicating that a quantitative easing program
was in place in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual percentage change of the consumer price index in the
lender's country. GDP growth is the annual percentage change of real GDP in the lender's country. The sample
includes non-financial borrowers only. Standard errors clustered at the lender company and borrower country
levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                             (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)
                IR                          -0.307       -1.013*       -0.818**      -1.844***
                                           (0.264)        (0.550)       (0.406)       (0.558)
                IR * Borrower E/A                           2.614*                    2.829**
                                                          (1.385)                     (1.334)
                QE                                                    -0.0713***    -0.0862***
                                                                       (0.0269)       (0.0249)
                CPI                        0.00460      0.000431      0.00892**       0.00401
                                          (0.00355)     (0.00344)      (0.00372)     (0.00348)
                GDP growth                0.00563**     0.00672**     0.00609***     0.00673**
                                          (0.00232)     (0.00273)      (0.00230)     (0.00267)
                Observations                93223           48959        93223         48959
                Adjusted R-squared          0.813           0.806        0.813         0.806
                Borrower*Time FE             Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
                Lender FE                    Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes




                                                       39
Table 3: Taylor rule residual, QE and cross-border lending volume
The dependent variable in all regressions is Volume, which is the natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a
banks’ share in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the borrower-lender-time level. Taylor residual is the error from
a regression of the monetary policy rates (IR) on the real GDP growth rate and the inflation rate (CPI) separately
for each lender country. IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. Borrower
E/A is the book value of common equity to the book value of total assets, lagged by one year. QE is a dummy
variable indicating that a quantitative easing program was in place in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual
percentage change of the consumer price index in the lender's country. GDP growth is the annual percentage
change of real GDP in the lender's country. The sample includes non-financial borrowers only. Standard errors
clustered at the lender company and borrower country levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                          (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
 Taylor residual                        -0.298      -1.889***      -1.075***     -2.963***
                                        (0.281)       (0.538)       (0.377)       (0.618)
 Taylor residual * Borrower E/A                      3.679***                    3.779***
                                                      (1.214)                     (1.184)
 QE                                                               -0.0906***     -0.112***
                                                                   (0.0200)       (0.0183)
 CPI                                   0.00294       -0.00220       0.00385       -0.00315
                                      (0.00356)     (0.00407)      (0.00335)     (0.00355)
 GDP growth                           0.00521**     0.00688**     0.00488**      0.00548*
                                      (0.00242)     (0.00284)      (0.00240)     (0.00299)
 Observations                           84505         43673          84505         43673
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.817        0.812          0.817         0.812
 Borrower*Time FE                        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
 Lender FE                               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes




                                                       40
Table 4: Monetary policy and the terms of cross-border loans
The dependent variable in regressions 1 and 2 is Maturity, which is the maturity of a facility in months. The dependent variable in regressions 3 and 4 is Spread, which is the
loan spread over the reference rate in basis points (for drawn credit) of a facility. The dependent variable in regressions 5 and 6 is Collateral, a dummy variable indicating that
a loan is collateralized. The dependent variable in regressions 7 and 8 is Covenant, a dummy variable indicating that there is a net worth or financial ratio covenant in the loan
contract. IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. Borrower E/A is the book value of common equity to the book value of total assets,
lagged by one year. QE is a dummy variable indicating that a quantitative easing program was in place in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual percentage change of the
consumer price index in the lender's country. GDP growth is the annual percentage change of real GDP in the lender's country. The sample includes non-financial borrowers
only. Standard errors clustered at the borrower country level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                                          Maturity                          Spread                          Collateral                        Covenant
                                                   (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)           (5)                 (6)           (7)               (8)
IR                                             -118.3***        -148.3**         -551.8***      -595.7***        -0.656***         0.859***          0.164         -0.852***
                                                 (39.47)        (56.53)           (132.7)            (149.6)       (0.163)          (0.248)         (0.210)         (0.296)
IR * Borrower E/A                                                85.08                           378.7**                          -2.692***                         -0.0123
                                                                (76.72)                              (186.6)                        (0.530)                         (0.510)
Borrower E/A                                                    -6.244**                        -71.81***                        -0.0797***                        0.175***
                                                                (2.556)                              (7.484)                       (0.0183)                         (0.0255)
QE                                             -5.440***       -6.522***         -93.36***      -40.72***        -0.184***       -0.0855***        0.0477***      -0.0667***
                                                 (1.180)        (1.047)           (7.290)            (5.302)      (0.0232)         (0.0115)        (0.00822)       (0.00900)
CPI                                             -0.0602          0.703*           -1.324*        7.689***        0.0153***        0.0439***         -0.00159      0.00959***
                                                 (0.434)        (0.359)           (0.774)            (0.701)      (0.00283)       (0.00369)        (0.00181)       (0.00287)
GDP growth                                        0.185          0.513           5.859***        4.201***        0.00399**        0.00420*          -0.00440      -0.0107***
                                                 (0.238)        (0.316)           (0.862)            (0.574)      (0.00185)       (0.00236)        (0.00330)       (0.00339)
Observations                                     92191           28544             67704             21756         44759            14883            43390           14288
Adjusted R-squared                                0.536          0.467             0.384             0.467          0.435           0.453            0.123           0.193
Borrower country - industry * Time FE             Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes




                                                                                        41
Table 5: The role of foreign banking presence, monetary policy and cross-border lending volume
Panel A: The dependent variable in all regressions is Volume, which is the natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a banks’ share in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the
borrower-lender-time level. IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower is the fraction of the banking
system's assets in the borrower’s country that is foreign owned, in percentage points. Official Supervisory Power, borrower (lender) is an index of the power of the
supervisory authorities in the borrower’s (lender’s) country to take specific actions to prevent and correct problems in banks, with higher values indicating greater power.
Overall Capital Stringency, borrower (lender) is an index measuring the stringency in determining minimum capital adequacy in the borrower's (lender’s) country, with
higher values indicating greater stringency. Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, borrower (lender) is an index of the extent to which banks in the borrower’s (lender’s)
country can engage in securities, insurance and real estate activities, with higher values indicating more restrictions. ER flexibility is a dummy variable indicating that the
borrower's country has a flexible exchange rate regime. Credit Constraints (in) is a dummy variable indicating the presence of restrictions on the inflow of commercial credit
in the borrower's country. QE is a dummy variable indicating that a quantitative easing program was in place in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual percentage change of
the consumer price index in the lender's country. GDP growth is the annual percentage change of real GDP in the lender's country. The sample includes non-financial
borrowers only. Standard errors clustered at the lender company and borrower country levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at 10%, 5%, and
1%.

                                                                 (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)       
 IR                                                          -1.781***     0.356        1.584     -2.788***    -2.657      -1.861**     -1.570     -1.351*     -1.398**
                                                               (0.605)     (2.053)     (1.519)     (1.058)     (2.127)     (0.902)     (2.050)     (0.756)      (0.535)
 IR * Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower                          0.0527***   0.0578***    0.0492***   0.0525***   0.0533***   0.0534***   0.0523***   0.0501***    0.0472**
                                                              (0.0144)    (0.0161)    (0.0135)    (0.0136)     (0.0149)    (0.0144)    (0.0152)    (0.0165)    (0.0195)
 IR * Official Supervisory Power, lender                                   -0.243
                                                                           (0.193)
 Official Supervisory Power, lender                                       0.00313
                                                                          (0.00404)
 IR * Overall Capital Stringency, lender                                              -0.826***
                                                                                       (0.242)
 Overall Capital Stringency, lender                                                    0.00895
                                                                                      (0.00736)
 IR * Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, lender                                            0.148
                                                                                                   (0.133)
 Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, lender                                               -0.00743


                                                                                      42
                                                                                                  (0.00605)
IR * Official Supervisory Power, borrower                                                                       0.0761
                                                                                                                (0.185)
IR * Overall Capital Stringency, borrower                                                                                    0.0213
                                                                                                                             (0.224)
IR * Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, borrower                                                                                 -0.0239
                                                                                                                                          (0.227)
IR * ER flexibility                                                                                                                                     -0.231
                                                                                                                                                       (0.922)
IR * Credit Constraints (in)                                                                                                                                         -1.258
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.775)
QE                                                          -0.0729***   -0.0914***   -0.104***   -0.0881***   -0.0721***   -0.0735***   -0.0734***   -0.0792***   -0.0732***
                                                             (0.0224)     (0.0184)    (0.0216)     (0.0241)     (0.0224)     (0.0223)     (0.0233)     (0.0231)     (0.0231)
CPI                                                          0.00671      0.00530     -0.00294     0.00420      0.00667      0.00661      0.00681      0.00421      0.00511
                                                            (0.00449)    (0.00421)    (0.00477)   (0.00451)    (0.00445)    (0.00443)    (0.00448)    (0.00373)    (0.00407)
GDP growth                                                  0.00286*      0.00281     0.00448*    0.00350*      0.00291      0.00279     0.00294*     0.00397**    0.00354**
                                                            (0.00165)    (0.00202)    (0.00240)   (0.00180)    (0.00177)    (0.00169)    (0.00171)    (0.00167)    (0.00166)
Observations                                                  66276        63913       64196        64090        65826        66021        65977        53326        61828
Adjusted R-squared                                            0.803        0.800        0.803       0.803        0.802        0.803        0.802        0.796        0.800
Borrower*Time FE                                               Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Lender FE                                                      Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         




                                                                                      43
Panel B: The dependent variable in all regressions is Volume, which is the natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a banks’ share in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the
borrower-lender-time level. IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. FDI is the number of subsidiaries in the country of the borrower
owned by banks in the lender's country. Official Supervisory Power, borrower (lender) is an index of the power of the supervisory authorities in the borrower’s (lender’s)
country to take specific actions to prevent and correct problems in banks, with higher values indicating greater power. Overall Capital Stringency, borrower (lender) is an
index measuring the stringency in determining minimum capital adequacy in the borrower's (lender’s) country, with higher values indicating greater stringency. Overall
Restrictions on Banking Activities, borrower (lender) is an index of the extent to which banks in the borrower’s (lender’s) country can engage in securities, insurance and real
estate activities, with higher values indicating more restrictions. ER flexibility is a dummy variable indicating that the borrower's country has a flexible exchange rate regime.
Credit Constraints (in) is a dummy variable indicating the presence of restrictions on the inflow of commercial credit in the borrower's country. QE is a dummy variable
indicating that a quantitative easing program was in place in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual percentage change of the consumer price index in the lender's country.
GDP growth is the annual percentage change of real GDP in the lender's country. The sample includes non-financial borrowers only. Standard errors clustered at the lender
company and borrower country levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                                                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
 IR                                                                      -0.846*      0.461        1.681     -2.438***     -0.361       -0.463      -0.659       0.480      -0.818*
                                                                         (0.476)     (1.392)      (1.083)     (0.733)      (1.650)     (0.839)      (1.029)     (0.628)      (0.416)
 IR * FDI                                                                 0.215       0.258*       0.208       0.177       0.242*     0.371***      0.252*      0.324*       0.190
                                                                         (0.143)     (0.150)      (0.145)     (0.151)      (0.143)     (0.113)      (0.148)     (0.175)      (0.158)
 FDI                                                                    0.0234**     0.0213*     0.0194*     0.0235**     0.0220**     0.0196*     0.0210*      0.0189*     0.0294**
                                                                         (0.0110)    (0.0111)    (0.0100)     (0.0112)    (0.0109)     (0.0105)    (0.0109)     (0.0108)    (0.0120)
 IR * Official Supervisory Power, lender                                              -0.170
                                                                                     (0.128)
 Official Supervisory Power, lender                                                  0.00435
                                                                                    (0.00460)
 IR * Overall Capital Stringency, lender                                                         -0.687***
                                                                                                  (0.191)
 Overall Capital Stringency, lender                                                              0.00521
                                                                                                 (0.00511)
 IR * Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, lender                                                      0.207*
                                                                                                              (0.113)
 Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, lender                                                           -0.00609
                                                                                                             (0.00535)

                                                                                       44
IR * Official Supervisory Power, borrower                                                                        -0.0636
                                                                                                                 (0.142)
IR * Overall Capital Stringency, borrower                                                                                      -0.183
                                                                                                                              (0.182)
IR * Overall Restrictions on Banking Activities, borrower                                                                                  -0.0610
                                                                                                                                           (0.115)
IR * ER flexibility                                                                                                                                    -1.821***
                                                                                                                                                        (0.623)
IR * Credit Constraints (in)                                                                                                                                          -0.349
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.777)
QE                                                          -0.0578**    -0.0901***   -0.0973***   -0.0804***   -0.0577**     -0.0508*    -0.0597**    -0.0783***   -0.0634***
                                                             (0.0258)     (0.0210)     (0.0232)     (0.0267)     (0.0282)     (0.0278)     (0.0296)     (0.0219)     (0.0238)
CPI                                                         0.00764**     0.00562      0.000469     0.00378     0.00866**     0.00804*    0.00938**     0.00322      0.00469
                                                            (0.00368)    (0.00394)    (0.00480)    (0.00407)    (0.00404)    (0.00431)    (0.00412)    (0.00356)    (0.00366)
GDP growth                                                  0.00552***   0.00497**    0.00791***   0.00678***   0.00626***   0.00489***   0.00594***   0.00628***   0.00634***
                                                            (0.00207)    (0.00226)    (0.00242)    (0.00218)    (0.00208)    (0.00182)    (0.00206)    (0.00194)    (0.00207)
Observations                                                  93223        83216        84179        84288        86213        81919        85730        70772        84349
Adjusted R-squared                                            0.814        0.811        0.813        0.814        0.814        0.809        0.814        0.810        0.811
Borrower*Time FE                                               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Lender FE                                                      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes




                                                                            45
Panel C: The dependent variable in all regressions is Volume, which is the natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a banks’ share in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the
borrower-lender-time level. IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower is the fraction of the banking
system's assets in the borrower’s country that is foreign owned, in percentage points. FDI is the number of subsidiaries in the country of the borrower owned by banks in the
lender's country. GDP per capita is GDP per capita in constant 2005 US dollars. Credit is domestic credit to the private sector by banks as a percentage of GDP. Domestic
credit is domestic credit provided by the financial sector as a percentage of GDP. Market cap is the market capitalization of listed companies as a percentage of GDP.
Turnover ratio is the total value of shares traded during the period as a percentage of the average market capitalization for the period. QE is a dummy variable indicating that
a quantitative easing program was in place in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual percentage change of the consumer price index in the lender's country. GDP growth is
the annual percentage change of real GDP in the lender's country. The sample includes non-financial borrowers only. Standard errors clustered at the lender company and
borrower country levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                           (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)

  IR                                   -2.930***     -2.276**    -3.583***    -2.919***        -2.761***     -1.339*     -1.671**     -1.392     -1.428**    -1.213**

                                         (0.716)      (0.914)     (1.019)      (0.736)          (0.591)      (0.706)      (0.809)     (0.860)     (0.550)     (0.489)

  IR * Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower   0.0563***     0.0435**    0.0617***    0.0495**         0.0584***
                                        (0.0177)     (0.0169)     (0.0213)    (0.0212)         (0.0177)

  IR * FDI                                                                                                   0.205        0.234       0.201       0.189       0.211

                                                                                                             (0.141)      (0.168)     (0.152)     (0.155)     (0.164)
  IR * GDP per capita                  0.0000450*                                                          0.0000199

                                       (0.0000250)                                                         (0.0000165)

  IR * Credit                                         0.0112                                                             0.00886

                                                     (0.00869)                                                           (0.00804)

  IR * Domestic credit                                           0.0139**                                                            0.00332

                                                                 (0.00639)                                                           (0.00504)
  IR * Market cap                                                             0.0138**                                                           0.00391*

                                                                              (0.00623)                                                          (0.00210)

  IR * Turnover ratio                                                                          0.0101***                                                     0.00176
                                                                                               (0.00344)                                                     (0.00280)

  FDI                                                                                                       0.0240**     0.0221*     0.0233**    0.0237**    0.0236*

                                                                                                            (0.0113)     (0.0117)    (0.0117)    (0.0116)    (0.0119)


                                                                                          46
QE                   -0.0668***   -0.0743***   -0.0655**   -0.0719***        -0.0685***   -0.0539**    -0.0714***   -0.0721***   -0.0716***   -0.0709***

                      (0.0226)     (0.0238)    (0.0250)     (0.0232)          (0.0247)     (0.0247)     (0.0244)     (0.0235)     (0.0233)     (0.0235)

CPI                   0.00601      0.00476     0.00492      0.00491           0.00356     0.00686**     0.00432      0.00429      0.00445      0.00435

                     (0.00407)    (0.00401)    (0.00387)   (0.00387)         (0.00389)    (0.00341)    (0.00361)    (0.00359)    (0.00361)    (0.00359)
GDP growth           0.00279*     0.00327**    0.00280*    0.00296**         0.00317**    0.00564***   0.00577***   0.00566***   0.00569***   0.00584***

                     (0.00166)    (0.00156)    (0.00156)   (0.00126)         (0.00139)    (0.00214)    (0.00208)    (0.00210)    (0.00212)    (0.00213)

Observations           64771        60034       60034        60213             60192        90460        80244        80226        80868        80824

Adjusted R-squared     0.802        0.801        0.801       0.801             0.801        0.813        0.813        0.813        0.813        0.813
Borrower*Time FE        Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

Lender FE               Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes




                                                                        47
Table 6: Lending experience in borrower countries and the role of subsidiaries

The dependent variable in all regressions is Volume, which is the natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a banks’ share in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the borrower-
lender-time level. IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower is the fraction of the banking system's assets
in the borrower’s country that is foreign owned, in percentage points. FDI is the number of subsidiaries in the country of the borrower owned by banks in the lender's country.
Experience is the natural logarithm of 1 + the number of loans extended by the lender in the country of the borrower in the three years prior to the loan. Subsidiaries is a
dummy variable that equals one if the lender company has at least one subsidiary in the borrower country during the sample period and zero otherwise. QE is a dummy
variable indicating that a quantitative easing program was in place in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual percentage change of the consumer price index in the lender's
country. GDP growth is the annual percentage change of real GDP in the lender's country. The sample includes non-financial borrowers only. In regressions 8 and 9 lending
by foreign subsidiaries is not assigned to their parent companies and for these lenders IR is taken to be the host country monetary policy interest rate. Standard errors
clustered at the lender company and borrower country levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                                                                                                                              Subsidiaries and parents
                                                                                        Baseline sample
                                                                                                                                                    separately

                                                         (1)        (2)        (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)            (8)           (9)
 IR                                                    -0.526     1.189*      -0.972     -2.157***     -2.268***     -1.009    -1.177*        -1.208***     -0.633**
                                                       (0.906)    (0.647)    (0.603)        (0.693)       (0.712)    (0.619)    (0.652)        (0.452)       (0.283)
 IR * Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower                   0.0272*                            0.0508***     0.0531***                              0.0381**
                                                      (0.0147)                              (0.0146)      (0.0153)                             (0.0146)
 IR * FDI                                                         0.183*                                             0.222     0.534**                       0.237**
                                                                  (0.108)                                            (0.143)    (0.213)                      (0.0950)
 IR * Experience                                       0.219*    -0.0706
                                                       (0.123)    (0.114)
 IR * Subsidiaries                                                            0.250          0.639         0.821     0.206      0.567
                                                                             (0.451)        (0.513)       (0.580)    (0.447)    (0.515)
 IR * Subsidiaries * Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower
                                                                                                          -0.00655

                                                                                                          (0.0260)
 IR * Subsidiaries * FDI                                                                                                       -0.409**
                                                                                                                                (0.181)
 Experience                                           0.113***   0.119***


                                                                                       48
                                               (0.00820)   (0.00921)
Subsidiaries                                                           0.0739***     0.0684***      0.0484**     0.0589***    0.0452***
                                                                        (0.0182)         (0.0179)    (0.0234)     (0.0144)     (0.0154)
Subsidiaries * Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower                                                        0.000937

                                                                                                    (0.000846)

Subsidiaries * FDI                                                                                                             0.0148*
                                                                                                                              (0.00844)
FDI                                                        0.00732                                                0.0208*      0.00951                  0.0170**
                                                           (0.00672)                                              (0.0110)     (0.0106)                 (0.00837)
CPI                                            -0.00174    -0.00155    0.00893**         0.00679     0.00696     0.00781**    0.00755**     0.00152      0.00129
                                               (0.00386)   (0.00349)   (0.00364)     (0.00421)      (0.00433)    (0.00365)    (0.00367)    (0.00320)    (0.00312)
GDP growth                                     -0.00187    0.000174    0.00596***        0.00265     0.00262     0.00548***   0.00542***    0.00236      0.00212
                                               (0.00301)   (0.00343)   (0.00226)     (0.00168)      (0.00180)    (0.00205)    (0.00204)    (0.00227)    (0.00224)
QE                                             -0.0376**   -0.0265*    -0.0681***    -0.0689***     -0.0695***   -0.0558**    -0.0561**    -0.0603***   -0.0519***
                                               (0.0183)    (0.0158)     (0.0257)         (0.0212)    (0.0213)     (0.0254)     (0.0248)     (0.0182)     (0.0146)
Observations                                    51218       73509        93223            66276       66276        93223        93223        56883        79586
Adjusted R-squared                               0.789      0.802        0.813            0.803       0.803        0.814        0.814        0.816        0.823
Borrower*Time FE                                 Yes         Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Lender FE                                        Yes         Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes




                                                                                    49
Table 7: The role of lending by subsidiaries and local interest rates

The dependent variable in all regressions is Volume, which is the natural logarithm of the dollar amount of a banks’ share in a syndicated loan, aggregated at the borrower-
lender-time level. IR is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the lender's country. IR (Borrower) is the central bank policy rate or the discount rate in the
borrower's country. Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower is the fraction of the banking system's assets in the borrower’s country that is foreign owned, in percentage points. FDI
is the number of subsidiaries in the country of the borrower owned by banks in the lender's country. QE is a dummy variable indicating that a quantitative easing program
was in place in the lender’s country. CPI is the annual percentage change of the consumer price index in the lender's country. GDP growth is the annual percentage change of
real GDP in the lender's country. The sample includes non-financial borrowers only. In regressions 6 and 7 foreign subsidiaries’ domestic lending is excluded. Standard errors
clustered at the lender company and borrower country levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.


                                                                                                                                                  Subsidiaries' domestic lending
                                                                                                 Baseline sample
                                                                                                                                                             excluded


                                                                          (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)               (6)               (7)
 IR                                                                     0.0394         -0.518       -0.177           0.122        -0.0180          -1.768***          -0.856*
                                                                        (0.414)       (0.644)       (0.953)         (0.413)       (0.428)           (0.562)           (0.441)
 IR * Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower                                                  0.0560**       0.0443                                         0.0464***
                                                                                      (0.0235)      (0.0292)                                       (0.0161)
 IR * FDI                                                                                                            0.0784        0.287                               0.193
                                                                                                                    (0.127)       (0.190)                             (0.137)
 IR * IR (Borrower)                                                     -7.521        -12.28*       -18.24          -5.555*       -3.210
                                                                        (4.581)       (6.742)       (13.60)         (3.312)       (3.577)
 IR * IR (Borrower) * Foreign-Owned Banks, borrower                                                  0.185
                                                                                                    (0.270)
 IR * IR (Borrower) * FDI                                                                                                         -3.505*
                                                                                                                                  (2.029)
 IR (Borrower) * FDI                                                                                                              0.00838
                                                                                                                                 (0.0757)
 FDI                                                                                                                0.0274**      0.0265*                            0.0183*
                                                                                                                    (0.0113)     (0.0147)                            (0.0102)
 CPI                                                                  0.00964**      0.00755*      0.00706*        0.00772**     0.00790**         0.00861**         0.00775*
                                                                       (0.00368)     (0.00445)     (0.00416)       (0.00350)     (0.00345)         (0.00413)         (0.00423)
 GDP growth                                                           0.00715***     0.00384**     0.00383**       0.00641***   0.00640***         0.00453*         0.00660***


                                                                                     50
                     (0.00252)   (0.00149)   (0.00149)   (0.00221)   (0.00224)   (0.00234)    (0.00244)
QE                   -0.0600**   -0.0592**   -0.0578**   -0.0482**   -0.0464*    -0.0816***   -0.0583***
                     (0.0257)    (0.0228)    (0.0228)    (0.0234)    (0.0240)     (0.0183)     (0.0215)
Observations          82622       58562       58562       82622       82622        57151        79664
Adjusted R-squared     0.808       0.794       0.794       0.810      0.810        0.814        0.821
Borrower*Time FE       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Lender FE              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes




                                 51
