                                                  WPS7883


Policy Research Working Paper                    7883




      Does Input-Trade Liberalization Affect
       Firms’ Foreign Technology Choice?
                                 Maria Bas
                               Antoine Berthou




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7883


  Abstract
 This paper studies the impact of input-trade liberalization                        firms depending on their initial productivity level. Relying
 on firms’ decision to upgrade foreign technology embodied                          on India’s trade liberalization episode in the early 1990s,
 in imported capital goods. The empirical analysis is moti-                         this paper demonstrates that the probability of importing
 vated by a simple theoretical framework of endogenous                              capital goods is higher for firms producing in industries
 technology adoption, heterogeneous firms and imported                              that have experienced greater cuts on tariffs on inter-
 inputs. The model predicts a positive effect of input tariff                       mediate goods. Only those firms in the middle range of
 reductions on firms’ technology choice to source capital                           the initial productivity distribution have benefited from
 goods from abroad. This effect is heterogeneous across                             input-trade liberalization to upgrade their technology.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at maria.bas@univ-paris1.fr.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                 Does input-trade liberalization affect ﬁrms’ foreign
                                                                             1
                                           technology choice?

                                      Maria Bas and Antoine Berthou




JEL classiﬁcation: F10, F12 and F14.

Keywords: Input-trade liberalization, ﬁrms’ decision to import capital goods, ﬁrm heterogeneity and

Indian ﬁrm-level data.

    1
      Maria Bas (Corresponding author) is a Professor at University of Paris 1, her email is maria.bas@univ-paris1.fr. An-
toine Berthou Antoine Berthou is an economist at Banque de France and associate researcher at CEPII; his email is
Antoine.berthou@banque-france.fr. We thank the Editor and two anonymous referees for their comments. We have beneﬁted
from discussions with Andrew Bernard, Pamela Bombarda, Lorenzo Caliendo, Pierre-Philippe Combes, Arnaud Costinot,
Matthieu Crozet, David Dorn, Swati Dhingra, Lionel Fontagne, Juan Carlos Hallak, Emeric Henry, Sebastien Jean, Gian-
marco Ottaviano, Philippe Martin, Thierry Mayer, Marc Melitz, John Morrow, Nina Pavcnik, Sandra Poncet, Ina Simonovska,
Vanessa Strauss-Kahn, Cristina Terra, Thierry Verdier, Eric Verhoogen and seminar participants of CEPII, Paris School of
Economics, Universite Dauphine, North American Econometric Society Winter meetings 2014, AEA Meeting Philadelphia;
Asian Econometric Society Meeting 2013, Singapore; Royal Economic Society Meeting, Royal Holloway 2013 and 47th
annual conference of the Canadian Economic Association, Montreal, Canada 2013. We are responsible for any remaining
errors. This research does not reﬂect the views of the Banque de France.
                                               I.INTRODUCTION


       Trade liberalization has produced in the past two decades steady growth in imports of intermediate

and capital goods across countries. The endogenous-growth literature has provided theoretical arguments

for the role of foreign intermediate inputs in enhancing economic growth and productivity gains (Ethier,

1979, 1982; Grossman and Helpman, 1991; Rivera-Batiz and Romer, 1991).2 The speciﬁc inﬂuence of

trade in capital goods on economic growth has also been emphasized in a number of theoretical and

empirical works (Lee, 1995; Eaton and Kortum, 2001; Goh and Olivier, 2002). Importing capital goods

is found to be a relevant channel of foreign technology transfers and R&D spillovers across countries (Xu

and Wang, 1999). Trade liberalization is therefore expected to improve economic growth, by decreasing

the cost of both foreign intermediate goods and capital equipments (Amiti and Konings, 2007; Topalova

and Khandelwal, 2011; Goldberg et al., 2010; Eaton and Kortum, 2001).

       This paper investigates the link between input-trade liberalization and foreign technology adoption

embodied in imports of capital goods. Input-trade liberalization may affect technology adoption through

a direct channel: the reduction of tariffs on capital goods decreases their price and allows ﬁrms to

import a larger volume of these goods. In this work, we take a different perspective and focus on an

indirect channel. We look at the effect of tariff cuts affecting variable inputs on ﬁrms’ decision to

upgrade foreign technology in imported capital goods. We emphasize unexplored mechanisms through

which trade liberalization affects ﬁrms’ technology choice: a supply shock of input tariff reductions

and a complementarity channel between imported variable intermediate goods and capital equipment.

Such complementarity is observed in our micro-data of Indian ﬁrms used in the empirical analysis. We

ﬁrst show that only a subset of ﬁrms in our sample import capital goods and almost all of them also

import intermediate inputs. This feature of the data suggests that importing capital goods is associated
   2
    Recent ﬁrm-level studies have conﬁrmed that input-trade liberalization played a key role on ﬁrm productivity growth
(Schor, 2004; Amiti and Konings, 2007; Topalova and Khandelwal, 2011), the ability to introduce new products in the
domestic market (Goldberg et al., 2010), export performance (Bas, 2012; Bas and Strauss-Kahn, 2015) and mark-ups changes
(DeLoecker et al., 2016). Other works highlight a positive link between imports of intermediate goods and ﬁrm productivity
(Kasahara and Rodrigue, 2008; Halpern et al., 2015).


                                                            2
with a technological investment decision. Moreover, these ﬁrms that import both intermediate inputs

and capital equipment goods improve their productivity gains suggesting a complementarity between

imported inputs and foreign technology in the production process.

       Our empirical analysis is motivated by a simple model of heterogeneous ﬁrms, endogenous technol-

ogy adoption and imported inputs that captures these main features of the Indian data. The aim of the

theoretical model is to rationalize the channels through which input-trade liberalization affects ﬁrms’

decision to upgrade foreign technology embodied in imported capital goods. Input-trade liberalization

reduces the costs of imported intermediate inputs and allows ﬁrms to decrease their marginal costs and

increase their proﬁtability. In the presence of ﬁxed cost of technology adoption, heterogeneous ﬁrms

and complementarity between imported inputs and high-foreign technology, the model yields two main

testable implications. First, input tariff reductions increase the probability of importing capital goods.

Second, the effect of input-trade liberalization on ﬁrms’ technology choice is heterogeneous across ﬁrms

depending on their initial productivity level. Firms that will beneﬁt from input-trade liberalization are

those with a high productivity level using low-technology embodied in domestic capital goods before

input tariff cuts.

       We then test the model implications using the Indian ﬁrm-level dataset, Prowess, over the 1989-1997

period. This data was collected by the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE). The Prowess

dataset provides information on imports distinguished by type of goods (capital equipment, intermediate

goods and ﬁnal goods). To establish the causal link between the availability of imported intermediate

goods and ﬁrms’ decision to import capital goods, we rely on the unilateral trade reform that took place

in India at the beginning of the 1990s as a part of the ‘Eighth Five-Year Plan’.3 We depart from previous

studies of input-trade liberalization by distinguishing tariffs on variable inputs from tariffs on capital

equipment products. The empirical identiﬁcation strategy disentangles the direct effects of tariffs on

capital goods and the indirect effects of tariffs on other variable intermediate goods on ﬁrms’ decision
   3
       Section 5.2 describes the policy instruments applied by the Indian Government during this reform.



                                                               3
to import capital equipment goods from abroad. Using effectively applied most favorite nation (MFN)

tariffs data and input-output matrix, we construct tariff measures on variable inputs and on capital goods

separately. We ﬁrst present evidence that our tariff measures are free of reverse causality concerns.

We extend the previous works in the literature and show that input tariff changes are uncorrelated with

initial ﬁrm and industry characteristics relevant for our analysis during the trade reform under the ‘Eighth

Five-Year Plan’. We then exploit this exogenous variation in input tariffs across industries to identify

the effect of the availability of foreign variable intermediate goods on ﬁrms’ decision to import capital

goods taking into account changes in speciﬁc tariffs on capital goods.

    The empirical ﬁndings conﬁrm the theoretical predictions. Firms producing in industries with larger

input tariff cuts have a higher probability of importing capital goods. Our results imply that the average

input tariff reductions during the 1989-1997 period, 27 percentage points, is estimated to produce a 4.6

percent increase in the probability of importing capital goods for the average ﬁrm importing interme-

diate goods. These results take into account the direct effect of capital goods tariff changes. We then

investigate if the impact of input-trade liberalization is heterogeneous across ﬁrms. Only those ﬁrms in

the middle range of the productivity distribution import capital goods after input tariff reductions. Firms

in the middle range of the initial productivity distribution increase their probability of sourcing capital

goods by almost 10 percent. As predicted by the model, our ﬁndings suggest that the least productive

ﬁrms do not beneﬁt from input tariff cuts to upgrade foreign technology. Input tariff changes do not

affect either the most productive ﬁrms that might have already adopted the foreign technology before

input tariff cuts.

    These results are robust to speciﬁcations which control for industry and ﬁrm observable characteris-

tics that could be related to tariff changes and might change over time. We also take into account other

possible explanations related to the incentives of Indian ﬁrms to adopt foreign technology. We show that

our results remain robust when we explicitly control for other reforms that took place in India, foreign

demand shocks (export-channel) and changes in ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial health that also affect ﬁrms’ decision

                                                     4
to import capital goods. Our ﬁndings are also robust and stable to other sensitivity tests. First, we in-

vestigate if reductions on tariff on intermediate goods are associated with the decision to start sourcing

capital goods from abroad when we restrict our sample to ﬁrms that have not imported capital goods in

the previous years. Second, the previous ﬁndings remain also stable when we exclude foreign or state-

owned ﬁrms from the sample. Finally, we also ﬁnd a positive effect of input-trade liberalization on the

intensive margin of imports of capital goods.

   These ﬁndings contribute to the literature on trade liberalization and ﬁrms’ technology choice. Most

of the existent theoretical studies focus on the effects of foreign demand shocks on ﬁrms’ technology or

quality upgrading. They look at demand shocks related to ﬁnal goods tariff changes affecting exports in

bilateral trade agreements or expansion of other export opportunities (Yeaple, 2005; Verhoogen, 2008;

Bustos, 2011; Aw et al., 2011; Lileeva and Treﬂer, 2010; Costantini and Melitz, 2008; Bas and Ledezma,

2015). The contribution of this paper to this literature is to focus on an unexplored channel through which

trade liberalization might also affect ﬁrms’ technology choice, namely, a supply shock related to changes

in the costs of imported intermediate inputs. Changes in tariffs on intermediate goods might affect ﬁrms’

performance and thereby, ﬁrms’ technology upgrading decision through multiple mechanisms: reduction

of production costs, foreign technology transfer and complementarity between imported intermediate

inputs and high-technology. Our ﬁndings show that input tariffs changes are also an important factor to

explain ﬁrms’ technology choice.

   Our results also complete the existing evidence regarding the microeconomic effects of input-trade

liberalization on ﬁrm performance. Concerning the case of India, input tariff cuts have contributed sig-

niﬁcantly to ﬁrm productivity growth and also to the ability of ﬁrms to introduce new products. Topalova

and Khandelwal (2011) show that input-trade liberalization improved ﬁrm productivity by 4.8 percent in

India, while Goldberg et al. (2010) demonstrate that input-tariff cuts in India account on average for 31

percent of the new products introduced by domestic ﬁrms. They also show evidence of the direct effect

of import tariff cuts on intermediate inputs in India during the same period under analysis. They ﬁnd

                                                    5
that tariff declines have a more pronounced impact on the extensive margin of imported intermediate

products relative to ﬁnal goods. DeLoecker et al. (2016) show that trade liberalization reduces prices

and that output tariff cuts have pro-competitive effects. They ﬁnd that price reductions are small relative

to the declines in marginal costs due to the input-tariff liberalization. Recent studies focused on the role

of input-trade liberalization in shaping ﬁrms’ export performance. Using ﬁrm-level data from Argentina,

Bas (2012) ﬁnds that ﬁrms producing in industries with larger input-tariff cuts have a greater probability

of entering the export market. Bas and Strauss-Kahn (2015) show that Chinese ﬁrms that have beneﬁted

from input tariff cuts bought more expensive inputs and raised their export prices. These ﬁndings suggest

that input-trade liberalization induces ﬁrms to upgrade their inputs at low cost to upgrade the quality of

their exported products.

   The next section describes the main empirical facts on Indian ﬁrms importing intermediate inputs

and capital equipment goods. Section III presents a simple theoretical framework of endogenous foreign

technology adoption that reﬂects the main features of the data and rationalizes the mechanisms through

which input-trade liberalization affects ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade technology. Section IV describes the

testable empirical implications. Section V presents the trade-policy background in India, the estimation

strategy and the empirical results. Section VI explores alternative explanations. Section VII introduces

several robustness tests. The last section concludes.




                                  II. EMPIRICAL MOTIVATION


   Before analyzing the relationship between input-trade liberalization and ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade

foreign technology embodied in imported capital goods, this section provides a ﬁrst inspection of the

data. We document several empirical facts on ﬁrms sourcing intermediate inputs and capital equipment

goods from foreign countries that will guide the assumptions of our theoretical model.

   Only a small subset of Indian ﬁrms produces with foreign technology embodied in imported capital

                                                     6
goods. During the period 1989-1997, only 38 percent of ﬁrms in the sample import capital goods, while

most of the ﬁrms (73 percent) import intermediate goods. Moreover, ﬁrms import intermediate inputs

on yearly basis, while ﬁrms import capital goods more sporadically. Looking at the ﬁrms that source

both foreign goods reveals that almost all ﬁrms that import capital goods (99 percent) also purchase

imported intermediate goods. The fact that only half of the ﬁrms that import intermediate goods are

able to source imported capital equipment goods suggests that the decision to source capital goods from

abroad is related to a technological choice that involves a ﬁxed investment cost.4


       Empirical fact 1: A large proportion of ﬁrms imports intermediate goods, while only a subset of those

ﬁrms also imports capital equipment goods.


       This small subset of ﬁrms that produces with imported capital goods technology performs better

than non-importers of capital equipment goods. Table 1 shows estimations of importer premia of capital

goods. We regress ﬁrms’ sales, capital stock, wage-bill, proﬁts and the share of imported inputs (imports

of intermediates over total inputs) on a dummy variable equal to one for ﬁrms with positive values of

imports of capital goods (importer of capital goods) and zero for those ﬁrms that do not import (non-

importer of capital goods), including industry and year ﬁxed effects. The results show that within an

industry-year, ﬁrms that import capital goods have larger sales, capital stock, wage-bill, proﬁts and

imported input share
   4
    Using detailed product-level data on imports by Indian manufacturing plants, Fernandes et al. (2012) show the existence
of ﬁxed costs of importing.




                                                            7
            Table 1: Importers vs. non-importers of capital goods: Importer of capital goods premia



                                       The dependent variable is described in each column

                                                (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                          (5)

                                               Sales             Capital           Wage-bill             Proﬁts           Imported inputs share



Importer of capital goods                  1.356***            1.517***            1.350***            1.558***                     0.085***

                                             (0.043)             (0.045)            (0.049)             (0.051)                      (0.014)



Year ﬁxed effects                               Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                          Yes

Industry ﬁxed effects                           Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                          Yes

Observations                                 14,680              14,647              14,680              11,945                       14,680

R-squared                                     0.224               0.283               0.202               0.214                        0.005

Notes: The dependent variable is described in the head of each column, all of those variables are expressed in logarithm terms except by the share of imported

inputs. The table shows regressions of each ﬁrm performance measure on a dummy variable equal to one if the ﬁrm imports capital goods in year t and

zero otherwise. All regressions include industry and year ﬁxed effects. Heteroskedasticity-robust standards errors clustered at the ﬁrm level are reported in

parentheses.




     Empirical fact 2: Firms producing with foreign technology embodied in imported capital goods have

larger sales, capital stock, are more proﬁtable and have a higher share of imported inputs than non-

importers of capital goods.


     We also observed that imports of intermediates and capital goods are positively correlated. Firms

that import intermediate inputs have a greater probability to source capital equipments from foreign

countries. Table 2 presents a set of simple estimations of the probability of importing capital equipment

goods as a function of ﬁrms’ imported inputs intensity (the ratio of imported inputs over total inputs).

We look at the relationship between the decision to import capital goods and the imported input intensity

                                                                              8
of the ﬁrm across ﬁrms within the same 3-digit industry (columns 1 and 2) and within-ﬁrm over time

(columns 3 and 4). Column (1) suggests that comparing ﬁrms producing in the same industry, ﬁrms that

import intermediate goods are more likely to import capital equipment goods. Column (2) includes a

control variable of ﬁrm size (wage-bill).5 Looking at within-ﬁrm variation over time, columns (3) and (4)

show that the decision to upgrade foreign technology embodied in imported capital goods is positively

correlated with ﬁrms’ imported input intensity. This descriptive evidence suggests that there exists a

certain complementarity between imported capital goods and intermediate inputs in India.


               Table 2: Complementarity between imports of capital goods and intermediate inputs


                                                     Dependent variable: Importer of capital goods status

                                                       (1)                                   (2)                              (3)                            (4)



Imported input share                                0.032***                              0.058***                         0.046***                        0.047***

                                                     (0.004)                               (0.004)                          (0.005)                        (0.005)



Firm size                                                                                    Yes                                                             Yes

Industry 3 digit ﬁxed effects                         Yes                                    Yes

Firm ﬁxed effects                                                                                                             Yes                            Yes

Year Fixed effects                                    Yes                                    Yes                              Yes                            Yes

Observations                                         14,680                                14,680                           14,680                          14,680

R-squared                                            0.262                                  0.326                            0.092                          0.294

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy for ﬁrm i having positive imports of capital goods in year t. The imported input share is the ratio of imported

inputs over total inputs. Firm size is measured by the logarithm of wage-bill and it is included in columns (2) and (4). Heteroskedasticity-robust standards

errors clustered at the ﬁrm level are reported in parentheses.   ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ ,   and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




        Empirical fact 3: The decision of sourcing capital goods from abroad is positively correlated with

imports of intermediate goods.


        As a ﬁnal step, we explore if this complementarity between foreign technology and imported interme-

diate goods translates into a higher global efﬁciency of the ﬁrm in the production process. We investigate
    5
        We rely on wage-bill as a measure of ﬁrms’ size since total employment is not reported in the Prowess dataset.


                                                                                     9
if importing both capital and intermediate goods improves ﬁrms’ total factor productivity (TFP) by es-

timating a production function relying on the methodology developed by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)

(henceforth LP). The LP approach controls for simultaneity bias in the estimation of ﬁrms’ production

function.6 LP is based on Olley and Pakes (1996) methodology that develop a two-stage method to con-

trol for unobserved ﬁrm productivity.7 We modify the LP-OP estimation by incorporating the importer

status of capital goods and intermediate inputs in the production function estimation. We also control for

the volume of imports of capital goods and/or intermediates to avoid that importer status pick up the fact

that ﬁrms that import both goods capital and intermediates will tend to have a larger volume of imports

that can affect total efﬁciency.8 Table A1 in the appendix reports the results. In column (2) we include

the dummy variables indicating whether the ﬁrm imports only intermediates or both inputs and capital

equipment goods. Firms producing with foreign inputs and domestic capital goods have greater TFP

relative to ﬁrms using only domestic inputs (18 percent). The estimates also show that ﬁrms producing

with both foreign inputs and imported capital goods are 22 percent more productive than non-importers.9


       Empirical fact 4: Producing with both imported inputs and foreign capital equipment goods improves

ﬁrms’ global efﬁciency in the production process.


       Given such complementarity, input-trade liberalization should affect ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade for-

eign technology in imported capital goods. The average tariff on variable imported intermediate goods

fell 27 percentage points between 1989 and 1997.10 At the same time that input tariffs drop, the share
   6
      Simultaneity arises because ﬁrms’ variable input demands and unobserved productivity are positively correlated: the
ﬁrm-speciﬁc productivity is known by the ﬁrm but not by the econometrician and ﬁrms respond to productivity shocks by
modifying their purchases of variable inputs.
    7
      Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) build upon the idea of Olley and Pakes using primary input demand (electricity) instead of
the investment decision to control for unobserved productivity shocks. Their rationale lies in the idea that investment data
are often missing or lumpy, whereas data on raw inputs are of better quality thus guaranteeing strict monotonicity without
efﬁciency loss. The Prowess dataset reports information on electricity inputs so we rely on the LP methodology.
    8
      We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this control variable.
    9
      Note that this evidence gives just an empirical motivation of the model assumption of complementarity between imported
capital goods and intermediate inputs. Although the production function is estimated pooling industries, the estimation
includes 3-digit industry ﬁxed effects.
   10
      Input tariffs are computed as tariff on variable intermediate goods other than capital equipment goods at the 3-digit
industry level as described in section 5.1.



                                                            10
of ﬁrms importing capital equipment goods increases in most industries. As can be seen in Figure A1

(in the appendix) within each 2-digit industry, the highest input tariffs drop and the greatest expansion

of the share of capital goods importers occur at the same time.


   Empirical fact 5: As average input tariff fall, the share of ﬁrms importing capital goods increase.


   The next section develops a simple model that rationalizes these empirical facts to explain the role of

input-trade liberalization on ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade foreign technology embodied in imported capital

goods.




                               III. THEORETICAL MOTIVATION


   Previous models of heterogeneous ﬁrms and technology or quality upgrading focus on the impact of

foreign demand shocks, mainly through export variable cost changes, on ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade their

technology/quality. Yeaple (2005) develops a trade model of heterogeneous skills, technology choice

and ex-post heterogeneous ﬁrms. In this model, trade liberalization by a reduction of trade variable

costs enhances technology adoption and skill-upgrading. Verhoogen (2008) presents a model of ﬁrm

heterogeneity and quality differentiation, where more productive ﬁrms produce high quality goods to the

export market. Expansion of export opportunities leads more-productive ﬁrms to upgrade the quality of

their goods for the export market. Bustos (2011) builds on Yeaple (2005) and Melitz (2003) to develop a

trade model of heterogeneous ﬁrms and endogeneous technology adoption. In her model trade variable

cost reductions increase expected export revenues and enhance technology upgrading. Bas and Ledezma

(2015) extends Melitz (2003) model by including an additional stage of investment choice over a contin-

uous support that determines ﬁrm productivity. In this model, trade liberalization also affects investment

choice and productivity through an expansion of foreign demand. Other works that include ﬁxed costs

of innovation or technology upgrading in a Melitz-type model are Aw et al. (2011); Lileeva and Treﬂer


                                                   11
(2010); Costantini and Melitz (2008). In those models, trade liberalization also shapes technology choice

via a foreign demand channel through changes in trade variable costs affecting ﬁnal goods.

       Our model is also related to Kugler and Verhoogen (2011) who extend Melitz (2003) heteroge-

neous ﬁrms model to include an endogenous input and output quality choices. They add a domestic

intermediate-input sector that produces inputs of different qualities. They consider two scenarios. In

the ﬁrst one, input quality and ﬁrm capability draws are complements to generate output quality. In the

second scenario, they assume ﬁxed costs of quality upgrading and that producing high-quality output

requires high-quality inputs.11 Only in this second scenario, ﬁrms’ quality choice depends on the scale

of market to which the plant sells. This second variant of the model will then predict that an exoge-

neous increase in market access induces quality-investments.12 Given that inputs are only domestically

produced, trade liberalization will not affect production factor costs.

       We depart from these models of trade, heterogeneous ﬁrms and technology/quality upgrading that

focus on foreign demand shocks related to ﬁnal goods trade variable cost changes and expansion of

market access. Our focus relies instead on a supply shock, namely variations in the relative production

costs associated to input-trade liberalization. Assuming that ﬁrms produce their ﬁnal product with both

domestic and imported intermediate inputs and that high-technology is biased towards foreign inputs,

trade liberalization through input tariff reductions affects the relative costs of foreign inputs and thereby,

ﬁrms’ proﬁtability and the incentives for technology adoption. Kasahara and Lapham (2013) also intro-

duce in a Melitz-type model imported intermediate goods and ﬁxed cost of importing to investigate the

simultaneous choice of export ﬁnal goods and import intermediates. Amiti and Davis (2012) build on

Kasahara and Lapham (2013) to explain the effects of input- and output-trade liberalization on ﬁrms’

wages. Bombarda and Gamberoni (2013) develop a Melitz-type model including an intermediate goods
  11
      Hallak and Sivadasan (2013) also consider ﬁxed costs of quality upgrading. They develop a model of trade with two
dimensions of ﬁrm heterogeneity (productivity and caliber, the ability of to develop high quality products with lower ﬁxed
outlays). In this model, exporters have more incentives to invest in quality upgrading due to a higher total demand and because
trade costs decrease with quality. Thereby, trade liberalization enhances quality upgrading.
   12
      For simplicity the authors assume that there are no trade variable costs.




                                                             12
sector producing differentiated varieties for domestic and foreign markets to explain the impact of re-

laxing rules of origin. However, they assume that intermediate goods producers are trade frictionless.

These models do not take into account how imported inputs tariffs affect ﬁrms’ technology choice.

   Our model is closely related to the recent framework developed by Boler et al. (2015) of heteroge-

neous ﬁrms, endogenous R&D choice and international sourcing of intermediate goods. In their setting

the complementarity mechanism between imported inputs and R&D investments arise due to a scale

effect: on the one hand, lower R&D costs raise the average productivity and ﬁrm size increasing the

number of imported inputs and on the other hand, importing intermediate goods reduce marginal costs

making it easier to incur the ﬁxed costs of R&D. In the empirical analysis they test the ﬁrst implication

by exploiting the implementation of a R&D tax credit in Norway and show that this reform stimulates

not only R&D investments but also imports of intermediates, which contributed to productivity growth.

Our focus is instead on how input-trade liberalisation affects ﬁrms’ foreign technology choice embodied

in imported capital goods. Assuming that foreign technology is biased towards imported intermediates

and the existence of ﬁxed costs of importing capital goods, we show that input-trade liberalization fosters

foreign technology adoption and the effect of input-tariff cuts is heterogeneous across ﬁrms depending

on their initial productivity level. Since we want to emphasize this imported input channel, for the sake

of simplicity we abstract from the export side of the story and the effects of trade liberalization through

variations in trade variable costs affecting ﬁnal goods that are already well-documented in the literature.




                                         Set-up of the model


   The aim of this section is to motivate our empirical analysis by introducing a simple model of het-

erogeneous ﬁrms, endogenous technology adoption and imported inputs based on Melitz (2003). The

assumptions of the model capture the empirical facts described in the previous section. The theory ra-

tionalizes the mechanisms through which input-trade liberalization affects ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade

                                                    13
technology embodied in imported capital equipement goods.

       Preferences. The representative household allocates consumption from among the range of differ-

entiated varieties of ﬁnal goods ω . Consumer preferences are assumed to take the Constant Elasticity
                                                                                        σ
                                                                          σ −1        σ −1
of Substitution (CES) utility function: U =               ω ∈Ω
                                                                 q (ω )     σ    dω          , where σ > 1 is the elasticity of

substitution between two varieties and Ω the set of available varieties. The optimal demand function for
                                                                     −σ
                                                             p(ω )
each differentiated variety is given by: q (ω ) = Q           P
                                                                          , where Q ≡ U is the aggregate consumption

of available varieties, P the price index and p(ω ) the price set by a ﬁrm. R = P Q, aggregate revenue.
                                                                                                   1
The price index dual to the CES utility function is P =                   ω ∈Ω
                                                                               p(ω )1−σ dω        1−σ
                                                                                                        .



                                                      Production



       There are two sectors in the economy. One sector produces a homogeneous domestic constant-return-

to-scale intermediate-input xd with one unit of labor requirement under perfect competition. Labor

is inelastically supplied and the wage is used as a numeraire. This homogeneous intermediate goods

sector is characterized by perfect competition, so that the price of domestic inputs equals the marginal

cost of producing the input: px = w = 1. Similar to previous works on heterogeneous ﬁrms and

imported intermediate goods (Kasahara and Lapham (2013) and Amiti and Davis (2012)), we assume

that intermediate goods are available in the country in ﬁxed measure exogenously determined.13 This

sector also produces domestic capital equipment goods kd under perfect competition and constant-return-

to-scale using one unit of labor requirement. The price of domestic capital goods is then equal to one.

       The other sector produces a continuum of differentiated ﬁnal goods under monopolistic competition.

In this sector, there is a continuum of ﬁrms, which are all different in terms of their initial productivity

level ϕ. Each ﬁrm produces a distinct horizontally-differentiated variety of ﬁnal good in a monopolistic

competition market structure. The production of each variety of ﬁnal good q involves a ﬁxed production
  13
    This assumption of a ﬁxed measure of intermediate goods allows us to focus on the cost-reduction channel of intermediate
goods trade in a tractable way avoiding the possible multiple equilibriums of models like Venables (1996).


                                                            14
cost f in terms of labor.14 Firms combine intermediate inputs x and capital equipment goods k to produce

the ﬁnal good in a Cobb-Douglas technology with factor shares η and 1 − η : q (ϕ) = ϕxη k 1−η . Firms

produce using both domestic xd and imported xm inputs combined in a CES function with an elasticity

                                                                             1
of substitution between the two types of inputs equal to θ =                1−α
                                                                                .   Domestic and imported inputs are

imperfect substitutes, 0 < α < 1 and 1 ≤ θ ≤ ∞. To keep the model simple, we assume that all

ﬁrms used both intermediate goods. This assumption is in line with the empirical fact 1 described in the

previous section.



                                                          1
                                   x = (xα     α α α
                                         di + γi xmi )                f or i = {l, h}                                   (2)


       Firms can produce the ﬁnal good with a low- or a high-technology with subscripts l and h. Low-

technology is embodied in domestic capital goods kd and is available to all ﬁrms. High-technology is

characterized by imported capital goods km and implies incurring an additional ﬁxed technology adop-

tion cost fh in terms of labor.15 Empirical fact 1 suggests that sourcing capital equipment goods from

abroad in India involves a ﬁxed investment cost that only a few ﬁrms can afford. The ﬁxed cost of

importing capital goods represents an investment in a new and more advanced technology that reduces

marginal costs of production. The parameter γi represents the complementarity between imported in-

termediate inputs and imported capital goods (empirical facts 3 and 4). The high value of this factor

is only available to ﬁrms that pay the ﬁxed foreign technology cost. Therefore, ﬁrms producing with

high-technology embodied in imported capital goods combine both types of capital goods by a Cobb-

                      β 1−β
Douglas function k = km kd and increase their efﬁciency due to the complementarity in the production

process between imported inputs and imported capital goods with γh > 1. Firms producing only with

low-domestic-technology have k = kd and γl = 1. The complementarity between imported inputs and

imported capital goods yields to a higher efﬁciency in the production process reducing ﬁrms’ marginal
  14
    This assumption allows us to study the decision of ﬁrms that face homogeneous ﬁxed costs.
  15
    The assumption that the ﬁxed technology adoption cost is also measured in terms of labor allows us to study the technol-
ogy choice of ﬁrms that face homogeneous ﬁxed costs.


                                                              15
costs. This complementarity translates in an imported-input biased foreign-technology.16 Given that im-

ported and domestic intermediate goods are imperfect substitutes, the complementarity assumption im-

plies that ﬁrms producing with high-technology embodied in imported capital goods are imported-input

intensive and ﬁrms producing with low-technology represented by domestic capital goods are domestic-

input intensive. The evidence presented on the previous section suggests that imported intermediate

inputs are complementary with foreign technology embodied in imported capital goods for Indian ﬁrms.

       Each ﬁrm chooses its price to maximize its proﬁts subject to a demand curve with constant elasticity

σ . The equilibrium price reﬂects a constant markup over marginal cost:


                                                              σ ci
                                                  pi (ϕ) =                                                               (3)
                                                             σ−1ϕ


       In this model, marginal cost can be divided into an intrinsic productivity term ϕ and a cost index

ci , which combines the prices of intermediate and capital goods. Final good producers are price-takers

in intermediate-input and capital equipment goods markets. The price of imported inputs and capital

goods takes into account the input tariff τm and the capital goods tariff τk , respectively. Since the price of

domestic intermediate and capital goods is equal to the wage which is used as a numeraire, the cost index

for the low- and high-technology ﬁrms can be expressed as a function of the complementarity parameter,
                                                                                                           η (α−1)
                                                         η (α−1)                                     α
                                                    α                                                          α
                                                             α                 β (1−η )             α−1
                                                   α−1                                         τm
input and capital goods tariffs: cl = 1 + τm                       and ch =   τk          1+   γh
                                                                                                                     . High-

technology ﬁrms pay a ﬁxed technology cost that allows them to reduce their marginal cost by increasing

their efﬁciency through the complementarity between imported inputs and imported capital goods (γh ).

We assume that the efﬁciency parameter of imported capital goods γh is higher than its additional variable

cost τk . The cost index of high-technology ﬁrms ch is then lower than the one of low-technology ﬁrms
                 ch
cl . The ratio   cl
                      is determined by:
  16
    Note that this complementarity is similar to the one present in the trade-induced skilled-biased technological change
models. The main difference is that such models do not explain supply shocks driven by trade liberalization and associated
with changes in the price of production factors. They focus instead on demand side shocks related to trade variable costs
reductions in ﬁnal goods that increase ﬁrms’ output demand and then the relative demand of skilled-labor.



                                                           16
                                                                                η (1−α)
                                                                α
                                                             1−α                    α
                                       ch    β (1−η )       τm   +1
                                          = τk               α          α                                                           (4)
                                       cl                   1−α
                                                           τm          1− α
                                                                    + γh

   This ratio expresses the relative cost of high-technology ﬁrms to low-technology ﬁrms. The relative
       ch
cost   cl
            is an increasing function of input tariffs. Partially differentiating equation (4) with respect to

the input tariffs (τm ), we ﬁnd that ∂ c
                                       cl
                                         h
                                           /∂τm > 0 since 0 < α < 1 and γh > 1. The lower the input

tariffs the lower the relative unit costs of ﬁrms using the high-technology vis-a-vis low-technology ﬁrms.

This result is explained by the fact that using high-technology in imported capital goods improves the

efﬁciency of production through the use of foreign inputs. Adopting the high-technology induces a tech-

nical change that is biased towards the use of foreign inputs given the substitutability between domestic

and imported intermediate goods in the CES production function. This makes the production process
                                                                      ch
more sensitive to input tariff changes. The relative cost             cl
                                                                           is also an increasing function of capital goods

tariffs. A reduction of tariffs on capital goods reduces the relative costs of using high-foreign technology.

   The ratio of the relative high-technology unit cost to low-technology expressed in equation (4) is

the key variable in this model that captures the differential effect of input-tariff changes on ﬁrms’

revenues and proﬁts. Combining the demand and the price function, ﬁrms’ revenues are given by
                       σ −1
                                      −σ σ −1                                                                           σ −1 σ −1
ri (ϕ) =        P
              pi (ϕ)
                              R = Ac1
                                    i   ϕ , where R is the aggregate revenue and A = P σ−1 R                              σ
                                                                                                                                     is

an index for market demand. High-technology ﬁrms’ revenues can be written as a function of revenues
                                                     1−σ
                                                ch
of low-technology ﬁrms rh (ϕ) = rl              cl
                                                           . Hence, ﬁrms that upgrade technology importing capi-
                                                                                                                                   1−σ
                                                                                                                              ch
tal goods have a relative cost advantage that allows them to raise their revenues by the term                                 cl
                                                                                                                                         .

Note that this term is higher than one since the elasticity of substitution among ﬁnal goods is σ > 1 and
                                                                                                                  ch   1−σ
                                                                              rl (ϕ)                     rl (ϕ)   cl
cl > ch . Proﬁts for both types of ﬁrms are given by πl (ϕ) =                    σ
                                                                                     −f   and πh (ϕ) =            σ
                                                                                                                             − f − fh .

   Given that the price is a constant mark-up over marginal costs, in this model ﬁrms with a higher

productivity draw using high-technology set lower prices than low-technology ﬁrms due to a better

exogenous productivity draw (ϕ) and a higher input efﬁciency thanks to the complementarity between



                                                                17
imported intermediate goods and imported capital goods (γh ). Since the demand is elastic, these lower

prices imply that more productive ﬁrms using foreign-technology embodied in imported capital goods

have also larger revenues and proﬁts relative to those ﬁrms producing only with domestic capital goods

(consistent with empirical fact 2).




                                          Firms’ decisions




                            The decision to exit or stay and produce


   Firms have to pay a sunk entry cost fe to enter the market before they know what their productivity

level will be. Entrants then derive their productivity ϕ from common distribution density g (ϕ), with

support [0, ∞) and cumulative distribution G(ϕ). After observing its productivity draw, ﬁrms decide

whether to stay and produce or to exit the market. Since there is a ﬁxed production cost f , only those

ﬁrms with enough proﬁts to afford this cost can produce. The proﬁts of the marginal ﬁrm that decides

to stay and produce with low-technology are equal to zero: πl (ϕ∗                   ∗
                                                                l ) = 0. The value ϕl is the survival


productivity cutoff to produce with low-technology. This cutoff is determined by the following condition:



                                      rl (ϕ∗
                                           l)      A 1−σ ∗σ−1
                          πl (ϕ∗
                               l) =           − f = cl  ϕl    −f =0                                   (5)
                                         σ         σ


   Equation (5) implies that the survival productivity cutoff to produce with low-technology is deter-

mined by ϕ∗
          l
            σ −1
                 = f cσ
                      l
                        −1 σ
                           A
                             . All ﬁrms that have a productivity draw lower than the survival cutoff are

not able to pay the ﬁxed production cost, they make losses and exit the market (ϕ < ϕ∗
                                                                                     l ). Firms with a


productivity draw greater than the survival cutoff stay in the market and produce (ϕ > ϕ∗
                                                                                        l ).




                                                   18
                                   The decision to adopt high-technology



       If a ﬁrm decides to stay in the market once it has received its productivity draw, it may also decide

to upgrade its technology by importing capital goods to reduce its marginal costs on the basis of its

proﬁtability. Technology choice is endogenously determined by the initial productivity draw. Firms with

a more favorable productivity draw have a higher potential payoff from adopting the high-technology

that is biased towards foreign inputs, and hence are more likely to ﬁnd incurring the ﬁxed technology

cost worthwhile. Thus, ﬁrms that will upgrade technology are the most productive ones whose increase

in revenues due to the adoption of high-technology enables them to pay the ﬁxed technology cost to

import capital goods. Technology adoption allows ﬁrms to increase their proﬁtability through the com-

plementarity channel between imported intermediate goods and imported capital goods in the production

process.17 The indifference condition for the marginal ﬁrm to acquire the new and more advanced foreign

technology is given by πh (ϕ∗          ∗
                            h ) = πl (ϕh ):




                                                  rh (ϕ∗          ∗
                                                       h ) − rl (ϕh )
                                                                      = fh                                                 (6)
                                                           σ


       The high-technology productivity cutoff ϕ∗
                                                h is the minimum productivity level for the marginal ﬁrm

                                                                                               ∗σ −1
that is able to adopt the high-technology and import capital goods. Equation (6) implies that ϕh     =
     fh
c1 −σ
      −c
             σ
         1−σ A .   By combining equation (5) with (6), we obtain ϕ∗                             ∗
                                                                  h as an implicit function of ϕl :
 h       l



                                                                                      1
                                                           1
                                                                          1−σ        1−σ
                                                    fh   σ −1        ch
                                      ϕ∗    ∗
                                       h = ϕl                                   −1                                         (7)
                                                    f                cl


                                         ch
       Where the relative unit costs     cl
                                              is a function of input and capital goods tariffs and the complemen-

tarity parameter between imported inputs and capital goods determined in equation (4). The sorting of
  17
     Firms’ technology adoption decision takes place after they discover their productivity draw. There is no other uncertainty
or additional time discounting apart from the probability of exit (δ ). Thus ﬁrms are indifferent between paying the one time
investment cost Fh or paying the amortized per period portion of this cost in every period fh = δFh .


                                                                19
ﬁrms by technology status depends on the relationship between ﬁxed costs of production, of technology

adoption and variable costs of importing intermediate inputs and capital goods. If ﬁxed costs of adopting

the high-technology are lower than ﬁxed production costs all ﬁrms will use the high-technology. The
                                                                                       1−σ
                                                                                  ch
parameter condition that ensures that ϕ∗    ∗
                                       h > ϕl is given by fh > f                  cl
                                                                                             −1 .

       We are interested in determining how changes in input tariffs affect ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade tech-

nology depending on their productivity levels. This question can be answered by investigating the impact

of input-tariff changes on the high-technology productivity cutoff ϕ∗
                                                                    h . Equation (7) shows that input tar-


iffs affect the high-technology productivity cutoff through a direct effect captured by the relative unit

costs of high-technology vis-a-vis low-technology and through an indirect effect captured by the impact

of input tariffs on the survival productivity cutoff ϕ∗
                                                      l . Hence, to determine the high-technology produc-


tivity cutoff, we need to solve ﬁrst for the equilibrium level of the survival productivity cutoff. This is

done in the next section.




                                              Industry equilibrium


       Two conditions determined the equilibrium value of ϕ∗
                                                           l : the free entry condition (FE) and the zero


cutoff proﬁt condition (ZCP).18 The FE condition represents a relationship between the average proﬁts

and the low-technology productivity cutoff level, where the average proﬁts are an increasing function of

the cutoff. In equilibrium, where entry is unrestricted, the net value of entry is equal to zero. Once ﬁrms

pay the sunk entry costs, entrants then draw their productivity from a known Pareto distribution function
               ϕk
g (ϕ) = k (ϕ) k+1 with ϕmin > 0 the lower bound of the support of the productivity distribution and a
            min


                                                                                                      k
                                                                                               ϕmin
shape parameter k . The Pareto cumulative distribution function is G(ϕ) = 1 −                   ϕ
                                                                                                          .19
  18
     All aggregate variables are deﬁned in the Appendix.
  19
     Assuming that productivity draws are Pareto distributed implies that ﬁrm size and variable proﬁts are also Pareto dis-
tributed with a shape parameter k/(σ − 1). The condition for average variable proﬁts to be ﬁnite is that k > σ − 1. Axtell
(2001) provides empirical evidence that the Pareto distribution is a good approximation of ﬁrm size distribution.



                                                            20
                                                                  k
                                       δfe               ϕ∗
                                                          l
                               π=             =                       δfe      (FE)                                    (8)
                                    1 − G(ϕ∗
                                           l)           ϕmin

   Under the ZCP condition, average proﬁts are a decreasing function of the cutoff.



                                  π = ρl πl (ϕl ) + ρh πh (ϕh )             (ZCP)                                      (9)


   Where ϕl and ϕh correspond to the average productivity levels of ﬁrms producing with low- and high-
                                                                                                      −k
                                                                               1−G(ϕ∗
                                                                                    h)           ϕ∗
technology, which depend on the productivity cutoff levels. ρh =               1−G(ϕ∗
                                                                                           =      h
                                                                                                 ϕ∗
                                                                                                           and ρl = 1 − ρh
                                                                                    l)            l


represent the ex-ante probability of using high- and low-technology.

   Combining the FE (equation (8)) and ZCP conditions (equation (9)), we can solve the equilibrium

survival productivity cutoff. Derivations are detailed in the Appendix:


                                                                         k                  
                                                                                    −k
                                                            1−σ         σ −1
                                                                                    σ −1
                                                   ch                          fh
                                        f +       cl
                                                                  −1           f
                                                                                           fh 
                               σ−1
                   ϕ∗ k                                                                        k
                          =                                                                    ϕmin                  (10)
                                        
                    l
                            k − (σ − 1)                          δfe
                                        
                                                                                              


                                                  ch
   where k > σ − 1 and the relative unit costs    cl
                                                        is a function of input tariffs τm , capital goods tariffs

τk and the complementarity parameter γh determined in equation (4). In this model, the equilibrium

productivity cutoff ϕ∗
                     l is a function of the input tariffs, the ﬁxed production and high-technology costs


and the complementarity technology parameter.




      IV. INPUT-TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND TECHNOLOGY UPGRADING



                                     Theoretical mechanisms


   This simple model yields two main predictions related to the determinants of the probability of

importing capital goods. The probability of adopting high-technology embodied in imported capital

                                                       21
goods is determined by the relationship between the two productivity cutoffs deﬁned in equation (7):

           ∗ −k
ρh = (ϕ∗
       h /ϕl ) . This equation shows that the probability of upgrading technology is a function of ﬁxed


production costs, ﬁxed costs of high-technology, input and capital goods tariffs and the complementarity

parameter. Input tariff cuts increase the likelihood of ﬁrms to upgrade high-technology.


       Proposition 1: The probability of adopting high-technology by importing capital goods ρh is a de-

creasing function of input tariff: ∂ρh /∂τm < 0.


       Using equation (7), we can express this probability as a function of the relative unit cost of high-
                                                                  −k                        −k
                                                                                 1−σ        1−σ
technology that depends on input tariffs: ρh = (fh /f )           σ −1   (ch /cl )     −1         . From equation (4), we

know that ∂ ch
            cl
               /∂τm > 0 since 0 < α < 1 and γh > 1, thereby, ∂ρh /∂τm < 0, since σ > 1.20

       This model also predicts a heterogeneous effect of input-trade liberalization on ﬁrms’ technology

choice. The assumptions of ﬁrm heterogeneity and ﬁxed costs of high-technology adoption imply that

those ﬁrms that will be able to beneﬁt from input-trade liberalization are the most productive ﬁrms using

low-technology before input-tariff cuts. Using equation (7) and (10) to determine the high-technology

productivity cutoff, we know that this cutoff decreases with input-tariff reductions. Input-trade liberaliza-

tion induces the highest-productivity ﬁrms producing with low-technology to switch to high-technology.


       Proposition 2: The high-technology productivity cutoff ϕ∗
                                                               h is an increasing function of input tariffs:


∂ϕ∗
  h /∂τm > 0


       Proof. See Appendix.


       We focus on two testable predictions derived from propositions 1 and 2 which are in line with the

empirical facts 5 presented in the previous section. These testable implications are presented in the next

section. Input tariff reductions also induce a selection effect of most productive ﬁrms in this model. The

least productive ﬁrms producing with low-technology intensive in domestic inputs will lose competitive-
  20
     The model also predicts that the probability of importing capital goods is a decreasing function of capital goods tariffs.
In the empirical analysis presented in the following sections we take into account the direct role of capital goods tariffs.


                                                             22
ness and market shares relative to high-technology ﬁrms due to input-trade liberalization. Indeed, input

tariff reductions imply an increase in the relative costs of domestic inputs vis-a-vis foreign intermediate

goods. This is shown formally in the Appendix. Unfortunately, the Indian dataset that we exploit in the

empirical analysis is not suitable to test this prediction since we cannot identify entry and exit of ﬁrms

since ﬁrms are under no legal obligation to report to the data collecting agency, the Prowess data do not

allow us to identify entry and exit of ﬁrms.




                                        Testable implications


   In the empirical analysis, we focus on ﬁrms’ technological decision to import capital equipment

goods in India. The simple model presented in the previous section yields two testable implications on

the relationship between changes in input tariffs and ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade technology embodied in

foreign capital goods.

   Input tariff cuts imply a reduction of the relative costs of foreign inputs vis-a-vis domestic ones.

Taking into account that the high-technology embodied in imported capital goods is biased towards

imported inputs and the substitutability between intermediate goods, input-trade liberalization in this

framework enhances the cost-advantage of high-technology ﬁrms. Thereby, input tariff cuts reduce

the relative unit costs of using high-technology, increasing proﬁts of high-technology ﬁrms relative to

low-technology ﬁrms creating incentives to upgrade technology embodied in imported capital goods.

Proposition 1 shows that input tariff reductions increase the likelihood of ﬁrms to adopt the high-foreign

technology by importing capital goods.


   Testable implication 1: Input-trade liberalization has a positive effect on ﬁrms’ decision to import

capital goods.


   Which are the ﬁrms that decide to upgrade foreign-technology after input-trade liberalization?


                                                    23
       The effect of input tariff reductions on ﬁrms’ technology choice is heterogeneous across ﬁrms de-

pending on their initial productivity level ϕ. Proposition 2 shows that the high-technology productivity

cutoff ϕ∗
        h decreases with input tariff reductions. Figure 1 illustrates the impact of input-trade liberaliza-


tion on ﬁrms’ technology choice for ﬁrms with different productivity levels. Input tariff cuts reduce the

high-technology productivity cutoff, allowing the most productive ﬁrms producing with low-domestic

technology before input-trade liberalization to upgrade their technology embodied in imported capi-

tal goods (ϕ∗        ∗
            h < ϕ < ϕh ). These ﬁrms will experience an increase in the expected proﬁts of high-


technology, due to input tariff reductions, that allows them to cover the ﬁxed technology adoption costs.

       Testable implication 2: The effect of input-trade liberalization is heterogeneous across ﬁrms. Firms

that will beneﬁt from input tariff cuts to upgrade foreign technology embodied in imported capital goods

are ﬁrms in the middle range of the productivity distribution.


       In the following sections, we test these empirical implications using the episode of India’s trade

liberalization at the beginning of the 1990s.




                                          V. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS




                                                         Data


       The Indian ﬁrm-level dataset is compiled from the Prowess database by the Centre for Monitoring the

Indian Economy (CMIE).21 This database contains information from the income statements and balance

sheets of listed companies comprising more than 70 percent of the economic activity in the organized

industrial sector of India. Collectively, the companies covered in Prowess account for 75 percent of all

corporate taxes collected by the Government of India. The database is thus representative of large and
  21
    The CMIE is an independent economic center of India that provides services of primary data collection through analytics
and forecasting. Further information can be found at http://www.cmie.com/.


                                                            24
medium-sized Indian ﬁrms. As previously mentioned this dataset was already used in several studies on

the performance of Indian ﬁrms.22

       The dataset covers the period 1989-1997 and the information varies by year. It provides quantitative

information on sales, capital stock, income from ﬁnancial and non ﬁnancial sources, consumption of raw

material and energy, compensation to employees (wage-bill) and ownership group.23 This dataset allows

us to estimate ﬁrm total factor productivity (TFP) using the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) methodology.

The Prowess database provides detailed information on imports by category of goods: ﬁnished goods,

intermediate goods and capital goods. In our main empirical speciﬁcation, we use imports of capital

goods (machinery and equipment) to measure foreign technology. Although we are not able to test

directly for the impact of imported capital goods depending on the country of origin since the Prowess

dataset does not include the origin country of imported goods (e.g developed vs. developing countries),

one realistic assumption for the case of a developing country like India is that most imports of capital

goods are sourced from more advanced economies and thus, they are a good proxy of a modern and

high-technology. Looking at imports of capital goods at HS6 product level of India by country of origin

reveals that about 70% of their imports came from developed countries in the period 1989-1997.24

       Input-trade liberalization might also allow ﬁrms to access to high-quality inputs. Using detailed

ﬁrm-product level data for Colombia, Kugler and Verhoogen (2009) compare the price of domestic

and imported inputs and provides evidence that higher-quality inputs may be relatively more available

internationally. Due to data constraints, we are not able to look at the effects of input-liberalization on

quality up-grading. The Prowess database does not provide any information on quantities to compute

unit values as a proxy of quality of intermediate goods. Despite that we can not observe the quality of

intermediate goods, for imported capital goods we can infer that they are more advanced or of a higher
  22
     See Topalova and Khandelwal (2011), Topalova (2004), Goldberg et al. (2010), Goldberg et al. (2009), Alfaro and Chari
(2009), DeLoecker et al. (2016).
  23
     Variables are deﬂated with industry-speciﬁc wholesale price indices from India’s national accounts statistics.
  24
     We used the BACI database provided by the CEPII as well as the Broad Economic Categories (BEC) classiﬁcation of
HS6 products by intermediates, capital goods and consumption goods.




                                                           25
quality relative to domestic capital equipment goods produced in India since most of the imports of

capital goods come from developed economies.

       Our sample contains information for around 3,744 ﬁrms in organized industrial activities from man-

ufacturing sector for the period 1990-1997. Since we lagged control variables, our estimating sample

starts in 1990 and the total number of observations ﬁrm-year pairs is 14,425. In order to keep a con-

stant sample throughout the paper and to establish the stability of the point estimates, we keep ﬁrms that

report information on all the ﬁrm and industry level control variables. Although our panel of ﬁrms is

unbalanced, there is no statistical difference in the average ﬁrm characteristics between the initial year

and the ﬁnal year of our sample.




                                                  Input-tariff data


       To identify the impact of input-trade liberalization on ﬁrms’ foreign technology choice, we use input

tariffs at the 3-digit-NIC industry level. Tariffs data is provided by WITS (World Bank) and corresponds

to India’s effectively applied most favorite nation (MFN) import tariffs with respect to the Rest of The

World at the industry level ISIC (rev 2).25 In order to identify the effect of input tariff changes on

ﬁrms’ decision to import capital goods, we construct different tariffs measures for capital goods and for

variable intermediate goods. In this sense, we depart from previous studies on input-trade liberalization

to consider both variable inputs and capital goods in the construction of input tariffs.

       This methodology allows us to disentangle the indirect effects of tariffs on intermediate goods on

ﬁrms’ decision to import capital goods from the direct effects of tariffs on capital goods. For each 3-

digit industry, s, we generate a capital goods tariff as the weighted average of tariffs on the capital goods

used in the production of ﬁnal goods of that 3-digit industry, where the weights reﬂect the share of capital

goods of the ﬁnal goods industry on total expenditures in capital goods using India’s input-output matrix
  25
     We use correspondence tables to convert tariffs into ISIC rev 3.1. that match almost perfectly with NIC 3-digit classiﬁ-
cation. This dataset is available at http://wits.worldbank.org/wits/.


                                                            26
in 1993. We rely on ﬁxed input weights and a pre-sample year input-output matrix to avoid possible

endogeneity concerns between variations in input weights and industry and ﬁrm performance. Using

a disaggregated input-output matrix, 14 from a total of 52 industries are classiﬁed as capital goods.26

Similarly, for each industry, s, we generate an input tariff as the weighted average of tariffs on all the

other intermediate goods (excluding capital goods) used in the production of ﬁnal goods of that industry,

where the weights reﬂect the input industry’s share of the output industry’s total expenditures in other

inputs using India’s input-output matrix in 1993.

       We compute input (capital goods) tariffs as τst =              z   αzs τzt , where αzs is the value share of input

(capital) z in the production of output in the 3-digit industry s. Take for example an industry that uses

three different intermediate goods in the production of a ﬁnal good. Suppose that the intermediate goods

face a tariff of 5, 10 and 15 per cent, and value shares of 0.10, 0.30 and 0.60, respectively. Using this

methodology, the input tariff for this industry is 12.5 percent (5 ×0.10 + 10×0.30 + 15×0.60).




                                          Trade liberalization in India


       The main feature of trade reform in India was the substantial trade-integration process experienced

in the 1990s. In this section, we describe India’s trade liberalization process and the trade-policy instru-

ments that were applied.

       India’s trade policy during the 1970s and 1980s was characterized by the license raj. This trade

system was grounded on trade protection policies with an emphasis on import substitution. It was very

restrictive, with high levels of nominal tariffs and import licenses in almost all sectors.

       Unilateral trade-reform plan was launched in the early 1990s as a consequence of the debt crisis and

as a part of an IMF program. Trade liberalization was at the core of structural reforms launched during
  26
     Capital goods industries are tractors and agriculture machinery, industrial machinery, industrial machinery (others),
ofﬁce computing machines, other non-electrical machinery, electrical industrial machinery, communication equipments, other
electrical machinery, electronic equipments, ships and boats, rail equipments, motor vehicles motor cycles and other transport
equipments.


                                                             27
the ‘Eighth Five-Year Plan’ period from 1992 to 1997. Under this plan, gradual tariff cuts were applied

in all sectors at the same time that non-tariff barriers and licenses were removed. As Topalova and

Khandelwal (2011) emphasize after 1997 tariff changes were not as uniform and the issue of potential

endogeneity of trade protection might be present in the period of the ‘Ninth Five-Year Plan’. For this

reason, we restrict our analysis to the 1989-1997 period.

       During this period India also becomes a member of the WTO (World Trade Organization) in 1995.

One of the commitments of India when decides to join WTO is to continue the process of trade liberal-

ization started at the early 1990s. From 1995, India starts implementing Uruguay Round commitments

that were completed in 2005 (see India’s Trade Policy Review by WTO in 2007).

       Average input tariffs have declined by 27 percentage points during the period, while capital goods tar-

iffs were only slightly reduced by 10 percentage points. This descriptive evidence suggests that changes

in variable inputs and capital goods tariffs were heterogeneous. They were also weakly correlated.27

There is also signiﬁcant variation in movements in input tariffs by industry over the 1989-1997 period.

At the 2-digit industry level, industries that experienced the greatest input tariff cuts are cloth, plastic,

machinery, wood and paper (Figure A1 in the appendix). At the more disaggregated 3-digit industry

level there is even more variation in input tariffs.




                                      Exogenous input tariffs variations


       One of the challenges in the investigation of the relationship between input-tariff reductions and

ﬁrm decisions to upgrade foreign technology embodied in imported capital goods is potential reverse

causality between tariff changes and ﬁrms’ import choices which would bias our estimates.28 In this

case, changes in input tariffs could reﬂect some omitted industry characteristics.
  27
      The correlation between average output tariffs and input tariffs is 0.45 and between output and capital goods tariffs is
0.01.
   28
      Karacaovali (2011) shows theoretically and empirically how productivity at the industry level could affect tariff rates at
the sectoral level.


                                                              28
   One way of addressing this issue is to test whether tariff changes are exogenous to initial industry and

ﬁrm characteristics. Similar to previous works analyzing the effects of trade liberalization on different

ﬁrm performance measures, Topalova and Khandelwal (2011), we regress ﬁrst changes in input tariffs

on a number of industry characteristics computed as the size-weighted average of ﬁrms’ characteristics

in the initial year of our sample. Table A2 in the appendix shows the coefﬁcients on the change in input

tariffs and capital goods tariffs (1989-1997) on industry level regressions of initial industry characteris-

tics (sales, capital stock, wage-bill, imports of intermediates and capital goods) on these tariff changes.

The estimates conﬁrm that input tariff changes between 1989 and 1997 were uncorrelated with initial

industry-level outcomes in 1989. As such, it seems unlikely that ﬁrms producing in industries with

greater input-tariff cuts were able to lobby for these lower tariffs.

   Next, following the analysis of Goldberg et al. (2010) we provide additional evidence that input tariff

changes between 1989 and 1997 were uncorrelated with initial ﬁrm performance measures in 1989 that

we are considering in this analysis. Table A3 in the appendix shows estimates from regressing ﬁrm

characteristics in 1989 such as the importer status, the share of imported capital goods over total sales,

the logarithm of capital stock and ﬁrm TFP on the variation in input tariffs and capital goods tariffs across

industries between 1989 and 1997. Had the government targeted speciﬁc ﬁrms/industries during trade

liberalization, we would expect tariff changes to be correlated with initial ﬁrm performance. However,

the correlation is insigniﬁcant.

   This evidence suggests that the government did not take into account pre-reform trends in ﬁrms’

imports of capital goods and other performance measures when deciding to reduce tariff during trade

reform at the beginning of the 1990s.




                  Input tariff cuts and ﬁrm decision to import capital goods


   Using speciﬁc tariffs on inputs (different from capital goods tariffs), we investigate the relationship

                                                     29
between the availability of imported intermediate goods and ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade foreign tech-

nology embodied in imported capital goods. To test the ﬁrst implication of the model, we estimate the

probability that ﬁrm i imports capital goods in year t using the following linear probability model:




                  Importer(k )ist = γ1 Inputτs,t-1 + γ2 Zs,t-1 + γ3 Xi,t-1 + µi + υt +    ist (I )




    Here Importer(k )ist is a dummy variable for ﬁrm i producing in industry s having positive imports

of capital goods in year t. Input τ s, t-1 represents the input tariffs of industry s in year t − 1. We have

already shown that we rely on exogenous changes in tariffs that are not correlated with initial ﬁrm or

industry characteristics. Moreover, we use lagged tariffs values to ensure that contemporaneous ﬁrms’

decisions cannot affect past values of tariffs. Zs,t-1 is a set of industry level control variables and Xi,t-1 is a

set of ﬁrm level observable characteristics varying over time. All speciﬁcations include ﬁrm ﬁxed effects,

µi , that take into account unobservable and time-invariant ﬁrm characteristics and year ﬁxed effects that

control for macroeconomic shocks affecting all ﬁrms and industries in the same way, υt . Since tariffs

vary at the 3-digit industry level over time, the errors are corrected for clustering across 3-digit industry

level.

    As discussed above, input-tariff changes are not correlated with either initial ﬁrm characteristics

or industry characteristics during the period 1989-1997. To deal with additional concerns of reverse

causality and omitted variables, we introduce different control variables at the industry level which may

affect ﬁrms’ import decisions of capital goods and could reﬂect the effects of input-tariff changes. The

γ1 coefﬁcient on input tariffs might then simply be picking up the effects of variations of tariffs on

capital goods. The simple model presented in the previous section also predicts that the probability

of importing capital goods is a decreasing function of capital goods tariffs. Hence, we ﬁrst include

India’s import tariffs on capital goods to capture the direct effects of variations in tariffs affecting capital

equipement products on ﬁrms’ decision to import those capital goods. Second, all speciﬁcations also

                                                        30
include tariffs on ﬁnal goods. This variable captures foreign competition pressures. Finally, we also

include a Herﬁndahl index at the sectoral level to control for domestic competition. Note that in order

to keep the theoretical framework simple and rationalize the effects of input-tariff on foreign technology

adoption, the model abstracts from these competition channels. They should be, however, included in

the empirical estimation to avoid omitted variable concerns.

       Next, we also explicitly take into account changes in observable ﬁrm characteristics that could affect

ﬁrms’ import patterns. Using the same dataset, Bas and Berthou (2012) have found evidence on a

positive correlation between ﬁrms’ decision to import capital goods and ﬁrms’ capital intensity. We

therefore expect that non-importing Indian ﬁrms which experienced signiﬁcant growth in their capital

intensity during the period under analysis were more likely to import capital goods. Xi,t-1 is a set of

ﬁrm-level controls such as ﬁrms’ capital intensity and the age of the ﬁrm. The Prowess dataset contains

the year of creation of the ﬁrm that allows computing the age of the ﬁrm.29

       Table 3 shows the estimation results for equation (I) using a within-ﬁrm estimator. These results show

the impact of lower input tariffs on the decision to import capital goods. In column (1) the coefﬁcient

on the input tariffs is negative and signiﬁcant at the 1% conﬁdence level, indicating that the drop in

input tariffs between 1989 and 1997 increased the probability of importing capital goods. The estimated

input tariff coefﬁcient is robust to the inclusion of MFN tariffs for ﬁnal goods set India (column 2).

We also introduce tariffs on capital goods to be sure that the input tariffs are not just capturing the

effect of changes in direct tariffs of imported capital equipment products (column 2). Not surprisingly,

reductions in tariffs on capital goods enhance the probability of upgrading foreign technology embodied

in imported capital goods. More interesting, the inclusion of capital goods tariffs does not pick up the

indirect effect of reductions of tariffs on intermediate inputs. We next include additional industry and

ﬁrm-level variables to control for industry and ﬁrm observable characteristics that vary over time and

which could be related to input tariffs. The coefﬁcient of interest on input tariff is robust and stable
  29
       The Prowess dataset does not report consistent information on number of employees.



                                                             31
when we control for domestic competition measured by the Herﬁndahl index (column (3)), the age of

the ﬁrm and ﬁrm capital intensity (column (4)). The coefﬁcient on input-tariff changes remains negative,

signiﬁcant and stable, however. It is very similar in size to the estimations with only industry-level

controls shown in column (1).

       If the availability of foreign intermediate goods induces ﬁrms to start importing capital goods, we

would expect the effect of lower input-tariffs to be greater for ﬁrms that actually import intermediate

inputs. Columns (5) and (6) carry out this test. First, we inlcude a dummy variable equal to one if

the ﬁrm imports intermediate goods. Firms sourcing inputs from abroad are more likely to also import

capital goods (column 5) conﬁrming the previous descriptive evidence on technological complementarity

                                                               30
between imported inputs and foreign technology.                     Next, we introduce an interaction between input

tariff and importer of intermediate goods status (column (6)).

       Comparing the coefﬁcients of tariffs on capital goods with those on intermediate goods (column (6))

reveals that the indirect effect of input tariffs cuts on the probability of upgrading capital goods is of

a similar magnitude to the direct effect of reducing capital goods tariffs. The estimated coefﬁcient of

variable input tariff cuts implies that a 10 percentage point fall in input tariffs leads to 1.5% to almost

1.7% increase in the probability of importing capital goods for the average ﬁrm and for those actually

importing intermediate goods. Between 1989 and 1997, input tariffs declined on average by 27 percent-

age points, with an associated implied increase in the probability of importing capital goods of about 4.6

for the average ﬁrm importing intermediate goods. These ﬁndings suggest that the additional gains from

input-trade liberalization thanks to the complementarity channel of imported inputs and capital goods

are non negligible.
  30
    As previously mentioned, unfortunately the Indian ﬁrm level dataset does not allow us to test the quality upgrading
channel of imported inputs or to distinguish the country of origin of imports of intermediate goods in order to provide a better
assessment of the complementarity mechanism.




                                                              32
                           Table 3: Input-tariff liberalization and ﬁrms’ decision to import capital goods


                                             Dependent variable: dummy equal to one if the ﬁrm i imports capital goods in t.

                                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)           (4)              (5)                 (6)



Input tariff(s)(t-1)                                     -0.166***            -0.149**             -0.152**     -0.152**         -0.151**             -0.012

                                                           (0.056)             (0.060)             (0.060)       (0.060)          (0.069)             (0.078)

Input tariff(s)(t-1)× imported inputs>0                                                                                                              -0.170**

                                                                                                                                                      (0.066)

Capital goods tariff(s)(t-1)                                                  -0.165**             -0.168**     -0.170**          -0.168*            -0.173**

                                                                               (0.073)             (0.073)       (0.073)          (0.086)             (0.083)

Output tariff(s)(t-1)                                                          -0.057               -0.057        -0.053           -0.026             -0.030

                                                                               (0.047)             (0.047)       (0.047)          (0.041)             (0.040)

Herﬁndhal index(s)(t-1)                                                                             0.044         0.045            0.022               0.024

                                                                                                   (0.049)       (0.049)          (0.059)             (0.059)

Age(t-1)                                                                                                          -0.004           -0.016             -0.011

                                                                                                                 (0.028)          (0.033)             (0.034)

Capital intensity(t-1)                                                                                           0.013**          0.014**             0.015*

                                                                                                                 (0.006)          (0.007)             (0.007)

Imported inputs>0                                                                                                                0.333***            0.405***

                                                                                                                                  (0.028)             (0.041)



Firm ﬁxed effects                                            Yes                 Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes

Year ﬁxed effects                                            Yes                 Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes

Observations                                               14,680              14,680              14,680        14,680           14,680              14,680

R-squared                                                   0.036               0.036               0.036         0.036            0.093               0.094

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy for ﬁrm i having positive imports of capital goods in year t. Output tariff(s)(t-1) are MFN applied tariffs from

WITS-WB dataset at the 3 digit industry level and input and capital goods tariffs are constructed separately using these output tariffs and India 1993 input-

output matrix. Importer inputs is a dummy equal to one if the ﬁrm imports intermediate goods. Herﬁndahl index measures the concentration of sales of the

industry. Capital intensity is measured by capital stock over sales of the ﬁrm. The Prowess dataset reports the year of creation of the ﬁrm that allows to

construct the age of the ﬁrm. Heteroskedasticity-robust standards errors are reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry

level.   ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ ,   and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                             The heterogeneous effects of input tariff cuts


                                                                                       33
       The simple model presented in Section 3 shows that input-trade liberalization affects ﬁrms differently

according to their initial productivity. Most ﬁrms with a high-productivity level might already import

capital goods before input tariff cuts, while the least productive ﬁrms might not be able to afford the ﬁxed

cost of importing capital goods despite input tariff changes. The model predicts that ﬁrms using low-

technology before the reform that have a productivity level close to the high-technology productivity

cutoff will beneﬁt from input tariff reductions to face the sunk costs of importing capital goods. We

explore in this section whether the impact of input-tariff changes on ﬁrms’ decision to import capital

goods depends on previous ﬁrm productivity.

       To investigate the heterogeneous effect of input-trade liberalization on ﬁrms’ decision to import cap-

ital goods, we introduce interactions between input-tariff changes and quantiles of ﬁrms’ TFP in the

initial year of the sample. We rely on ﬁrm initial TFP to avoid potential endogeneity issues between ﬁrm

performance and imports of capital goods. Firms are divided up into three initial TFP quantiles with

the ﬁrst one representing the least productive ﬁrms (those ﬁrms with an initial TFP lower than the 33rd

percentile), the second group covers middle range initial productivity ﬁrms (between the 33rd and 66th

percentile) and the last group represents the high initial productivity ﬁrms (with an initial TFP higher

than the 66th percentile).31 We then interact input-tariff with the ﬁrms’ initial TFP quantiles. We estimate

the following linear probability model for the decision to import capital goods:


                                   4
             Importer(k )ist =          χρ (Inputτs,t−1 × Qρ
                                                           is ) + γ2 Zs,t-1 + γ3 Xi,t-1 + µi + υt +   ist (II )
                                  ρ=1


       Here Importer(k )ist is a dummy variable for ﬁrm i in 3-digit industry s having positive imports

of capital goods in year t. Firms are classiﬁed into three groups of initial TFP by ρ: Q1
                                                                                        is is a dummy


variable for ﬁrm i belonging to the group of the least productive ﬁrms and so on. Inputτs,t−1 × Qρ
                                                                                                 is


are the interaction terms between the three groups of ﬁrms’ TFP and input tariff. We include the same
  31
       Firm TFP is estimated using the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) methodology.




                                                            34
industry (output tariffs, capital goods tariffs and Herﬁndahl index) and ﬁrm-level (age, capital intensity

and the intermediate goods importer status) controls as in the previous estimations. The dummy variables

for each group of ﬁrm initial TFP are excluded from the estimation since they are collinear with the ﬁrm

ﬁxed effects.

   The estimation results for equation (II) are presented in Table 4. Note that in this speciﬁcation

we restrict the sample to ﬁrms that are present in the initial year and so the number of observations

is reduced. Column (1) reports as a benchmark the baseline estimates on the sample of ﬁrms that are

present in the initial year. Columns (2) to (4) introduce the interaction terms between input tariffs and

ﬁrms’ initial TFP quantiles. The impact of input tariffs on the probability of importing capital goods

is only signiﬁcant for ﬁrms in the middle range of the initial productivity distribution. This result is

consistent with the predictions of our model. Since ﬁrms faced ﬁxed sunk costs of importing capital

goods, only those ﬁrms that were not importing capital goods before the input-tariff reform and that

are productive enough to pay the importing ﬁxed costs are able to import capital goods thanks to the

reduction of input tariffs. The estimated coefﬁcient implies that the 27 percentage point fall in input

tariffs during the period leads to almost 10% increase in the probability of importing capital goods for

ﬁrms in the middle range of the initial productivity distribution.




                                                    35
Table 4: The heterogeneous effects of input-tariff liberalization on ﬁrms’ decision to import capital goods


                                         Dependent variable: dummy equal to one if the ﬁrm i imports capital goods in t.

                                                                 (1)                           (2)                           (3)                            (4)



Input tariff(s)(t-1)                                           -0.201*

                                                               (0.102)

Input tariff(s)(t-1)× Low initial TFP                                                        -0.111                        -0.145                         -0.149

                                                                                             (0.111)                       (0.105)                       (0.104)

Input tariff(s)(t-1)× Medium initial TFP                                                   -0.315***                     -0.345***                      -0.346***

                                                                                             (0.110)                       (0.104)                       (0.103)

Input tariff(s)(t-1)× High initial TFP                                                       -0.043                        -0.067                         -0.058

                                                                                             (0.164)                       (0.146)                       (0.151)

Capital goods tariff(s)(t-1)                                   -0.181*                       -0.150                        -0.170*                       -0.176*

                                                               (0.095)                       (0.108)                       (0.096)                       (0.095)

Output tariff(s)(t-1)                                          -0.040                        -0.055                        -0.041                         -0.033

                                                               (0.047)                       (0.052)                       (0.048)                       (0.051)

Imported inputs>0                                             0.344***                                                    0.344***                      0.344***

                                                               (0.029)                                                     (0.029)                       (0.029)

Age(t-1)                                                        0.022                                                                                     0.031

                                                               (0.057)                                                                                   (0.061)

Capital intensity(t-1)                                          0.018                                                                                     0.019

                                                               (0.012)                                                                                   (0.012)

Herﬁndhal index(s)(t-1)                                         0.004                                                                                     0.013

                                                               (0.067)                                                                                   (0.069)

Firm ﬁxed effects                                                Yes                           Yes                           Yes                           Yes

Year ﬁxed effects                                                Yes                           Yes                           Yes                           Yes

Observations                                                    7,861                         7,861                         7,861                         7,861

R-squared                                                       0.087                         0.038                         0.088                         0.088

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy for ﬁrm i having positive imports of capital goods in year t. Input tariff(s)(t-1) are interacted with quartiles of

ﬁrm TFP in the initial year of the sample. Firm TFP is estimated using the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) methodology. All control variables are deﬁned in

table 3. Industry control variables (output tariffs, capital goods tariffs and the Herﬁndahl index) are included in all speciﬁcations. Heteroskedasticity-robust

standards errors are reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry level.∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and

10 percent levels respectively.




                                               VI. ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS

                                                                                36
       There are other potential explanations for the incentives of Indian ﬁrms to upgrade foreign technology

embodied in imported capital goods over the 1989-1997 period, with the input-trade liberalization being

one of them. In this section, we discuss and examine three alternative explanations: (i) other reforms

that took place in India during this period, (ii) learning effects, (iii) foreign demand shocks (export-

channel) and (iv) ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial health. First we describe our strategies to take into account these

alternative factors in the estimations. We then present evidence showing that our previous ﬁndings

remain stable when including these factors suggesting that the input tariff cuts channel is an important

factor determining ﬁrms’ foreign technology upgrading decision.




                                             Other reforms in India


       During the 1990s India has experienced structural reforms in several areas of the economy. In order

to test if the coefﬁcient on input tariffs is picking up the effects of other reforms that took place in India,

we carry out alternative sensitivity tests.

       Table A4 in the appendix presents the results. The benchmark estimation presented in column (5)

of table 3 is reported in column (1). Next, we include in column (2) industry-year ﬁxed effects to take

into account all unobservable characteristics varying over time that could affect industries. In this case

only the interaction term between input tariff and the importer of intermediate goods status variable is

included. The coefﬁcient of the interaction term is negative and signiﬁcant, and the magnitude is slightly

smaller relative to the one found in the baseline speciﬁcation reported in column (1).32

       Since other reforms like labor market regulations were introduced at the beginning of the 1990s at the

State level, we introduce region-year ﬁxed effects to control for unobservable characteristics affecting

the 21-Indian states in columns (3) and (4). As can be seen the coefﬁcient of interest on input tariffs and

on the interaction term between input tariffs and the initial quartiles of ﬁrm TFP remain robust and stable
  32
     Note that in the speciﬁcation in which we include industry-year and ﬁrm ﬁxed effects in column (2), the effect of input
tariff and initial quantiles of ﬁrm TFP will be completely subsumed by the ﬁxed effects.


                                                            37
to the inclusion of region-year ﬁxed effects. The point estimates of input tariffs remain robust relative to

the ones presented in the baseline speciﬁcations in Table 3 and 4.

       Overall, these results conﬁrm that our previous ﬁndings do not suffer from omitted variables bias

related to other policy-reforms that took place in India.




                                                    Learning effects


       Learning by importing channel could also explain the relationship between input trade liberalization

and foreign technology upgrading in imports of capital goods. Firms that import intermediate inputs

might learn about sourcing countries and providers and it is easier for them to start importing capital

goods with the new information acquired than ﬁrms that face foreign sellers for the ﬁrst time. Note that

testing directly this mechanism requieres further information on the country of origin of imports that is

not available for the Indian dataset.

       We present here a test for this channel that relies on past import experience on intermediate goods as

a proxy of learning effects. The previous speciﬁcation is extended to include an interaction term between

intermediate good tariff with the number of prior years in which the ﬁrm imported intermediate goods.

Results are presented in columns (5) and (6) of Table A4 in the appendix. The coefﬁcient measuring past

import experience is positive but not signiﬁcant and the interaction term with input tariffs is negative

but also not signiﬁcant. Nevertheless, this alternative channel is not picking up the effects of our main

variable of interest: input tariffs cuts have still signiﬁcant effect on the probability of importing capital

goods on average and mainly ﬁrms in the middle range of the productivity distribution beneﬁt from

input-tariffs liberalization to upgrade foreign technology in imported capital goods.33




                                               Foreign demand shocks
  33
       We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this test.


                                                                 38
   In the simple theoretical framework presented in Section 3, we emphasize the imported input channel

as the main mechanism through which trade liberalization affects ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade foreign

technology. For the sake of simplicity we did not take into account the export side of the story and

the effects of trade liberalization through variations in trade variable costs affecting ﬁnal goods that are

already well-documented in the theoretical literature (Yeaple, 2005; Bustos, 2011).

   Expansion of export opportunities due to foreign demand shocks might also increase the incentives

for ﬁrms’ to upgrade foreign technology embodied in imported capital goods. Moreover, importing

intermediate inputs might lead to higher exports as documented in the empirical literature (Feng et al.,

2016; Bas, 2012; Bas and Strauss-Kahn, 2015). Higher export proﬁts would allow to overcome the ﬁxed

cost of importing capital goods. If input tariff changes are positively correlated with export performance

or with variations in output tariffs set by India’s trading partners, our previous empirical ﬁndings might

be just picking up the effects of foreign demand shocks.

   The industry-year ﬁxed effects included in the estimations of the previous section already address

this issue since they capture all unobservable shocks at the industry level varying over time. In this

section, we provide additional evidence that foreign demand shocks at the sectoral level captured by

export tariffs are not picking up our results. We control for this alternative explanation by including

in the previous speciﬁcations the average effectively applied tariff at the 3-digit NIC industry level set

by the rest of the world to India (export tariff) during the 1989-1997 period from WITS dataset (World

Bank). Columns (1) to (3) of Table A5 in the appendix report the results. The effect of export tariff

is negative but not signiﬁcant. The coefﬁcient of interest on the input tariffs remains robust and stable

in all speciﬁcations when we take into account the role of foreign demand. This ﬁnding suggests that

the supply side mechanism emphasized in this paper is also an important channel through which trade

liberalization affects technology upgrading.




                                       Firms’ ﬁnancial health

                                                    39
   In a previous work, we have shown that ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial health is an important determinant of ﬁrms’

decision to import capital goods in India (Bas and Berthou, 2012). We investigate whether the previous

ﬁndings are not driven by an omitted variable bias related to ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial health. The previous esti-

mations are extended to include lagged values of the leverage ratio (borrowings over total assets) of the

ﬁrm. Columns (4) to (6) of Table A5 in the appendix present the ﬁndings. As in our previous study,

we ﬁnd that ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial health is an important determinant of ﬁrms’ decision to upgrade foreign

technology. Nevertheless, our coefﬁcient of interest on input tariffs is not affected by the inclusion of

ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial variables.




                               VII. OTHER ROBUSTNESS TESTS




                         The decision to start importing capital goods


   We explore the robustness of our baseline speciﬁcation when we restrict our sample to ﬁrms that

have not imported capital goods in the previous years. The estimates from linear probability estimations

of equation (I) and (II) with ﬁrm and year ﬁxed effects for the restricted sample of ﬁrms that have not

imported capital goods in the previous year or two years are reported in Table 5.




                                                   40
                                          Table 5: The decision to start importing capital goods


                                         Dependent variable: dummy equal to one if the ﬁrm i imports capital goods in t.

                                                                  (1)                          (2)                          (3)                                (4)

                                                                          Non importer in                                           Non importer in

                                                                           the last year                                            the last two years



Input tariff(s)(t-1)                                           -0.210**                                                  -0.249*

                                                                (0.099)                                                   (0.133)

Output tariff(s)(t-1)                                           0.069                        0.088                         0.083                              0.094

                                                                (0.046)                     (0.065)                       (0.060)                            (0.077)

Capital goods tariff(s)(t-1)                                   -0.248**                     -0.234*                      -0.376**                           -0.443**

                                                                (0.118)                     (0.124)                       (0.172)                            (0.201)

Input tariff(s)(t-1) × Low initial TFP                                                       -0.262                                                           -0.289

                                                                                            (0.153)                                                          (0.182)

Input tariff(s)(t-1) × Medium initial TFP                                                   -0.304**                                                        -0.393**

                                                                                            (0.127)                                                          (0.186)

Input tariff(s)(t-1) × High initial TFP                                                      -0.082                                                           -0.269

                                                                                            (0.155)                                                          (0.187)



Herﬁndahl index(s)(t-1)                                          Yes                          Yes                           Yes                                Yes

Firm level controls                                              Yes                          Yes                           Yes                                Yes

Firm ﬁxed effects                                                Yes                          Yes                           Yes                                Yess

Year ﬁxed effects                                                Yes                          Yes                           Yes                                Yes

Observations                                                    9,228                        4,245                         5,439                              2,758

R-squared                                                       0.029                        0.031                         0.056                              0.066

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy for ﬁrm i having positive imports of capital goods in year t. All control variables are deﬁned in table 3.

Heteroskedasticity-robust standards errors are reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry level.   ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ ,   and ∗ indicate

signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




      In these cases, the coefﬁcients on input tariff are higher compared to the baseline speciﬁcation. We

should keep in mind that this could be due to the reduction of the sample size to half from 14,425 to

around 9,200 or 5,500 observations.



                                                         The role of ﬁrm ownership

                                                                               41
   In this section, we investigate if ﬁrms’ ownership is driving our previous results. Previous studies on

multinational ﬁrms show that foreign ﬁrms in developing countries tend to use more advanced technolo-

gies and be more productive relative to domestic ﬁrms (Javorcik, 2004). In general, the fact that foreign

companies are more efﬁcient and use more advanced technology could potentially explain our results.

Foreign afﬁliates might beneﬁt more from input tariff changes to upgrade foreign technology embodied

in imported capital goods since they have connections with foreign headquarters located abroad. In order

to address this issue, we carry out two different tests.

   First, we test for the possibility that foreign spillovers are driving our ﬁndings: if multinational com-

panies beneﬁt the most from input-trade liberalization there could also be foreign technology transfer

to domestic ﬁrms. We include in the previous speciﬁcation a variable measuring the number of foreign

afﬁliates in the region (Indian state) and industry where the ﬁrm is producing and an interaction term

between this variable and input tariffs. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 present the results. The presence

of multinational afﬁliates increases the probability that Indian ﬁrms upgrade their technology and the in-

teraction term suggests that input tariffs cuts have a greater effect on ﬁrms located in states and industries

that have experienced an increase in the number of foreign afﬁliates (column 1). Once we control for this

potential alternative explanation, our coefﬁcient of interest on input tariffs alone is lower in magnitude

but still signiﬁcant and negative. Moreover, the heterogeneous effect of input tariff cuts depending on

ﬁrms’ initial TFP is robust and stable (column 2).

   Second, we exclude from our sample multinational ﬁrms in columns (3) and (4) of Table 6. Our

coefﬁcients of interest on input tariff (column (3)) and on the interaction term between input tariff and

the initial ﬁrm TFP quantile (column (4)) remain robust when we restrict the sample to domestic ﬁrms,

suggesting that input-trade liberalization matters for non-multinational ﬁrms.




                                                     42
                                                      Table 6: The role of ﬁrm ownership


                                         Dependent variable: dummy equal to one if the ﬁrm i imports capital goods in t.

                                                       (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)                    (6)

                                                             MNF spillovers                   Without MNF ﬁrms                              Private ﬁrms



Input tariff(s)(t-1) x MNF(r,s,t)                   -0.086*             -0.072

                                                    (0.044)             (0.058)

MNF(r,s,t)                                           0.057*              0.070

                                                    (0.034)             (0.044)

Input tariff(s)(t-1)                                -0.119*                               -0.185**                                -0.150**

                                                    (0.070)                                (0.081)                                (0.067)

Input tariff(s)(t-1) × Low initial TFP                                  -0.130                                 -0.205                                  -0.163

                                                                        (0.107)                               (0.119)                                  (0.105)

Input tariff(s)(t-1) × Middle initial TFP                              -0.323***                             -0.416***                               -0.340***

                                                                        (0.106)                               (0.115)                                  (0.103)

Input tariff(s)(t-1) × High initial TFP                                 -0.025                                 -0.089                                  -0.039

                                                                        (0.158)                               (0.161)                                  (0.143)

Capital goods and output tariff(s)(t-1)               Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes

Herﬁndahl index(s)(t-1)                               Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes

Industry level controls                               Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes

Firm level controls                                   Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes

Firm ﬁxed effects                                     Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes

Year ﬁxed effects                                     Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes

Observations                                         14,680              7,861             13,300              6,817               14,247                  7,593

R-squared                                            0.094               0.089             0.097               0.093               0.096                   0.091

Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy for ﬁrm i having positive imports of capital goods in year t. MNF(r,s,t) is the logarithm of the number of foreign

afﬁliates located in the same region (r) and industry (s). All other control variables are deﬁned in table 3. Heteroskedasticity-robust standards errors are

reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry level.∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels

respectively.




      Moreover, previous works using the same ﬁrm-level dataset have emphasized the role of state-owned

ﬁrms relative to private companies in India (Topalova, 2004; Alfaro and Chari, 2009). One could argue

that state-owned companies might have a greater lobby power to induce the government to reduce tariff

on those goods that they use as intermediate ones in the production of ﬁnal goods. In order to address

                                                                                  43
this issue, we restrict the sample to private ﬁrms in columns (5) and (6). The point estimates of input

tariff (column (5)) and the interaction term between input tariff and the initial ﬁrm TFP quantile (column

(6)) remain robust and stable for the sample of private ﬁrms.




            VIII. ADDITIONAL GAINS FROM INPUT-TRADE LIBERALIZATION

       The previous results show that lower tariffs on intermediate inputs increases the probability of im-

porting capital goods, in addition to the direct effect of lowering tariffs on capital goods. Those ﬁndings

suggest that the potential gains from trade liberalization might be larger than in previous studies when

one takes into account the additional gains from input tariff cuts on the decision to import capital goods

(the indirect channel). This section discusses the additional gains at the ﬁrm level of input-trade liberal-

ization thanks to the complementarity channel between variable foreign inputs and capital goods.




                          The intensive margin of imports of capital goods


       If imports of intermediate goods are complementary with imports of capital goods, we expect that

input tariff reductions will also enhance larger volumes of imports of capital goods. One concern that

arises in the estimation of the determinants of the intensive margin of imports of capital goods is that

this variable is observed only over some interval of its support. An OLS estimation of the logarithm

of imports of capital goods will exclude the zero import values leading to sample-selection bias and

inconsistent parameter estimates as the censored sample is not representative of the entire sample of

Indian ﬁrms.

       To address this issue we present Tobit estimates with imports of capital goods shares on the left-hand

side explicitly taking censoring into account by considering the zero values as a left-censored.34 Tobit
  34
     The predicted values from Tobit estimations account for the lower limit of the censored data. We should keep in mind
that Tobit estimation relies on the assumption of homoskedastic normally-distributed errors for consistency.



                                                           44
models with individual ﬁxed effects have an incidental parameters problem, and are generally biased

(Greene 2003). We thus report results from both pooled Tobit, without unobserved effects, and random

effects Tobit.35 Table 7 presents the results. Columns (1) and (2) show the marginal effects at the sample

mean from pooled Tobit estimation of tariffs on imports of capital goods shares and columns (3) and (4)

report the results from random-effects Tobits. The coefﬁcient of interest on input tariffs is negative and

signiﬁcant in all speciﬁcations implying that input-trade liberalization increases the share of imports of

capital goods.

              Table 7: Input-trade liberalization and the intensive margin of imports of capital goods


                                Dependent variable: the share of imported capital goods over total imports of the ﬁrm i in t.

                                                              (1)                          (2)                                  (3)                            (4)

                                                                       Pooled Tobit                                                   Random effects Tobit



Input tariff(s)(t-1)                                      -0.378***                     -0.362***                       -0.218***                        -0.225***

                                                           (0.066)                       (0.066)                          (0.064)                            (0.064)



Capital goods and output tariff(s)(t-1)                      Yes                           Yes                              Yes                               Yes

Random effects                                                                                                              Yes                               Yes

Industry ﬁxed effects                                                                                                       Yes                               Yes

Year ﬁxed effects                                            Yes                           Yes                              Yes                               Yes

Observations                                                10,800                       10,800                           10,800                             10,800

log likelihood                                              -5533                         -5412                            -4457                             -4436

Sigma u                                                     0.352                         0.348                            0.267                             0.261

Sigma e                                                                                                                    0.264                             0.264

Notes: The dependent variable is the share of imported capital goods over total sales of the ﬁrm i in year t. All speciﬁcations include capital goods and output

tariffs and the Herﬁndahl index. Columns (2) and (4) also include ﬁrm-level controls. All control variables are deﬁned in table 3. Heteroskedasticity-robust

standards errors are reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry level.   ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ ,   and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5

and 10 percent levels respectively.




   35
    In the random effects Tobit, ﬁrm unobserved heterogeneity is assumed to be part of the composite error. Random-effects
Tobits are unbiased if ﬁrm characteristics are exogenous (uncorrelated with the regressors). Honore (1992) has developed
a semiparametric method dealing with this issue which captures unobserved time-invariant individual heterogeneity. He
proposes a trimmed least squares estimator of censored regression models. Nevertheless, this semiparametric estimator for
ﬁxed-effect Tobits is not suitable here due to the relatively small sample size.


                                                                              45
             Input-trade liberalization, ﬁrm proﬁtability, sales and electricity


    Next, we explore the relationship between input-tariff cuts and other ﬁrm outcomes such as ﬁrms’

proﬁts, sales and electricity consumption. Previous literature has already shown that India’s trade lib-

eralization yields to larger gains from new imported varieties of intermediate goods (Goldberg et al.

(2010)).

    The simple theoretical model presented in Section 3 emphasizes that input-tariff reductions allow

ﬁrms to increase their proﬁts and sales to afford the high-technology. We thus estimate equation (I)

with the logarithm of ﬁrms’ proﬁts and sales as dependent variables and we include an interaction term

between input tariffs and a dummy variable equal to one when the ﬁrm imports capital goods. Since the

estimation includes ﬁrm and year ﬁxed effects, the coefﬁcient on the interaction term captures the effect

of input tariff cuts on ﬁrms’ proﬁts and sales for ﬁrms that start importing capital goods. Table 8 presents

the results. Columns (1) and (3) show that ﬁrms that upgrade their foreign technology embodied in

imports of capital goods increase their sales and proﬁts as predicted by the model. Input-tariff reductions

lead to greater sales and proﬁts for ﬁrms that start importing capital goods of about 4% (columns (2) and

(4)).




                                                    46
                                       Table 8: Additional gains from input-trade liberalization


                                            Dependent variable: logarithm of proﬁts or sales or electricity of ﬁrm i in t.

                                                            (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)                (6)

                                                                   Proﬁts                                Sales                     Electricity consumption



Importer capital goods                                  0.128***            0.308***          0.098***           0.268***        0.091***           0.213***

                                                         (0.025)             (0.057)           (0.010)            (0.029)         (0.011)            (0.027)

Input tariff(s)(t-1) × Importer capital goods                               -0.427***                            -0.409***                          -0.297***

                                                                             (0.123)                              (0.055)                            (0.057)

Input tariff(s)(t-1)                                                         -0.200                                0.169                             -0.194*

                                                                             (0.308)                              (0.113)                            (0.106)



Capital goods and output tariff(s)(t-1)                    Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes

Herﬁndahl index(s)(t-1)                                    Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes

Industry level controls                                    Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes

Firm level controls                                        Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes

Firm ﬁxed effects                                          Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes

Year ﬁxed effects                                          Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes

Observations                                              11,945             11,945            14,680             14,680          14,662             14,662

R-squared                                                 0.178               0.182             0.604              0.607           0.708              0.709



Notes: The dependent variable is the logarithm of ﬁrms’ proﬁts (columns 1 and 2) or sales (columns 3 and 4) in year t. All control variables are deﬁned in

table 3. Heteroskedasticity-robust standards errors are reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry level.∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and

∗ indicate   signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




        Finally, we test the assumption that Indian ﬁrms are upgrading their technology by importing capital

goods. More advanced technologies are more likely to be reliant on electricity. Thereby, we expect that

Indian ﬁrms increase their consumption of electricity as a result of input tariff cuts and importing capital

goods. Columns (5) and (6) of Table 8 show that this was indeed the case.36




   36
        We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this test.


                                                                                 47
                                  IX. CONCLUDING REMARKS


    The main contribution of this paper to the literature on the micro-economic effects of input-trade

liberalization on ﬁrm performance is to investigate the efﬁciency gains from input tariff cuts on ﬁrms’

decision to source capital goods from abroad.

    We motivate our empirical analysis with a simple theoretical model of heterogeneous ﬁrms that

explains the channels through which changes on tariff on intermediate goods might affect ﬁrms’ de-

cision to upgrade foreign technology in imported capital goods. Assuming that imported intermediate

inputs and foreign-technology are complementary and ﬁxed costs of technology upgrading, the model

predicts a positive effect of reductions of tariff on intermediate goods on ﬁrms’ choice to adopt a foreign-

technology. The impact of input-trade liberalization is heterogeneous across ﬁrms depending on their

initial productivity level.

    Using Indian ﬁrm-level data and the trade liberalization episode at the early 1990s, we test the main

implications of the model. Our ﬁndings demonstrate that the probability of importing capital goods

is higher for ﬁrms producing in industries that have experienced greater cuts on tariff on intermediate

goods. Looking at the heterogeneous effect of input-trade liberalization, we ﬁnd that only those ﬁrms in

the middle range of the productivity distribution have beneﬁted from input tariff cuts as predicted by the

model. These empirical ﬁndings are robust to alternative speciﬁcations that control for imported capital

goods tariffs, other reforms, and industry and ﬁrm characteristics.




                                                    48
References

Alfaro, L. and Chari, A. (2009). India transformed? insights from the ﬁrm level 1988-2005. India Policy

  Forum 6.


Amiti, M. and Davis, R. (2012). Trade, ﬁrms, and wages: Theory and evidence. Review of Economic

  Studies, 79:1–36.


Amiti, M. and Konings, J. (2007). Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs, and productivity: Evidence

  from indonesia. American Economic Review, 97(5):1611–1638.


Aw, B., Roberts, M., and Xu, D. (2011). R&d investment, exporting, and productivity dynamics. Amer-

  ican Economic Review, 101:1312–44.


Bas, M. (2012). Input-trade liberalization and ﬁrm export decisions: Evidence from argentina. Journal

  of Development Economics, 97:481–493.


Bas, M. and Berthou, A. (2012). The decision to import capital goods in india: Firms’ ﬁnancial factors

  matter. World Bank Economic Review, 26(3):486–513.


Bas, M. and Ledezma, I. (2015). Trade liberalization and heterogeneous technology adoption. Review

  of International Economics, 23(2):738–781.


Bas, M. and Strauss-Kahn, V. (2015). Input-trade liberalization, export prices and quality upgrading.

  Journal of International Economics, 95(2).


Boler, E., Moxnes, A., and Ulltveit-Moe, K. (2015). R&d, international sourcing and the joint impact on

  ﬁrm performance, forthcoming. American Economic Review.


Bombarda, P. and Gamberoni, E. (2013). Heterogeneous ﬁrms, rules of origin and rules of cumulation.

  International Economic Review, 54(1):307–328.


                                                  49
Bustos, P. (2011). Trade liberalization, exports and technology upgrading: Evidence on the impact of

  mercosur on argentinean ﬁrms. American Economic Review, 101:304–340.


Costantini, J. and Melitz, M. (2008). The dynamics of ﬁrm-level adjustment to trade liberalization.

  in Helpmann, E., Marin, D. and Verdier, T. (eds) The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy

  (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press), pages 107–141.


DeLoecker, J., Goldberg, P. K., Khandelwal, A. K., and Pavcnik, N. (2016). Prices, markups and trade

  reform. Econometrica, 84(2).


Eaton, J. and Kortum, S. (2001). Trade in capital goods. European Economic Review, 45(7):1195 –

  1235.


Ethier, W. (1979). Internationally decreasing costs and world trade. Journal of International Economics,

  9:1–24.


Ethier, W. (1982). National and international returns to scale in the modern theory of international trade.

  The American Economic Review, 72:389–405.


Feng, L., Li, Z., and Swenson, D. (2016). The connection between imported intermediate inputs and

  exports: Evidence from chinese ﬁrms. 101:86–101. Journal of International Economics.


Fernandes, A., Ghani, E., , OConnell, S., and Sharma, G. (2012). Sourcing and sophistication decisions:

  Input choice by indian manufacturing. Mimeo.


Goh, A.-T. and Olivier, J. (2002). Learning by doing, trade in capital goods and growth. Journal of

  International Economics, 56(2):411–444.


Goldberg, P., Khandelwal, A., Pavcnik, N., and Topalova, P. (2009). Trade liberalization and new im-

  ported inputs. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99(2):494–500.



                                                    50
Goldberg, P. K., Khandelwal, A. K., Pavcnik, N., and Topalova, P. (2010). Imported intermediate

  inputs and domestic product growth: Evidence from india. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

  125(4):1727–1767.


Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. (1991). Innovation and growth in the global economy. Cambridge, MA:

  MIT.


Hallak, J. and Sivadasan, J. (2013). Firms’ exporting behavior under quality constraints. Journal of

  International Economics, 91(1):53–67.


Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2015). Imported inputs and productivity. American Economic Review,

  105(12):3660–3703.


Javorcik, B. S. (2004). Does foreign direct investment increase the productivity of domestic ﬁrms? in

  search of spillovers through backward linkages. American Economic Review, 94(3):605–627.


Karacaovali, B. (2011). Productivity matters for trade policy: Theory and evidence. International

  Economic Review, 52 (1):33–62.


Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008). Does the use of imported intermediates increase productivity? plant-

  level evidence. Journal of Development Economics, 87:106–118.


Kasahara, H. and Lapham, B. (2013). Productivity and the decision to import and export: Theory and

  evidence. Journal of International Economics, 89(2):297–316.


Kugler, M. and Verhoogen, E. (2009). Plants and imported inputs: New facts and an interpretation.

  American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99(2):501–507.


Kugler, M. and Verhoogen, E. (2011). Prices, plant size, and product quality. Review of Economic

  Studies, pages 1–33.



                                                 51
Lee, J.-W. (1995). Capital goods imports and long-run growth. Journal of Development Economics,

  48(1):91 – 110.


Levinsohn, J. and Petrin, A. (2003). Estimating production functions using inputs to control for unob-

  servables. Review of Economic Studies, 70(2):317–341.


Lileeva, A. and Treﬂer, D. (2010). Improved access to foreign markets raises plant-level productivity ...

  for some plants. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125:1051–1099.


Melitz, M. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and agregate industry productivity.

  Econometrica, 71:1695–1725.


Rivera-Batiz, L. and Romer, P. (1991). International trade with endogenous technological change. Eu-

  ropean Economic Review, 35(4):971–1001.


Schor (2004). Heterogeneous productivity response to tariff reduction: evidence from brazilian manu-

  facturing ﬁrms. Journal of Development Economics, 75:373–396.


Topalova, P. (2004). Overview of the indian corporate sector: 1989-2002. IMF Working Papers 04/64.


Topalova, P. and Khandelwal, A. (2011). Trade liberalization and ﬁrm productivity: The case of india.

  93(3):995–1009. The Review of Economics and Statistics.


Venables, A. (1996). Equilibrium location of vertically linked industries. International Economic Re-

  view, 37:341–359.


Verhoogen, E. (2008). Trade, quality upgrading and wage inequality in the mexican manufacturing

  sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123:489–530.


Xu, B. and Wang, J. (1999). Capital goods trade and r&d spillovers in the oecd. Canadian Journal of

  Economics, 32(5):1258–1274.



                                                   52
Yeaple, S. (2005). A simple model of ﬁrm heterogeneity, international trade and wages. Journal of

    International Economics, 65:1–20.




A      Appendix

Aggregation


The low-technology average productivity level ϕl and the ex-ante weighted average productivity level of

high-foreign-technology ﬁrms ϕh is given by:




                                                                                                  1
                                  ϕ∗
                1                  h                                 1        1 − ξ −k+φ−1      σ −1

    ϕl ≡                               (ϕ)σ−1 g (ϕ)dϕ = ϕ∗
                                                         lυ
                                                                   σ −1
                                                                                                          if ϕ∗        ∗
                                                                                                              l ≤ ϕ < ϕh
            ∗
         G(ϕh ) − G(ϕ∗
                     l)          ϕ∗
                                  l
                                                                                1 − ξ −k




                                       ∞                                 1
                    1                                                  σ −1
           ϕh ≡                            (ϕ)σ−1 g (ϕ)dϕ = ϕ∗
                                                             hυ                                          if ϕ ≥ ϕ∗
                                                                                                                 h
                1 − G(ϕ∗
                       h)             ϕ∗
                                       h

                                                                           1
                                                  1
                                                σ −1
                                                            1−σ           1−σ
                    k                      fh          ch
     where υ =   k−(σ −1)
                            and ξ =        f           cl
                                                                  −1            .


     The ex-post average productivity of high-foreign-technology ﬁrms takes into account the increase

in the ﬁrms’ efﬁciency due to the acquisition of the more advanced technology complementary with

imported intermediate inputs. The adoption of the high technology allows these ﬁrms to reduce their
                                                                              1−σ
                                                                       ch
unit costs and raise their market shares by this term                  cl
                                                                                     . Notice that average revenues of high-
                                                                                      1−σ
                                                                                ch
technology ﬁrms can be expressed as rh (ϕh ) = rl (ϕh )                         cl
                                                                                            . Therefore, the weighted average

productivity index of the industry ϕT represents the market shares of all types of ﬁrms: ϕT σ−1 =
                                 1−σ
1
M
     Ml (ϕl )σ−1 + Mh       ch
                            cl
                                       (ϕh )σ−1 .

     The number of ﬁrms producing with low technology Ml = ρl M and those producing with high

technology Mh = ρh M are determined by the total number of ﬁrms M and the probabilities of using

                                                              53
                                      1−G(ϕ∗
                                           h)            ∗ −k
low and high technology. ρh =         1−G(ϕ∗
                                                 = (ϕ∗
                                                     h /ϕl )  and ρl = 1 − ρh . The low- and high-technology
                                           l)


average productivity levels and the aggregate productivity index deﬁne all the aggregate variables.


    The price index of the industry is determined by:



                                       ϕ∗
                                        h                                  ∞
                     P   1−σ
                               = Ml         (pl )1−σ µl (ϕ)dϕ + Mh              (ph )1−σ µh (ϕ)dϕ =
                                      ϕ∗
                                       l                                  ϕ∗
                                                                           h




                                      1−σ                                           1−σ
                                σ                           σ −1               ch
                                             c1
                                              l
                                                −σ
                                                     Ml (ϕl )      + Mh                   (ϕh )σ−1
                               σ−1                                             cl




                                                                                                                1−σ
                                                                                                        σ cl
    Using the aggregate productivity ϕT , the price index can be expressed as P 1−σ = M               σ −1 ϕT
                                                                                                                      =


M p (ϕT )σ−1 .




Proof. of the equilibrium survival productivity cutoff



FE (8) and ZCP (9) conditions jointly determine the equilibrium cutoff level (ϕ∗
                                                                               l ). In order to obtain this


cutoff, we use the technology productivity cutoff, the average productivity for low-and high-technology

(ϕl , ϕh ) ﬁrms and the probability of using low- and high-technology (ρl , ρh ). The equilibrium cutoff

level (ϕ∗
        l ) is given by:




                                        ϕ∗                             ∞
         ϕ∗l
             k
                     1         1         h

          k
               δfe =             Ml          rl (ϕ)µl (ϕ)dϕ + Mh           rh (ϕ)µh (ϕ)dϕ − M f − Mh fh
         ϕmin        M         σ       ϕ∗                             ϕ∗
                                                                       h




                                                                                        1−σ σ −1
    Solving for low and high technology revenues and using Ml = ρl M, Mh = ρh M, rl = Acl  ϕi , rh =

                                                            54
   −σ σ −1
Ac1
  h ϕi     and using equation (5), to determine A, so as to express average proﬁts as a function of the

productivity cutoff, yields:



                                                  σ −1                     σ −1             σ −1
                        ϕ∗l
                            k
                                            ϕl                       cl              ϕh
                              δfe =    ρl                + ρh                                      − 1 f − ρ h fh
                        ϕk
                         min                ϕ∗
                                             l                       ch              ϕ∗
                                                                                      l




       By substituting the average productivity for low-and high-technology ϕl , ϕh and using the high-

productivity cutoff deﬁned in equation (7), yields:




                                                                                      k                      
                                                                                                   −k
                                                                     1−σ             σ −1
                                                                                                   σ −1
                                                                ch                          fh
                                               f +             cl
                                                                               −1           f
                                                                                                          fh 
                                      σ−1
                          ϕ∗ k                                                                                k
                                 =                                                                            ϕmin   (A.1.)
                                               
                           l
                                   k − (σ − 1)                                δfe
                                               
                                                                                                             



       This cutoff, ϕ∗                                                                  ∗
                     l , then determines the high-technology productivity cutoff level ϕh deﬁned in equation


(7).



Proof. of proposition 2.


This high-technology productivity cutoff is an increasing function of input tariff (τm ). Keeping in mind
        ch
that    cl
             is an increasing function of τm 37 , we take the partial derivative of the productivity technological

cutoff (ϕ∗
         h ) determind in Equation (7) with respect to τm :




                                                                                                         
                                   ∂ϕ∗
                                     h  ϕ∗  ∗
                                         h  ∂ϕl
                                                   ∂c
                                                    cl
                                                      h
                                                                                     ϕ∗
                                                                                      l
                                                                                                       
                                       = ∗      +                             1−σ
                                                                                                                     (A.2.)
                                   ∂τm  ϕl ∂τm ∂τm                        ch                     ch
                                                                                                      σ
                                                                          cl
                                                                                     −1          cl

  37
    Partially differentiating equation (3) with respect to the input tariffs (τm ), we ﬁnd that ∂ c
                                                                                                  cl /∂τm > 0 since 0 < α < 1
                                                                                                    h


and γh > 1.


                                                                55
                                                                                                             ∂ϕ∗
   Next, we partially differentiate equation (A.1) ϕ∗
                                                    l with respect to τm , to obtain
                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                             ∂τm
                                                                                                                   :




                                                              k
                                                1−σ         σ −1
                                                                 −1         −k
                                          ch                           fh   σ −1

                               ∂c                     −1                           fh         −σ
   ∂ϕ∗
     l
                          1
                       ∗k k −1
                                  h
                                 cl
                                          cl                           f                 ch                    σ−1
       = (−1)         ϕl                                                                           ϕk
                                                                                                    min                   <0
   ∂τm                         ∂τm                          δfe                          cl                 k − (σ − 1)
                                                                                                                          (A.3.)



               ch               1−σ
           ∂                                                                  ∂ϕ∗
               cl          ch                     σ −1
   Since   ∂τm
                    > 0,   cl
                                      > 1 and   k−(σ −1)
                                                           > 0, yields to       l
                                                                              ∂τm
                                                                                    < 0.


                                                                                                   ∂ϕ∗
   Plugging equation (A.3) into equation (A.2), a sufﬁcient condition for                            h
                                                                                                   ∂τm
                                                                                                         > 0 is:



                                                                              k
                                                                                                    
                                                                                           −k
                                                                1−σ         σ −1
                                     σ−1                   ch                       fh     σ −1   fh  k
                           ϕ∗k
                            l >
                                                                      −1                             ϕmin                (A.4.)
                                  k − (σ − 1)              cl                       f             δfe


   To prove that this condition holds, we plug in the equation (A.4) the survival productivity cutoff ϕ∗
                                                                                                       l


as determined in equation (10) and we obtain:




                                                                f >0




                                                                  56
Figure 1: Heterogeneous effect of input-trade liberalization on ﬁrms’ technology choice




                                   (a) Before input-liberalization



        0      |                                               |                          ĳ

               ĳl*              Low-technology firms          ĳh* High-technology firms


                                   (b) After input-liberalization



        0             |                       |                |                          ĳ
                            ’                     ’
               Exit   ĳl*                     ĳh* < ĳ       < ĳh*

                                         Firms adopting high-technology




                                                  57
                                   Table A1: Production function estimates.
                                             Dependent variable: output of ﬁrm i in year t.
                                                      (1)                                     (2)

           Wage-bill                                 0.416***                             0.402***
                                                      (0.010)                              (0.010)
           Materials                                 0.180***                             0.176***
                                                      (0.007)                              (0.010)
           Capital stock                             0.365***                             0.347***
                                                      (0.029)                              (0.040)
           Importer of capital and inputs                                                 0.221***
                                                                                           (0.023)
           Only importer of inputs                                                        0.183***
                                                                                           (0.021)
           Total imports of inputs and/or capital                                         0.190***
                                                                                           (0.026)
           The table reports estimates of a production function relying on the Levinsohn and Petrin
           (2003) methodology using electricity expenditures to control for unobserved productivity
           shocks. All variables are expressed in logarithms. The estimation includes industry and
           year ﬁxed effects. The number of observations is 19138. Heteroskedasticity-robust stan-
           dards errors are reported in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and
           10 percent levels respectively.




Table A2: Tariff reductions between 1989 and 1997 and pre-reform industrial characteristics
                                     Dependent variable: change in input tariffs between 1989-1997
                                              (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)                  (5)

           Sales(s,1989)                      0.004
                                             (0.008)
           Capital stock(s,1989)                         0.003
                                                        (0.009)
           Wages(s,1989)                                            0.004
                                                                   (0.009)
           Imports capital goods(s,1989)                                       0.007
                                                                              (0.008)
           Imports inputs(s,1989)                                                                     0.001
                                                                                                     (0.005)

           Panel B                                         change in capital goods tariffs between 1989-1997
                                               (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)                     (5)

           Sales(s,1989)                      0.002
                                             (0.002)
           Capital stock(s,1989)                         0.001
                                                        (0.002)
           Wages(s,1989)                                            0.002
                                                                   (0.002)
           Imports capital goods(s,1989)                                       0.003
                                                                              (0.003)
           Imports inputs(s,1989)                                                                     0.001
                                                                                                     (0.002)

           Observations                        47         47         47         47                     47
           The dependent variable is the changes in input tariffs between 1989 and 1997. The table
           shows regressions at the 3-digit industry level of changes in input tariffs on different indus-
           try level characteristics. All regressions include indicators for industry use type (consumer
           goods, capital and intermediates). All industry-level variables are expressed in logarithms.
           Heteroskedasticity-robust standards errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                  58
                       Figure A1: The share of ﬁrms importing capital goods as input tariff fall




             Source: Authors’ calculation based on tariff data from WITS and the Prowess dataset.



Table A3:            Initial ﬁrm characteristics in 1989 and input tariff changes between 1989-1997

                                                            (1)                           (2)                            (3)                      (4)
                                                        Importer of K               Imports K /sales                Capital stock                 TFP

∆ Input tariffs(s,97-89)                                      0.071                         -0.005                        0.709                  0.081
                                                             (0.385)                       (0.092)                       (0.500)                (0.335)
Panel B
∆ Capital goods tariffs(s,97-89)                              -0.270                        0.100                         1.483                  -1.299
                                                             (0.254)                       (0.778)                       (4.221)                (2.821)
Observations                                                   676                           676                           676                    676
Notes: The dependent variables in each column are the initial ﬁrm-level outcomes in 1989. The table shows the coefﬁcients on changes in input tariffs between
1990 and 1996 from ﬁrm-level regressions of initial ﬁrm characteristics on input tariff changes and 2 digit industry ﬁxed effects. Firm-level variables are
expressed in logarithms except for the impporter of capital goods dummy and the ratio of imports of capital goods over total sales. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standards errors are reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry level.




                                                                            59
Table          A4:             Other           reforms          in      India         and        past        importer           input         experienced
                                         Dependent variable: dummy equal to one if the ﬁrm i imports capital goods in t.
                                                             (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)                  (5)                (6)

Input tariff(s)(t-1)× imported inputs>0                   -0.170**         -0.158**          -0.156**
                                                           (0.066)          (0.065)           (0.066)
Imported inputs>0                                         0.405***         0.397***          0.404***          0.348***           0.334***          0.348***
                                                           (0.041)          (0.039)           (0.042)           (0.031)            (0.028)           (0.027)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)                                       -0.011                              0.018                               -0.130*
                                                           (0.078)                            (0.078)                              (0.067)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)× Low initial TFP                                                                             -0.112                               -0.235
                                                                                                                 (0.101)                              (0.124)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)× Medium initial TFP                                                                       -0.296***                            -0.288***
                                                                                                                 (0.103)                              (0.106)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)× High initial TFP                                                                            -0.005                               -0.029
                                                                                                                 (0.121)                              (0.161)
Capital goods tariff(s)(t-1)                              -0.173**                             -0.141            -0.147            -0.179*           -0.193*
                                                           (0.084)                            (0.093)            (0.095)           (0.093)            (0.114)
Output tariff(s)(t-1)                                      -0.029                              -0.045            -0.053             -0.028            -0.040
                                                           (0.040)                            (0.047)            (0.057)           (0.042)            (0.062)
Input tariff(s)(t-1) x experience importer inputs                                                                                   -0.051            -0.008
                                                                                                                                   (0.049)            (0.074)
Experience importer inputs                                                                                                          0.032               0.005
                                                                                                                                   (0.021)            (0.031)

Herﬁndahl index(s)(t-1)                                      Yes                Yes           Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Firm level controls                                          Yes                Yes           Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Firm ﬁxed effects                                            Yes                Yes           Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Year ﬁxed effects                                            Yes                Yes           Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Industry year ﬁxed effects                                   No                 Yes           No                 No                 No                 No
Region year ﬁxed effects                                     No                 No            Yes                Yes                No                 No
Observations                                               14,680             14,680        14,430             7,825              14,430              7,825
R-squared                                                   0.094             0.130          0.135             0.156               0.094              0.090
Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy for ﬁrm i having positive imports of capital goods in year t. All control variables are deﬁned in table 3 in the
main text. Heteroskedasticity-robust standards errors are reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry level. pairs.∗∗∗ ,
∗∗ , and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




Table           A5:              Controlling              for        demand           shocks            and         ﬁrms’          ﬁnancial            health
                                        Dependent variable: dummy equal to one if the ﬁrm i imports capital goods in t.
                                                        (1)                (2)             (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)
Export tariff(s)(t-1)                                 -0.049             -0.045          -0.034
                                                     (0.061)            (0.059)         (0.074)
Leverage(t-1)                                                                                             -0.155***            -0.155***              -0.092
                                                                                                            (0.036)              (0.036)             (0.059)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)                                -0.162**             -0.024                            -0.139**                0.000
                                                     (0.074)            (0.083)                             (0.064)              (0.076)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)× imported inputs>0                                -0.170**                                                 -0.170**
                                                                        (0.067)                                                  (0.067)
Imported inputs>0                                   0.334***           0.406***        0.346***            0.332***            0.405***             0.344***
                                                     (0.029)            (0.041)         (0.029)             (0.029)              (0.040)             (0.029)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)× Low initial TFP                                                    -0.163                                                       -0.140
                                                                                        (0.103)                                                      (0.101)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)× Medium initial TFP                                              -0.361***                                                    -0.343***
                                                                                        (0.105)                                                      (0.099)
Input tariff(s)(t-1)× High initial TFP                                                   -0.071                                                       -0.058
                                                                                        (0.157)                                                      (0.149)
Output tariff(s)(t-1)                                 -0.026             -0.030          -0.033              -0.027               -0.031              -0.035
                                                     (0.042)            (0.042)         (0.052)             (0.040)              (0.039)             (0.051)
Capital goods tariff(s)(t-1)                         -0.174*           -0.179**         -0.184*             -0.157*              -0.161*             -0.170*
                                                     (0.089)            (0.086)         (0.096)             (0.083)              (0.080)             (0.092)
Capital goods and output tariff(s)(t-1)                Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Herﬁndahl index(s)(t-1)                                Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Firm level controls                                    Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Firm ﬁxed effects                                      Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Year ﬁxed effects                                      Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Observations                                         14,425             14,425           7,731              14,678                14,678               7,861
R-squared                                             0.093               0.094          0.088               0.096                 0.097               0.089
Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy for ﬁrm i having positive imports of capital goods in year t. All control variables are deﬁned in table 3 in the
main text. Heteroskedasticity-robust standards errors are reported in parentheses. Errors are corrected for clustering at the 3-digit industry level. pairs.∗∗∗ ,
∗∗ , and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                              60
