                                                         WPS7879


Policy Research Working Paper                           7879




            Are There Skills Payoffs in Low-
            and Middle-Income Countries?
               Empirical Evidence Using STEP Data

                               Alexandria Valerio
                           Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta
                               Namrata Tognatta
                           Sebastian Monroy-Taborda




Education Global Practice Group
November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7879


  Abstract
  Most research on the economic payoffs of skills has used                           noncognitive skills and earnings in low- and middle-income
  individuals’ level of schooling attained—typically years or                        countries. The study uses measures of reading proficiency
  level of education or training received—as a key proxy for                         and complexity of on-the-job computer tasks to proxy cogni-
  skills. Such research has consistently found that individual                       tive skills, and personality and behavioral measures to proxy
  returns to schooling are positive and that returns tend to be                      noncognitive skills. The results demonstrate that even when
  higher in low- and middle-income countries than in higher-                         controlling for schooling and background factors, these
  income countries. However, years in school is only one                             skills pay off in the labor market. This is particularly the case
  proxy for skills—are these returns still observed using other                      for the measures of cognitive skills, while noncognitive skills
  measures as proxies? This study uses data from the STEP                            show some significant, but small, effects on earnings. The
  Skills Measurement Survey to examine the extent to which                           findings also suggest that there is significant heterogeneity
  there is an independent association between cognitive and                          across countries in how skills are valued in the labor market.




  This paper is a product of the Education Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at Avalerio@
  worldbank.org




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
             Are There Skills Payoffs in Low- and Middle-Income Countries?
                                         Empirical Evidence Using STEP Data


                                                               Alexandria Valerio1
                                                          Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta2
                                                               Namrata Tognatta3
                                                          Sebastian Monroy-Taborda4




JEL Classification codes: J24, I26
Key Words: Skills, Cognitive Skills, Noncognitive Skills, Labor Market Outcomes



                                                       
1 Alexandria Valerio. The World Bank. Lead Education Specialist. Education Global Practice. E‐mail: 

avalerio@worldbank.org 
2 Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta. The World Bank. Senior Economist. Jobs Cross Cutting Solution Area. E‐mail: 

msanchezpuerta@worldbank.org  
3 Namrata Tognatta. Education Specialist. E‐mail: ntognatta@worldbank.org 
4 Sebastian Monroy Taborda, Consultant. E‐mail: sebmonroy@gmail.com  

 
Helpful peer reviewer comments were received from Ihsan Ajwad (Senior Economist), Rita Almeida (Senior Economist) and
Xiaoyan Liang (Senior Education Specialist) from the World Bank Group Education and Social Protection and Labor Global
Practices. The paper also benefited from advice and comments from Michael Handel (Northeastern University) and Najeeb
Shafiq (University of Pittsburg). Claudia Costin (Senior Director Education Global Practice) ), Amit Dar (Director Education
Global Practice), Luis Benveniste (Practice Manager, Global Engagements, and Education Global Practice) and Harry
Patrinos (Practice Manager, East Asia and the Pacific Education Global Practice) provided overall technical and
management support. Claire Miller (Consultant, World Bank) provided research and writing assistance, and Marc DeFrancis
(DeFrancis Writing & Editing) edited the report.
The report received financial support from the Skills and Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) Trust Fund
from the Government of the Republic of Korea. All conclusions and findings reflect those of the report’s authors only.




 
I. Introduction
       As countries continue to invest in their education systems to develop skilled workforces,
an inherent question arises: does it pay off economically to be more skilled? Are certain types of
skills associated with higher wages? Most of the empirical work in labor economics has been
motivated by human capital theory, which posits that human capital—that is, an individual’s stock
of skills—is a key determinant of individual and aggregate economic success (Becker, 1964;
Schultz, 1999). Much attention has been paid to measuring this human capital and examining
how it is rewarded in the labor market.
       To do so, most literature on the payoffs of individual skills has used individuals’ level of
schooling—typically years or level of education or training received—as the main variable (Card,
1999; Psacharopoulos, 1985). Such research has consistently found that individual returns to
schooling are positive and that returns tend to be higher in low- and middle-income countries than
in higher-income countries (Montenegro and Patrinos, 2014).
       However, schooling is not the only variable that can be used to in calculating the economic
payoff of individual skills. More recent research on skills payoffs has broadened beyond schooling
to incorporate skills proficiency. Measures of cognitive and noncognitive skills, including those
relevant in today’s technology-driven environment, provide information on what individuals can
do and what their level of performance can be in a way that goes well beyond measures of
schooling. Most of these recent studies have focused on the effects of either cognitive skills or
noncognitive skills on wages, and a smaller set of studies has sought to understand the differential
contribution of these skills to labor market outcomes (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006;
Heineck and Anger, 2010; Ramos et al., 2013; Nikoloski and Ajwad, 2014).  Research has also
investigated the role of cognitive skills such as computer use in predicting wages (Handel, 2007;
Sakellariou and Patrinos, 2003). Most of the research on the payoff of various skills in the labor
market has been based in the United States and other OECD countries, with the exception of a
handful of recent studies based in low- and middle-income economies (Acosta et al., forthcoming;
Ajwad et al., 2014; Bassi et al., 2012; Ramos et al., 2013; Nikoloski and Ajwad, 2014). This
overrepresentation of high-income countries has been largely driven by the specific requirements
for and availability of data needed to conduct such studies.
       This paper uses data from the Skills towards Employability and Productivity (STEP)
surveys of urban adults in eight countries, namely Armenia, Bolivia, Colombia, Georgia, Ghana,
Kenya, Ukraine, and Vietnam. The paper analyzes the extent to which there is an independent
association between earnings and cognitive skills—proxied by measures of reading proficiency
and complexity of computer use on the job—and noncognitive skills—using personality and


                                               2
behavioral measures. The STEP data sets are a rich globally comparable information base that
include direct and indirect measures (or proxies) for different types of skills as well as information
on individual education, training and labor market trajectories and family background
characteristics.
       The results of this study have important implications for policy and programs focused on
improving the education, training and skills profiles of workers to better suit the needs of the labor
market. Our results show that skills yield significant payoffs in the labor market, even after
controlling for education and other relevant individual and family background factors. This is
particularly the case for our two measures of cognitive skills, reading proficiency and complexity
of computers use on the job, while noncognitive skills show some significant, albeit small effects
on earnings. Even after controlling for schooling, we find the association between earnings and
reading proficiency (our first measure of cognitive skills) to be large and stable while the
complexity of computer use on the job (our second measure of cognitive skills), has the largest
association with earnings across the countries in our sample.
       Beyond these overall findings, our results suggest that there is significant heterogeneity
across countries in how skills are valued in the labor market. There is also some indication of
possible subgroup differences by gender, employment status, and occupational group. These
differences across groups highlight the need for additional analysis for a more nuanced
understanding of the role of skills in labor market success and context-specific programming that
takes into account the characteristics of the education and training systems and labor market
needs of each country.
       The paper is structured as follows. The next section (Section II) briefly describes the
literature on the effect of skills on wages. Section III provides a description of the data and the
analytic sample used in the empirical analysis. Section IV provides a discussion of the
methodology. The results are reported in Section V, and Section VI provides conclusions.

II. Literature Review
       There is a vast econometric literature that examines returns to education and training as
proxied by schooling (years of school or level of education completed) in high-, middle-, and low-
income countries (Card, 2001; Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 2004; Hanushek et al. 2013). Most
studies on returns to schooling are based on the standard Mincerian framework, which posits that
schooling develops general skills and is thus a good measure of human capital (Mincer 1974).
They estimate that each year of additional schooling is associated with an earnings increase of
about 7 to 10 percentage points (Psacharopoulos, 1994; Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 2004;



                                                3
Montenegro and Patrinos, 2014). Although historically most research found the highest payoffs
came from primary education, recent evidence from a study comparing 139 economies
(Montenegro and Patrinos, 2014) suggests that the returns to tertiary education surpass those at
the primary and secondary education levels.  These findings may be an indication of important
shifts taking place, whether as a result of massive expansion in educational attainment, because
of so-called skill-biased technological change (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Autor, Katz and Krueger,
1998) or because of rising inequality in the wage structure (DiNardo and Pishcke, 1997; DiNardo
and Card, 2002).
             However, while findings on the returns to schooling have proven to be robust and useful
(Heckman, Lochner, and Todd, 2001), there are limitations (i.e., unobserved ability and effort,
endogeneity, etc.) and methodological challenges associated with using schooling as a proxy for
estimating schooling returns (Card, 1999). For example, Hanushek et al. (2013) have pointed out
that Mincer’s formulation assumes that schooling is the only systematic source of skill
differences.5 But research shows that other factors, such as an individual’s ability, family inputs,
and school and labor market characteristics also determine skill acquisition (Card, 2001
Heckman, and Vytlacil, 2001). Further, not all skills are acquired or demonstrated through years
of formal schooling. Cognitive and noncogntive skills are important determinants of labor market
success (Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne, 2001; Borghans et al., Duckworth, Heckman, and ter
Weel, 2008; Cawley, et al., 1996; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). Using schooling alone as
a proxy for general skills severely underestimates the returns to human capital and obscures our
understanding of how the labor market rewards various skills.
             In response to the conceptual and methodological limitations of the returns-to-schooling
studies noted above, a substantial literature has examined how cognitive skills, and to a lesser
extent noncognitive skills, are rewarded in the labor market (Cawley, et al., 1996; Hanushek and
Zhang, 2006; Hanushek et al., 2013). Although available metrics are fairly heterogeneous and
seldom comparable across data sets, cognitive skills tend to be measured through student
achievement tests and reading and numeracy assessments. Noncognitive skills are typically
estimated through self-reported measures of behaviors and personality traits (such as the Big
Five personality inventory dimensions).
             Overall, findings indicate that, like years or level of schooling, cognitive skills tend to have
a statistically significant effect on wages—the magnitude of which varies by the specific


                                                       
5 “Mincer’s empirical innovation has perhaps been too successful as it has also led researchers to ignore many

important and continuing measurement issues. Implicitly the Mincer formulation assumes that schooling is the sole
systematic source of skills differences” (Hanushek et al., 2013, p. 4).


                                                          4
populations under review, metrics and model specifications used. Most early research examining
cognitive skills in the context of labor market outcomes is based in the United States and uses
data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), which includes a measure of
cognitive and vocational ability—the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB)
(Cawley, et al., 1996; Cawley, Heckman, and Vytlacil, 2001). Findings from these studies show
cognitive ability having modest effects on wages.
             Subsequent research on the role of cognitive skills moved toward using comparable data
from large-scale international reading literacy tests, such as the International Adult Literacy
Survey (IALS) and the Adult Literacy and Life Skills Survey (ALLS). It is argued these reduce the
heterogeneity of cognitive skills metrics and are also better measures of functional literacy and
reading proficiency (Barrett, 2012; Barone and van de Werfhorst, 2011; Fasih, Patrinos, and
Sakellariou, 2013; Green and Riddell, 2003; Hanushek and Zhang, 2006). Separate studies using
the Canadian IALS (Green and Riddell, 2003) and the Australian ALLS (Barrett, 2012) find that
cognitive skills significantly predicted higher earnings. Similarly, IALS data have been used in
cross-country comparisons.
             More recent research examining the effect of cognitive skills on earnings has used reading
assessment data from the Program for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
(PIAAC) survey, which is sponsored by the OECD and is designed to measure key cognitive and
workplace skills. The PIACC survey measures cognitive skills in three domains: literacy,
numeracy, and problem solving in technology-rich environments. It addresses some of the
measurement issues noted with the IALS and ALLS.6 Hanushek et al. (2013) used the PIAAC
data to estimate the returns to skills in 22 countries. Their findings indicate that higher cognitive
skills (proxied using the numeracy and literacy skills components of the PIAAC assessment) lead
to higher wages across all countries, with prime-age workers (ages 35 to 54) showing higher
returns than recent entrants to the labor market. When they added years of schooling to the
model, along with numeracy skills, their results showed that the estimated effect of cognitive skills
went down by about 43 percent, but coefficients remained positive and significant.
             In contrast to the literature on returns to cognitive skills, which demonstrates strong links
between cognitive skills and labor market options, similar evidence on noncognitive skill payoffs
is relatively sparse—and it is more difficult to consolidate findings. This is largely due to the variety
of ways in which noncognitive skills are defined, measured, and interpreted. In general, however,
available evidence shows that noncognitive skills have small positive effects on earnings, and the


                                                       
6   See Hanushek et al. (2013) for a brief discussion of these issues.


                                                          5
magnitude of these effects varies by the type and number of measures used. In some cases,
studies show effects that are comparable with the estimates found for cognitive skills (Bowles,
Gintis, and Osborne, 2001; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006; Heineck and Anger, 2010;
Mueller and Plug, 2006; Nyhus, and Pons, 2005).
             Many studies have used the Big Five personality traits—openness, conscientiousness,
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism (Goldberg, 1990) as proxies for noncognitive skills
(Heineck and Anger, 2010; Mueller and Plug, 2006). Mueller and Plug (2006) used data from the
Wisconsin Longitudinal Study and examined the effect of these five personality traits on earnings
separately for men and women. They found that controlling for IQ, occupation, and a range of
covariates, openness, agreeableness, and neuroticism had small albeit significant effects on
earnings among men. In contrast, openness and conscientiousness significantly predicted
earnings among women. Heineck and Anger (2010) used the Big Five personality measures to
estimate the impact of noncognitive skills on labor market outcomes in Germany. In addition to
the Big Five, they added measures of locus of control and reciprocity7 to their analytical model.
Their results indicated that after controlling for cognitive abilities and several socio-demographic
and job-related characteristics, personality was a significant predictor of earnings. Other research
has also explored noncognitve skills outside of the Big Five. Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006)
used the NLSY 1979 data, which included measures of individuals’ self-worth and individuals’
perceived degree of control over their lives, to determine the effect of these measures on labor
market outcomes. They found small but significant effects (less than 1 percent) for these
measures of noncognitive skills in predicting wages. Their findings suggest that the estimated
effects of noncognitive skills on wages are as strong as those estimated for cognitive skills when
one controls for schooling and family characteristics.

             As technology changes, and its use continues to increase in labor markets throughout the
world, some research has expanded the definition of cognitive skills to include those skills
necessary for success in technology-rich environments. In this study, in addition to reading
proficiency, we proxy cognitive skills with a variable that measures the complexity of computer
use on the job. The literature on this technological transition shows that the changes introduced
by the use of technology (mostly computers) has shifted the premiums for those skilled workers
who are able to complement what technology can do, introducing a skill bias. These changes
have likewise replaced workers whose skills can be substituted by technology in a labor-saving

                                                       
7 Locus of control refers to an individual’s perception of the relation between her/his own behavior and its

consequences. Reciprocity entails showing much more cooperation than predicted in response to friendly actions
from others and, conversely, being “much more brutal” in response to hostile actions (Heineck and Anger, 2010).


                                                          6
pattern (Acemoglu and Autor, 2011; Autor, 2014; Autor, Levy, and Murnane, 2003; MacCrory et
al., 2014). These findings have generated further interest in examining the role of technology (or
computer use) at an individual level to explain changes in hourly earnings.

     Most of the evidence on this matter has been documented for high-income countries.
Krueger (1993) was among the first to attempt to establish a link between computer use at work
and a wage premium. He used the supplemental questions containing information about computer
use from the Current Population Survey (CPS) in 1984 and 1989. His findings indicated that the
computer use payoff over the same time period ranged from 10 to 15 percent. He also found that
about 40 percent of the increase in earnings during the second half of the 1980s was attributable
to computer use. DiNardo and Pischke’s (1997) study and, later, Handel’s (2007) study noted that
the premium on computer use might not be reflective of changes in the wage structure but instead
reflect unobserved heterogeneity within a job or occupation.

     Sakellariou and Patrinos (2003) put forth another interpretation for the wage premium on
computer use. They suggested that the observed premium is a reflection of the ease in recovering
the costs that high-wage workers incur when they gain these skills. Their correlational research
with higher education graduates in Vietnam showed wage premiums close to 26 percentage
points. In addition, Borghans and ter Weel (2003) aimed to disentangle computer use from
computer skills. Their study used the Skills Survey of the Employed British Workforce from 1997
to estimate the returns to computer, writing, and math skills. The study, which sampled workers
ages 18 to 60, found positive and significant returns for writing (25 percentage points), math (17
percentage points) and computers (33 percentage points), but found no significant relationship
between wages and computer skills at work. They inferred that higher wage premiums are
associated with computers if computers are used in an advanced manner.

     More recently, Falck et al. (2016) used PIAAC data from 19 countries to estimate labor
market returns of information and communication technology (ICT) skills. Starting with the
premise that developing such skills is facilitated by internet access, the authors employed an
instrumental-variable strategy based on variation in broadband internet access—and found that
a one stand deviation increase in ICT skills increased earnings by 24 percent.

     Overall, the existing research on wage premiums related to cognitive and noncognitive skills,
as measured by reading proficiency levels, frequency and complexity of computer use on the job,
and personality traits and selected behaviors, shows some consensus on the role of these skills
in predicting labor market success. The size and magnitude of these relationships vary and are
in many ways a function of the range of metrics used to proxy for cognitive and noncognitive skills.


                                               7
With regard to the relationship between computer-related skills and earnings premiums, the
results are more heterogeneous; there is as yet no consensus on whether this relationship is
driven by an increase in computer-specific human capital or changes in the organization of the
workplace.

III. Data

          This paper uses the STEP Skill Measurement surveys from eight low- and middle-income
countries: Armenia, Bolivia, Colombia, Georgia, Ghana, Kenya, Ukraine, and Vietnam. It gathers
information from urban adults between the ages of 15 and 64 and includes three unique modules
that cover various measures cognitive and noncognitive skills.

          The STEP surveys provide a direct, objective assessment of reading proficiency skills, which
is scored on the same scale as the OECD’s PIAAC assessment. The assessment includes three
parts that together provide a measure of reading proficiency among adults in each of the countries
surveyed. The items used in STEP were developed based on the literacy frameworks developed
for PIAAC, which defines literacy as: “understanding, evaluating, using and engaging with written
texts to participate in society, to achieve one’s goals, and to develop one’s knowledge and
potential” (OECD, 2012). This definition provides a broad understanding of the processes and
goals of literacy as measured in STEP. The main aspects of the construct—contexts for reading
and underlying cognitive processes required to complete the presented tasks—have been taken
into consideration when selecting the texts and developing items included in the STEP literacy
assessment  (Pierre et al., 2014; Educational Testing Service, 2014). The scores of the
assessment range from 0 to 500 and represent six levels of proficiency.8
          In addition to reading proficiency, several items on the STEP survey capture data on
computer use at work, which we use as a second measure of cognitive skills for this study. This
variable provides the frequency and complexity of computer use on the job and was selected to
help determine the extent to which these skills are being rewarded in the labor market.
Respondents report the frequency with which they use computers at work—never, a couple of
times a week, or more than three times per week—followed by a description of the computer-
related tasks required in their job. Four levels of computer use are defined: level 1 includes
browser-based tasks (such as use of email and the internet), level 2 includes basic Microsoft
Office functions (such as word processing and graphics), level 3 includes basic programming
(such as spreadsheets or databases), and level 4 includes advanced programming tasks (such

                                                       
8   See Pierre et al. (2014), p. 83, for a detailed description of the assessment and levels of proficiency.


                                                            8
as web design, software programming, or network management). The surveys also include items
to determine the use of computer skills in daily life, which could be a broader measure of the
availability of such skills in the workforce—although it is also plausible that such skills may not be
required in their jobs.

          The STEP surveys also gather information on noncognitive skills. Information on the Big
Five personality traits (openness, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness and
neuroticism), grit, and behaviors such as decision-making and hostility bias is gathered through
a series of Likert-type items with four possible responses ranging from “almost never” to “almost
always.”  Items measuring these traits and behaviors are rated on a four-point Likert scale from
“Almost never” to “Almost always.”

          Along with the skills measures described above, the STEP surveys gather extensive
information on individual education and employment outcomes, labor market trajectories and on
family background characteristics.

Analytic sample

          The STEP surveys are targeted to the urban working-age population (those between the
ages of 15 and 64). For this study, we limited the sample to adults between the ages of 25 and
64, excluding those currently attending an educational program. The sample was further restricted
to include only wage and salaried workers and those who are self-employed. Employers were
excluded from the self-employed group to avoid biased estimates due to measurement error in
earnings. Part-time workers (those working less than 40 hours a week) and unpaid workers were
also excluded from the analytic sample, conforming to standard practice in these types of
analyses. The proportion of salaried and wage workers and the self-employed group in each of
the country samples is presented in Table 1.9 As shown, the self-employed in Armenia, Georgia,
and Ukraine constitute a much smaller group compared to those in the other countries in the
sample.




                                                       
9 Also, see Tables A.2 and A.3 in Appendix A for differences between the two worker types. These tables show that

the groups are similar across measured characteristics.


                                                          9
Table 1. Percentage of wage and self-employed workers, sample countries
                                       Wage/ salaried     Self-employed    Number
                                         workers             workers      employed
  Armenia                  87.87            8.98                           1,047
  Bolivia                  51.85           32.89                           1,788
  Colombia                 53.20           35.62                           1,735
  Georgia                  84.13           10.23                            958
  Ghana                    35.67           50.80                           2,181
  Kenya                    56.59           33.03                           2,419
  Ukraine                  88.83            6.96                           1,307
  Vietnam                  56.34           28.32                           2,366
Note: “Employed” includes employers and unpaid workers.
Source: STEP Surveys (2014).


          In keeping with standard practice, the top 1 percent hourly earners were removed from the
analytic sample to avoid potential outliers, and extremely low wages were imputed to those
reporting zero hourly earnings.10 Finally, cases missing information on any of the key variables
were dropped from the sample. The proportion missing constitutes less than 0.1 percent of the
sample.11 This is a small proportion of observations; we believe that excluding them would not
bias the estimates due to nonrandom loss of sample. The effective sample size for the empirical
analysis ranges from 849 to 1,953 observations across the countries in our sample.

Description of the sample

          The general landscape of the labor market in each country is presented in Tables 2 and 3.
Overall, labor force participation across the sample of countries is high and ranges from 49.5
percent in Armenia to 84.3 percent in Ghana. However, the employment rate is fairly low in
Armenia (27.8 percent) and Georgia (25 percent), while it is above 50 percent in the other
countries.12 The low employment rate observed in Armenia and Georgia impacts the effective
sample size used to estimate the returns to education and the relationship between various skills
and hourly earnings.

          The average hourly earnings in 2011 purchasing-power-parity-(PPP)-adjusted U.S. dollars
range from approximately US$2.15 in Ghana to US$3.60 in Bolivia and Ukraine. There are also

                                                       
10 A value of 0.00001 was imputed to workers who reported no hourly earnings.
11 In the case of Ghana, about 800 cases are missing data on the noncognitive skills measures. These items were
administered in English and respondents reported inadequate English language skills to complete this battery. As a
result, data from Ghana are not included in estimating the effects of noncognitive skills.
12 According to UN data, labor force participation among males and females in Armenia in 2012 was about 51 percent

and 73 percent, respectively. Corresponding figures for Georgia in 2012 were 56 percent and 75 percent, respectively
(http://unstats.un.org/).  


                                                                10
differences in the average hourly earnings of wage workers compared to the self-employed; the
latter group earn approximately US$0.50 to US$2.00 less than wage workers in six of the eight
countries. The relationship is different for Armenia and Ukraine, where the self-employed earn
about US$0.20 more than wage workers; this may be due to the different nature of self-
employment in these two countries or to small-sample measurement error (the proportion of self-
employed in these countries constitutes less than 1 percent of the sample).

Table 2. Labor market indicators, population ages 25 to 64, sample countries
                    Labor force      Employment       Unemployment
  Country                                                              Observations
                    participation       rate              rate
  Armenia             49.5%            27.8%             43.7%                2,076
  Bolivia               79.5            72.6               8.6                 951
  Colombia              73.7            61.9              15.9                1,391
  Georgia               51.6            25.0              51.6                2,080
  Ghana                 84.3            76.3               9.5                1,346
  Kenya                 83.2            66.4              20.2                1,877
  Ukraine               58.4            50.1              14.2                1,741
  Vietnam               72.6            71.1               2.0                2,075
Source: STEP Surveys (2014).



Table 3. Average hourly earnings, workers ages 25 to 64, sample countries
(in 2011 PPP-adjusted U.S. dollars)
                    Armenia     Bolivia     Colombia    Georgia      Ghana      Kenya     Ukraine   Vietnam
 All workers          2.66          3.57      3.45          3.39     2.15        2.55      3.52      3.21
                      (1.79)     (3.82)      (4.07)         (3.05)   (3.81)      (3.00)    (1.92)    (3.51)
 N                    530           653       830           481       560        1159      731       1384

 Wage workers         2.65          3.99      3.69          3.59     2.60        3.06      3.51      3.42
                      (1.71)     (3.98)      (4.52)         (3.14)   (4.34)      (3.35)    (1.87)    (3.18)
 Self-employed        2.89          2.82      2.90          1.66     1.81        1.64      3.67      2.80
                      (2.62)     (3.37)      (2.69)         (1.19)   (3.33)      (1.96)    (2.44)    (4.03)

Note: Standard deviations in parentheses.
Source: STEP Surveys (2014).



      There are large differences in educational attainment across the countries, as Figure 1
illustrates. The average completed years of education for those currently employed ranges from
8.63 years in Ghana to 15.47 years in Georgia. These differences are more pronounced when
one compares the proportion of the sample completing various levels of education. More than half
the sampled workers in Georgia, Armenia, and Ukraine have a tertiary education degree, while in
Ghana and Kenya only about 14 percent of the sample do.



                                                       11
Figure 1. Average completed years of education and educational attainment: workers ages
25 to 64 (percent distribution)




Source: STEP Surveys (2014)
Note: Dark line indicates average number of years for entire analytic sample.



          As mentioned before, the STEP surveys contain measures for different types of skills, which
are the focus of this study. Results showing how the countries in the sample compare on cognitive
and noncognitive skills are provided in Appendix Tables A.1 through A.3., including within-country
differences in these skills between wage workers and self-employed workers. The findings are
described below.

          To measure cognitive skills among adults in low- and middle-income countries, the STEP
surveys administer a reading proficiency assessment designed to mimic the diversity and gradual
degree of complexity of tasks encountered by adults in daily life and assess the cognitive
operations used to navigate these tasks.13 The reading proficiency assessment is scored on the
same scale as the PIAAC assessment, allowing one to benchmark the reading proficiency of the
adult population in low- and middle-income countries with that in OECD countries. The average
score on reading proficiency for STEP countries is around 212 points, while the average score for
PIAAC countries is about 271 (see Figure 2). Given the score construction (a 500-point scale with

                                                       
13 See Pierre et al. (2014) for a fuller discussion on the rationale for and description of the STEP reading proficiency
assessment. Also, the STEP surveys include self-reported measures of writing, math and problem solving. The most
reliable of the cognitive skills measures available in the STEP data, the reading proficiency scores, have been used
to proxy cognitive skills in this paper.


                                                          12
a standard deviation of 50), the STEP countries are more than a standard deviation below their
PIAAC counterparts.14 (For a discussion of the implications of these differences, see Section VI.)

Figure 2. Average reading proficiency scores for PIAAC and STEP assessments, ages 25
to 64, sample and selected OECD countries




Note: The PIAAC estimates correspond to the national resident population 25 years and older in each country. The
STEP estimates correspond to the urban population 25 years and older, excluding unpaid workers.
Source: STEP Surveys (2014), OECD (2013).


          Scores on the reading proficiency assessment can be expressed in terms of six levels,
where each level corresponds to a cumulative set of tasks that an individual can undertake with
his or her reading capabilities. Task difficulty increases by level.15 More than half of the workers
across the countries in our sample score in the lower levels of reading proficiency (levels 0, 1,
and 2). The data also show heterogeneity across countries. For instance, as shown in Figure 3,
in Ghana, Bolivia, and Kenya more than 65 percent of the workers (between ages 25 and 64) are
clustered in level 1 or below, while in Armenia and Ukraine about 13 percent and 16 percent of
the sample, respectively, is at level 1 or below.




                                                       
14   See Educational Testing Service (2014).
15   See Educational Testing Service (2014).


                                                          13
Figure 3. Reading proficiency levels, workers ages 25 to 64, sample countries
(Percent distribution)




Source: STEP Surveys (2014).
Note: See text for explanation of reading levels.



      We also treat computer use at work as a proxy for cognitive skills. This measure is based
on the complexity of computer-based tasks undertaken by the respondent in his or her job. For
respondents using computers on the job, the measures of complexity range from using email and
browser-based tasks (the lowest level), followed by using Microsoft Office applications including
presentations and graphics (the next level of complexity), followed by tasks involving basic
programming functions (for example, working with spreadsheets, databases, and/or book-
keeping applications), and finally to tasks involving advanced programming at the highest level
(these include designing websites, using computer-aided design software, programming software
and/or managing networks). In the countries in our sample, around 66 percent of workers reported
not using a computer at work, while 29 percent reported using computers at their jobs with high
frequency (see Figure 4). This suggests that, in general, across the countries in our sample,
computer use at work is low, but when used on the job it is used with high frequency. Furthermore,
this use varies across types of workers. About 43 percent of wage workers tend to use computers
(with any frequency) as compared to 16 percent of self-employed workers.




                                                    14
Figure 4. Intensity of computer use at work, workers ages 25 to 64, by employment type
(percent distribution)




Source: STEP Surveys (2014).


      With regard to the distribution of workers by the complexity of their computer use, we find
that the largest proportion of computer users at work are using basic applications involving a word
processor, spreadsheets, making presentations, or doing data entry. This group accounts for 40
to 50 percent of computer users in most of the countries with the exception of Kenya and Bolivia
(see Figure 5). In Kenya and Bolivia we find that the largest proportion of respondents who use
computers on their job are using advanced programming skills. The proportion of workers
handling tasks involving basic programming skills like advanced functions in spreadsheets or
bookkeeping applications is also substantial across all the countries (from about 15 percent in
Bolivia and Vietnam to more than 30 percent in Kenya and Ukraine). Finally, we find that less than
10 percent of respondents who use computers at work limit their computer usage to browser-
based tasks.




                                              15
Figure 5. Level of complexity of computer use at work, workers ages 25 to 64 (percent
distribution)




Source: STEP Surveys (2014).



          In Figure 6 we present the distribution of average scale scores on the noncognitive skills
across the countries in our sample. For items measuring personality and behavior traits,
respondents select one of four responses (“Almost never,” “Some of the time,” “Most of the time,”
or “Almost always”).16 Figure 6 shows that the average scores on each of the Big Five personality
traits, grit, and decision-making are similar across the countries in our sample. While scores on
emotional stability and extraversion seem to show some cross-country differences, these
differences are not substantial.




                                                       
16
     See Pierre et al (2014) for a description of the noncognitive skills module in the STEP Surveys.



                                                          16
Figure 6. Average scores on the ‘Big Five’ personality traits, workers ages 25 to 64




Source: STEP Surveys (2014).



     We also investigate within-country differences between subgroups (wage workers and the
self-employed, for instance) in their average scores on any of the personality and behavior traits.
While we do not find substantial within-country differences in the distribution of these skills for
most countries, in Vietnam the average scores for openness—and to a lesser extent for
conscientiousness—differ across wage workers and self-employed workers.



IV. Empirical Strategy

     In order to estimate returns to education and the net effect of skills on hourly earnings, we
use the standard Mincer approach (Mincer, 1974). The Mincerian framework assumes that
schooling, considered the main measure of human capital, develops general skills and can
explain variations in individual earnings. The empirical formulation of this relationship is expressed
as shown below. Dummy variables for gender, type of employment, and occupation have been
added to the basic Mincer formulation to capture subgroup differences.

                                                                     	
                                                            ,




                                               17
where     indicates (log) hourly earnings; Experience is potential experience calculated as (Age –
Years of education – 6); Gender, Self Employed, and Occupation are indicator variables; and
is the unexplained residual.

     In order to estimate the relationship between skills and earnings, schooling attainment in
the wage function above is substituted by measures of cognitive skills (namely, reading
proficiency scores and dummy variables indicating complexity of computer use on the job) and
noncognitive skills. The coefficient on the skills measure provides the net effect of that skill on
earnings, that is, the direct effect of skills on earnings and the effect through schooling (Heckman,
Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). Thus, to examine the effect of cognitive skills on wages, the model is
expressed with the reading proficiency measure as shown here:



                                                                     	

                                               	    	,

where Reading is the standardized score on the reading proficiency assessment. For each
country, Reading has been standardized with mean 0 and standard deviation of 1.

     To estimate the relationship between complexity of computer use at work and wages, the
model is given thus:

                                                                     	
                                                     	,

where Computer is a vector of dummy variables for each level of complexity described earlier.

     The model when using noncognitive skills is expressed this way:

                                                                     	
                                                          	,

where Noncognitive is a vector of skills composed of standardized scores on the Big Five
(extraversion, conscientiousness, openness, agreeableness, and emotional stability), grit, and
decision-making.

     The standard Mincer model is typically estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
regressions. However, in the case of wage functions, OLS regressions produce biased estimates
of the effect of schooling (Card, 2001). The endogeneity of the schooling variable can lead to its
being overestimated, while measurement error in the years of schooling can lead to an
underestimated coefficient. Further, earnings are only observed for individuals employed in the


                                               18
labor force—a nonrandom sample of the population—and this sample selection can lead to bias
in OLS estimates (Wooldridge, 2010).

          The existing literature provides various techniques to address these inconsistencies in
estimating wage equations. Card’s (2001) investigation found that 80 percent of the studies
reviewed used instrumental variables and about 15 percent used Heckman’s correction method.

          This paper uses Heckman’s correction method (Heckman, 1979) to estimate the returns to
education and the relationship between skills and wages.17 The intuition behind Heckman’s
correction for sample selectivity is to construct a model that jointly represents both the regression
equation to be estimated and the process that determines if the dependent variable (in this case,
earnings) is observed.

             As a first step, we estimate the probability of labor force participation. The model is
expressed thus:
                                                                                ∗
                                                                 ;	       1         0 ,

where labor force participation (                         ) is predicted by	 , a vector that contains instruments not
included in the wage equation, in addition to the full specification of variables described in each
model (except those that correspond directly to job characteristics such as self-employed and
computer use at work). The vector of instruments includes number of shocks at age 15, socio-
economic status at age 15, and an index based on current household assets. Shocks during
childhood can affect children’s educational attainment positively or negatively, depending upon
the household’s ability to withstand the same. The evidence from low- and middle-income
countries, in particular, indicates that families adjust the educational and labor market activities of
children in response to shocks (Jacoby & Skoufias, 1997; Duryea, 1998; Skoufias & Parker,
2002). Similarly, there is some evidence showing that household income is a significant predictor
of labor force participation—especially among women (Klasen & Pieters, 2013). Household
assets indicate potential income and the leisure likely to be afforded by the household.
Households that can afford greater leisure are likely to show lower labor force participation.




                                                       
17 We also estimate unweighted and weighted OLS models for schooling and all the skills measures. We find some
differences between weighted OLS and Heckman estimates for all countries besides Armenia and Georgia.
Comparing results from the weighted and unweighted OLS, we find similar coefficients and small differences in
estimated standard errors.


                                                                  19
          All the models are estimated using the Heckman correction method in Stata. The full-
information maximum-likelihood approach, which is more efficient than the Heckman two-step
procedure, is used for estimation (Leung and Yu, 1996; Puhani, 2000).18



  V. Results

          This section presents the results of the empirical models discussed in Section IV. As a first
step, we estimate the returns to education for the urban adult population in the selected low- and
middle-income countries.

Effects of schooling

Our results show a positive and significant return to schooling (see Table 4). For instance, an
additional completed year of schooling is associated with a 5- to 7-percentage-point increase in
hourly earnings, controlling for experience, gender, type of employment, and occupational
group.19 Montenegro and Patrinos (2014) report, on average, a 10-percentage-point return to
each additional year of education worldwide, controlling for potential experience.20 The
heterogeneity in country estimates indicates differences in how the labor market rewards
educational attainment across the countries in our sample.




                                                       
18 The full-information maximum likelihood method relies heavily on normality assumptions and could have difficulties

converging in the absence of exclusion restrictions.
19 The coefficient in Table 4 represents an increase in log points. We use the following formula to convert to

percentage points:               	             1. For example, in Kenya the coefficient is 0.087, which suggests an
8.7 log point increase in earnings, which, using the suggested formula, indicates that there is a 9.1 percentage point
increase ( .        1 in hourly earnings.
20 A major difference between the estimates reported here and those reported in other studies (e.g., Hanushek et al.

(2013); Montenegro and Patrinos (2014); and Fasih, Patrinos, and Sakellariou (2013) is that this study uses an urban
sample that includes both wage and self-employed workers. Further, previous studies have estimated returns using
OLS and a smaller set of control variables, while this study corrects for selection bias and uses a larger set of
controls.  


                                                          20
Table 4. Returns to years of education by selected characteristics, workers ages 25 to 64
                                                            Self-
                              Schooling                               Women
                                                          employed                 N
     Armenia                    0.019***                    0.015     -0.181***   1557
                                 (0.01)                     (0.13)      (0.09)
     Bolivia                    0.054***                  -0.208***   -0.494***   847
                                 (0.01)                     (0.10)      (0.11)
     Colombia                   0.064***                  -0.218***   -0.070***   1190
                                  (0.01)                   (0.08)      (0.09)
     Georgia                    0.049***                  -0.581***   -0.066***   1464
                                 (0.01)                     (0.10)      (0.09)
     Ghana                      0.047***                    0.133     -0.383***   1174
                                 (0.02)                     (0.11)      (0.12)
     Kenya                      0.072***                  -0.310***     0.065     1454
                                 (0.01)                     (0.08)      (0.08)
     Ukraine                    0.051***                   -0.395*    -0.383***   1370
                                  (0.02)                   (0.22)      (0.06)
     Vietnam                    0.060***                   -0.006     -0.254***   1948
                                  (0.01)                   (0.06)      (0.05)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The sample includes wage and
self-employed workers. Schooling is measured as completed years of education. The reference categories
for Self-employed and Gender variables are those not self-employed and males, respectively. Control
variables include potential experience, the quadratic of potential experience, and two occupation dummy
variables indicating highly skilled and low skilled white-collar jobs (with blue-collar jobs as the reference
group). The Heckman method is used to correct for selection bias.



          Our estimates for the returns to education also show a strong and consistent discrimination
against women in their hourly earnings. The evidence suggests that in five of the eight countries,
women earn between 18 and 49 percentage points less than men in these countries.21

          We also find that after controlling for schooling and potential experience, in five of the eight
countries self-employed workers show lower average earnings than those in wage work. For the
self-employed group, the earnings are between 21 percentage points (Bolivia and Colombia) and
58 percentage points (Georgia) lower than the average earnings of wage workers. We also find
that those in high-skilled white-collar occupations earn more than blue-collar workers, a difference
that is not observed in the case of low-skilled white-collar workers. In fact, in three of the eight
countries low-skilled white-collar workers have lower earnings than blue-collar workers.


                                                       
21 Further analysis and discussion of gender differences is presented in Tognatta, Valerio, and Sánchez Puerta,
forthcoming.


                                                                      21
          To gain a better understanding of the dimensions of human capital potential beyond
education, we next examine the role of skills in predicting hourly wages. As such, the results
presented here should not be interpreted as the returns to skills but as the net effect of skills on
earnings, holding other factors constant. There are two reasons for this: First, when schooling is
not included in the model, the coefficient on the skills measures captures the direct effect of skills
plus the effect of skills acquired through schooling (see Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua [2006] for
a detailed explanation). Second, there is as yet no information on the time required to learn or
acquire the cognitive and noncognitive skills examined in this study, even when the model controls
for completed years of education. Thus, in the absence of an estimate for the time dimension of
foregone earnings, we are not estimating the “returns” to cognitive and noncognitive skills.

Effects of cognitive skills

          Our empirical results for cognitive skills, as measured using reading proficiency scores,
show that the net association between reading proficiency and earnings is large, positive, and
significant for all countries except Armenia.22 An increase of one standard deviation in reading
proficiency scores is associated with an hourly earnings increase ranging from 9 percentage
points (in Colombia, Georgia, and Ukraine) to 19 percentage points (in Ghana). These results,
presented in panel A of Table 5, are comparable to those found in Hanushek et al. (2013) and in
Acosta, Muller, and Sarzosa (2015).

          We also find evidence that cognitive skills predict earnings beyond educational attainment
in some countries in our sample. The relationship between wages and reading proficiency is
significant over and above completed years of education in Ghana, Ukraine, and Vietnam. The
magnitude of this association ranges from 6 percentage points (in Vietnam) to 14 percentage
points (in Ghana). These results are presented in panel B of Table 5. When reading proficiency
scores are added to the model with schooling, we find that the returns to completed years of
education remain similar in magnitude and significance to those presented in Table 4. This
suggests that our measure of cognitive skills is capturing other dimensions of human capital not
explained by schooling.




                                                       
22
   The reading proficiency score was standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1 for ease of
interpretation and comparison across countries. Scores were standardized by country.


                                                          22
Table 5. Estimated effect of reading proficiency on hourly earnings, workers ages 25 to 64
                                                           Panel B – Controlling for
                            Panel A
                                                                  schooling
                              Self-                                 Self-
               Reading                   Women          Reading                Women
                           employed                               employed                  N
  Armenia       -0.003      -0.030        -0.154*       -0.011      0.015       -0.178**   1557
                 (0.04)      (0.13)        (0.09)       (0.03)      (0.13)       (0.09)
  Bolivia       0.120**    -0.353***     -0.542***       0.067     -0.213**    -0.490***    847
                 (0.05)      (0.10)        (0.12)       (0.05)      (0.10)       (0.11)
  Colombia      0.085*     -0.220***     -0.435***      -0.022    -0.217***      -0.074    1190
                (0.05)       (0.08)       (0.09)         (0.05)     (0.08)      (0.10)
  Georgia       0.086*      -0.750***     -0.111         0.065    -0.590***     -0.097     1464
                (0.04)        (0.10)       (0.09)        (0.05)     (0.10)       (0.09)
  Ghana        0.188***       -0.011     -0.408***      0.140**     0.179      -0.351***   1174
                (0.07)        (0.13)       (0.12)        (0.07)     (0.12)       (0.11)
  Kenya        0.158***     -0.449***      0.024         0.059    -0.311***     -0.061     1454
                (0.06)        (0.08)       (0.27)        (0.05)     (0.08)       (0.08)
  Ukraine      0.086***      -0.372*     -0.382***      0.072**    -0.368*     -0.382***   1370
                (0.03)       (0.25)       (0.06)         (0.03)     (0.21)      (0.05)
  Vietnam      0.148***     -0.142**     -0.301***      0.061*      -0.005     -0.254***   1948
                (0.03)       (0.06)       (0.05)        (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.05)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The sample includes wage and
self-employed workers. Reading proficiency scores are standardized. Schooling is measured as completed
years of education. The reference categories for Self-employed and Gender variables are those not self-
employed and males, respectively. The wage model controls for potential experience, experience squared,
and occupation. The Heckman method is used to correct for selection bias.



        Results for our second measure of cognitive skills, complexity of computer use at work,
show big earnings premiums across all eight countries, even after controlling for type of
employment and occupation. In general, we find that the magnitude of the association between
computer use at work and earnings increases with the complexity of computer use. Advanced
programming skills show large magnitudes of association with hourly earnings (ranging from 24
percentage points in Ukraine to 107 percentage points in Kenya), while the coefficients for tasks
related to word processing, spreadsheets, and data entry range from 24 percentage points in
Armenia to 88 percentage points in Kenya. However, in the cases of Armenia, Ghana, Ukraine,
and Vietnam, we notice a slightly different pattern. Computer use involving basic programming
skills shows larger associations with earnings than computer use involving advanced
programming skills. The magnitude of this association ranges from 34 percentage points in
Ukraine to more than 100 percentage points in Ghana.




                                                   23
        The magnitude of the observed associations could be a function of selection into high-
paying occupations that require advanced computer use. It could also be capturing some of the
education effect, since education and computer use are highly correlated. However, we find that
even after controlling for schooling, the magnitude of these associations, although slightly smaller,
is still substantial (see Table 6).

        Another explanation for the large magnitude of these effects could be the relatively smaller
share of jobs requiring complex computer use across these countries, making these jobs highly
remunerated--even after controlling for type of employment and occupation. Unfortunately, the
data used in this study do not allow for examining whether this hypothesis is supported. Additional
research is needed to disentangle the effects of the use of computer skills as well as the
complexity of computer skills.


Table 6. Estimated effect of computer complexity at work on hourly earnings, workers ages
25 to 64
  Panel A
                       Browser-                         Basic program     Advanced
                                      MS Office tasks                                        N
                      based tasks                           tasks       program tasks
  Armenia                0.116           0.242***         0.400***         0.388***        1,557
                         (0.12)           (0.06)            (0.10)          (0.10)
  Bolivia                0.030            0.240             0.121          0.403***         847
                         (0.14)           (0.15)            (0.14)          (0.15)
  Colombia               0.053           0.357***         0.5693***        0.603***        1,190
                         (0.07)           (0.10)            (0.10)          (0.11)
  Georgia                0.307*          0.562***         0.5781***        0.653***        1,464
                         (0.16)           (0.10)            (0.11)          (0.14)
  Ghana                 0.878**           0.361           1.0244***        0.831***        1,174
                         (0.37)           (0.27)            (0.21)          (0.26)
  Kenya                 0.853***         0.881***         0.9474***        1.072***        1,454
                         (0.15)           (0.12)            (0.12)          (0.13)
  Ukraine                0.160           0.255***         0.3344***         0.243*         1,370
                         (0.10)           (0.09)            (0.08)          (0.14)
  Vietnam               0.451***         0.404***         0.555***         0.472***        1,948
                         (0.16)           (0.08)            (0.09)          (0.09)




                                                 24
  Panel B - Controlling for Schooling
                      Browser-                          Basic program       Advanced
                                    MS Office Tasks                                             N
                     based Tasks                            tasks         program tasks
  Armenia                0.070          0.196***          0.338***           0.322***         1557
                        (0.12)           (0.06)             (0.10)            (0.10)
  Bolivia                0.019           0.103              0.019             0.251*           847
                        (0.17)           (0.14)             (0.15)            (0.14)
  Colombia              -0.038          0.262**           0.468***           0.489***         1190
                        (0.09)           (0.11)             (0.10)            (0.11)
  Georgia                0.199          0.472***          0.4836***          0.568***         1464
                        (0.17)           (0.10)             (0.11)            (0.14)
  Ghana                0.823**           0.287            0.931***           0.745***         1174
                        (0.37)           (0.26)             (0.21)            (0.25)
  Kenya                0.781***         0.787***          0.845***           0.946***         1454
                        (0.11)           (0.11)             (0.12)            (0.12)
  Ukraine                0.143          0.211**           0.295***            0.182           1370
                        (0.10)           (0.09)             (0.08)            (0.14)
  Vietnam               0.308*          0.256***          0.384***           0.310***         1948
                        (0.17)           (0.08)             (0.09)            (0.09)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The sample includes wage and
self-employed workers. Schooling is measured as completed years of education. The reference categories
for Self-employed and Gender variables are those not self-employed and males, respectively. The wage
model controls for gender, self-employed workers, potential experience and occupation. The Heckman
method is used to correct for selection bias.



Effects of noncognitive skills

      Models similar to the ones above were estimated using measures of the Big Five personality
traits, grit, and decision-making. Our results show significant relationships between hourly
earnings and openness, agreeableness, or grit in five countries: Kenya and Ukraine for openness;
Armenia, Colombia, and Kenya for agreeableness; and Armenia and Vietnam for grit. We also
find a positive significant relationship between decision-making and earnings in Colombia. The
entire set of results is presented in panel A of Table 7. For openness, a one-standard-deviation
increase in scores is associated with an hourly wage increase of 9 to 11 percentage points, which
is comparable to the estimates for cognitive skills when measured using reading proficiency
scores. Agreeableness shows mixed results; while it has a positive association with wages in
Colombia, in Armenia and Ukraine we find a significant negative association between higher




                                                25
agreeableness scores and wages. We do not find significant results for conscientiousness,
contrary to evidence from previous research on personality measures and job performance.23

          We do not find statistically significant results for the other noncognitive skills included in the
model. It must be noted that the noncognitive skills measures are a function of scores on three to
five items each. We believe the limited number of items for each (noncognitive skill) scale could
be limiting the reliability of these measures and obscuring the true relationship between
noncognitive skills and earnings.

Table 7. Estimated effect of noncognitive skills on hourly earnings, workers ages 25 to 64
       Part A – Without Education
                                                          Conscient    Extra-   Agreeabl Emotional              Decision
                                     Openness             iousness    version    eness    stability    Grit     -making
       Armenia                         0.015               -0.046     0.032     -0.066**   0.012      0.052*     -0.031
                                       (0.04)              (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
       Bolivia                         0.049               0.045      0.016      0.021     0.064      -0.008     -0.039
                                       (0.05)              (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.05)
       Colombia                        -0.009              -0.028     -0.027    0.078*     0.028      -0.046    0.085**
                                       (0.04)              (0.03)     (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)
       Georgia                         0.041               -0.029     -0.036     0.009     -0.020     -0.072     0.009
                                       (0.04)              (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.05)
       Kenya                           0.117*              0.118      0.047      0.104     -0.027     -0.041     0.033
                                       (0.07)              (0.09)     (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.07)     (0.06)     (0.07)
       Ukraine                        0.085**              0.039      0.030     -0.073**   0.011      -0.007     0.049
                                       (0.04)              (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)
       Vietnam                         0.030               -0.051     -0.006     0.008     -0.05      0.062**    -0.002
                                       (0.04)              (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.03)      (0.03)    (0.04)




                                                       
23 Research has found that personality traits other than conscientiousness are predictive of job performance for
certain combinations of job title and outcome measures (Landy and Shankster, 1994). Further, more recent research
in psychology indicates that contextual factors (on the job) could play a role in mediating the relationship between
personality traits and job performance (Sanchez and Levine, 2012).


                                                                       26
    Panel B – With education
                                Conscien- Extrave Agreeable-                Emotional                   Decision-
                       Openness tiousness rsion     ness                     stability        Grit       making
    Armenia              0.013        -0.033       0.040      -0.064**         0.016       0.056**       -0.033
                        (0.04)        (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)
    Bolivia              0.039         0.044      -0.003        0.007          0.048       -0.014        -0.032
                        (0.05)        (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.05)       (0.05)
    Colombia            -0.021        -0.016      -0.034       0.033           0.016       -0.032        0.053*
                        (0.04)        (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)
    Georgia              0.015        -0.040      -0.038        0.012         -0.010       -0.059         0.013
                        (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.05)       (0.05)
    Kenya                0.084         0.099       0.025        0.074         -0.047       -0.012         0.038
                        (0.07)        (0.10)      (0.07)       (0.07)         (0.07)        (0.06)       (0.06)
    Ukraine             0.060*         0.053       0.034       -0.052          0.030        0.017        0.059*
                        (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.04)         (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.04)
    Vietnam              0.030       -0.060*      -0.004       -0.000         -0.044       0.067**       0.003
                        (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.04)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses (* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01). The sample includes wage and self-employed
workers. Schooling is measured as completed years of education. Reference categories for Self-employed and Gender
variables are those not self-employed and males, respectively. Personality and behavior traits are averaged across
scales and standardized. The wage model controls for gender, self-employed workers, potential experience and
occupation. The Heckman method is used to correct for selection bias.



      The noncognitive skills results discussed above are also examined with schooling included
in the model (Table 7, panel B). For agreeableness, the association with hourly earnings remains
negative in Armenia (around 6 percentage points), controlling for education. The returns to
completed years of education are consistent with those presented in Table 4, except in the case
of Armenia and Ukraine. We find that after accounting for noncognitive skills, each additional year
of education is associated with a wage increase of 2 percentage points in Armenia and nearly 4
percentage points in Ukraine. The results reported in Table 4 showed that without any skills
measures in the model, the association between schooling and wages was 5 percentage points
in Ukraine and not significant in the case of Armenia.

Relative impact of cognitive vs. noncognitive skills

         In order to examine the association between cognitive and noncognitive skills and
earnings, controlling for schooling, employment status, occupation, and gender, we estimate a
model with all skills included on the right hand side. The results, presented in Table 8, show that
cognitive skills indicated by computer use on the job continue to matter most for labor market
success, with significant variation across countries. We find that the association between reading



                                                       27
proficiency scores and earnings remains positive and significant only in the case of Ukraine,
where cognitive skills show higher labor market payoffs than completed years of education. The
returns to education range between 3 and 5 percentage points, and in Ukraine a one-standard-
deviation increase in reading proficiency scores is associated with a 7-percentage-point increase
in wages, controlling for completed years of education. Controlling for schooling and cognitive
skills, the association between noncognitive skills and earnings is slightly smaller than that
observed in Table 7, though it is stable.

       We compare these results to those from a weighted OLS regression, using the same
controls but without any correction for selection bias. The OLS results (see Table A.4 in the
Appendix) are slightly larger in magnitude than those reported in Table 8. Further, reading
proficiency and hourly earnings are significantly positively related to earnings in six of the eight
countries after controlling for noncognitive skills, schooling, and the usual controls.




                                               28
Table 8. Net effect of skills on hourly earnings, workers ages 25 to 64
 Variables                   Armenia      Bolivia     Colombia     Georgia      Kenya      Ukraine     Vietnam
 Gender                       -0.203**   -0.438***      -0.120       -0.100      0.041     -0.382***    -0.092
                                (0.1)      (0.11)       (0.08)       (0.10)      (0.10)       (0.06)    (0.09)
 Self-employed                  0.035     -0.199*     -0.193***    -0.492***   -0.195***     -0.351     0.087
                               (0.13)      (0.10)       (0.07)       (0.10)      (0.07)       (0.22)    (0.07)
 High-skilled white collar     -0.052    0.435***      0.262**        0.001     0.391***     -0.099    0.167**
                               (0.08)      (0.15)       (0.11)       (0.10)      (0.11)       (0.07)    (0.07)
 Low-skilled white collar    -0.216***     -0.020      -0.125*     -0.276***     0.078      -0.164**    -0.002
                               (0.08)      (0.13)       (0.07)       (0.08)      (0.08)       (0.08)    (0.06)
 Years of education             0.010    0.043***     0.044***      0.031**     0.035***     0.030*    0.051***
                               (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.02)    (0.01)
 Standardized literacy         -0.012       0.049       -0.037        0.063      0.065       0.070**     0.022
                               (0.03)      (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.03)    (0.04)
 Browser-based tasks            0.065       0.023       -0.040        0.185     0.740***      0.073    0.326**
                                (0.2)      (0.18)       (0.10)       (0.16)      (0.10)       (0.11)    (0.16)
 MS Office tasks             0.190***       0.104      0.273**      0.462***    0.784***   0.208***    0.279***
                               (0.06)      (0.14)       (0.11)       (0.10)      (0.12)       (0.08)    (0.08)
 Basic program tasks         0.326***      -0.008     0.485***     0.480***    0.820***    0.256***    0.397***
                               (0.10)      (0.16)       (0.09)       (0.11)      (0.16)       (0.08)    (0.09)
 Advanced program tasks      0.302***      0.228      0.494***      0.531***    0.974***      0.128    0.298***
                               (0.10)      (0.14)       (0.11)       (0.14)      (0.13)       (0.13)    (0.09)
 Openness                       0.009       0.029       -0.022       -0.016      0.060*      0.082**   0.061**
                               (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.04)    (0.03)
 Conscientiousness             -0.038      0.040        -0.033       -0.032      0.066*      -0.017      0.001
                               (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.03)    (0.03)
 Extraversion                   0.037      -0.014       -0.039       -0.057      0.026       -0.018      0.015
                               (0.02)      (0.05)       (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.03)    (0.03)
 Agreeableness                -0.070**     0.011        0.030         0.016     -0.065**     -0.012     -0.002
                               (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.03)    (0.03)



                                                             29
  Emotional Stability            0.002          0.038         0.005        -0.034        0.017         -0.008        0.053*
                                (0.03)         (0.04)         (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)
  Grit                          0.049*         -0.012        -0.036        -0.067        0.028          0.033        -0.037
                                (0.03)         (0.05)         (0.03)       (0.05)        (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.04)
  Decision-making               -0.031         -0.028        0.063**        0.004        0.040         -0.019        0.004
                                (0.03)         (0.05)         (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)
  Observations                   1,557          847           1190          1464         1454           1370          1948
Note: Standard errors in parentheses (* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01). The sample includes wage and self-employed workers. Schooling is
measured as completed years of education. Reference categories for Self-employed and Gender variables and for computer complexity are those
not self-employed, males, and no computer use, respectively. Scores on the reading proficiency assessment and personality and behavior traits
have been standardized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. The wage model controls for gender, self-employed workers, experience and
occupation. The Heckman method is used to correct for selection bias.




                                                                     30
             Capitalizing on the harmonized data used in this study, we also estimate pooled
regressions to examine the overall association between cognitive skills (as measured by reading
proficiency scores and complexity of computer use on the job) and earnings across all of the eight
countries together.24 We estimate a country-level fixed-effects model (allowing for differences in
average relationships between skills and earnings across countries) with robust standard errors.25
Our results are presented in Table 9. Column 1 of the table presents results for reading proficiency
scores with the usual controls; in column 2 we add schooling to the model with reading proficiency
scores; and in columns 3 and 4 we estimate the relationship between the computer complexity
dummy variables and earnings before and after controlling for completed years of education.
Finally, in column 5 we include all cognitive skills in the model with schooling. As reported above,
we find that the estimated effect of cognitive skills is lower in magnitude but continues to be
positive and significant after controlling for education. In the full model, the returns to education
are 4 percentage points, and hourly earnings increase by a similar magnitude for every standard
deviation increase in reading proficiency scores. For computer skills, we find that as complexity
of computer use on the job increases, and after controlling for schooling and reading proficiency,
hourly earnings increase by 28 to 51 percentage points.


Table 9. Pooled regression estimates for cognitive skills with country fixed effects,
workers age 25 to 64
                                                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
     Gender                                               -0.302***   -0.268***   -0.294***   -0.262***   -0.260***
                                                            (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.06)
     Potential experience                                  -0.000       0.007        0.008     0.013**    0.013***
                                                            (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.00)      (0.01)
     Experience squared                                    -0.000       -0.000     -0.000**    -0.000**   -0.000***
                                                            (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)
     Self-employed                                        -0.209***    -0.157**     -0.140*     -0.103      -0.100
                                                            (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.06)     (0.07)      (0.07)
     High-skilled white collar                            0.461***    0.283***    0.234***      0.103       0.096
                                                            (0.09)      (0.08)       (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.06)
     Low-skilled white collar                              -0.034       -0.087      -0.115*    -0.152**    -0.155**
                                                            (0.07)      (0.06)       (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.06)
     Schooling                                                        0.054***                0.047***    0.043***
                                                       
24Noncognitive skills measures were not included in the pooled regression.
25An additional advantage of fixed effects models is that they can provide some control against bias due to omitted
variables, provided that these variables and their effects are time-invariant. Our models do not include relevant labor
market indicators that could potentially influence hourly earnings, and the fixed effects framework could serve as a
potential safeguard from bias due to this omission.  


                                                                       31
                                                (0.00)                      (0.00)       (0.00)
  Standardized literacy          0.126***      0.056***                                 0.044***
                                  (0.02)        (0.02)                                   (0.02)
  Browser-based tasks                                        0.357***      0.282**      0.275***
                                                              (0.10)        (0.10)       (0.09)
  MS Office-based tasks                                      0.443***      0.340***     0.332***
                                                              (0.08)        (0.08)       (0.08)
  Basic program tasks                                        0.566***      0.463***     0.456***
                                                              (0.11)        (0.11)       (0.11)
  Advanced program tasks                                     0.650***      0.521***     0.512***
                                                              (0.11)        (0.11)       (0.11)
  Constant                       0.887***       0.169**      0.684***       0.085        0.131
                                  (0.06)         (0.07)       (0.06)        (0.10)       (0.09)
  Observations                     6,699        6,699         6,699         6,699         6,699
  R-squared                        0.19          0.23          0.23          0.25         0.25
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses (* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01). The sample includes
wage and self-employed workers. Schooling is measured as completed years of education. Reference
categories for Self-employed and Gender variables and for computer complexity dummies are those not
self-employed, males, and no computer use, respectively. Scores on the reading proficiency assessment
and personality and behavior traits have been standardized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.
The model includes country fixed-effects.




                                                32
VI. Conclusions

   Worldwide, low- and middle-income countries are investing in strategies to expand
workforce skills. In the past, much of the research on skills payoffs focused high-income
countries, and using years of schooling as a proxy for individual skills. The STEP Skills
Measurement program provides a unique opportunity to explore the relationships between
education, skills, and labor market outcomes in adult populations in low- and middle-
income countries—and via measures that go beyond schooling. Our findings contribute to
the growing literature on measuring cognitive and noncognitive skills and estimating the
relationship between skills and key labor market outcomes in low- and middle-income
countries. Key findings from our analysis include the following.

       Reading proficiency—one of our proxies for cognitive skills—is associated with
higher earnings, even when controlling for schooling. This association is large, positive,
and significant in seven of the eight participating countries. In fact, a one-standard
deviation increase in reading proficiency scores (equivalent to 50 points) is associated
with an hourly earnings increase ranging from 9 percentage points in Colombia, Georgia,
and Ukraine to 19 percentage points in Ghana. Reading proficiency predicts earnings
beyond educational attainment in several countries. Interestingly, we find that returns to
years of education remain similar in magnitude and significance even after adding reading
proficiency to the traditional schooling model—which suggests that using reading
proficiency as a proxy for cognitive skills does indeed capture additional dimensions of
human capital not explained by schooling alone.

       Similarly, complexity of computer use at work—the other element of cognitive skills
in this study—is associated with substantial earnings premiums in all countries. This
relationship exists even after controlling for type of employment and occupation and after
controlling for years of schooling. The association increases with the complexity of
computer use. That is, advanced programming skills show a larger magnitude of
association with hourly earnings than tasks like world processing, using spreadsheets,
and data entry—which is what we would expect. These findings suggest two potential
explanations. First, only a relatively small share of jobs in the sample countries required
advanced computer skills, which could explain the higher earnings associated with those
skills. In addition, the results suggest education and computer use may be highly
complementary—future research could explore interaction terms between schooling and
computer use.


                                          33
       Findings on noncognitive skills, in contrast, are more mixed. Our study shows
some statistical support for the value of openness and agreeableness, although not across
all eight countries. The results show significant relationships between hourly earnings and
openness, agreeableness, and grit in three countries and decision-making in one country.
However, when we add controls for years of schooling, associations between earnings
and grit and decision-marking are no longer significant. Of course, the small number of
noncognitive skills items in our survey might not be sufficient to reliably measure
personality or behavioral traits thus obscuring the true relationship between noncognitive
skills and earnings.

       Overall, our findings show that the returns to schooling remain a strong predictor
of hourly earnings in most countries. We also find that cognitive skills matter above and
beyond education and that they capture additional dimensions of human capital not
usually captured by traditional measures of schooling. In particular, reading proficiency
and the complexity of computer skills at work are both associated with higher hourly
earnings, even after controlling for schooling, experience, and occupation variables.

       Two broad policy implications emerge from these findings. First, it is important for
educational systems to generate graduates who are proficient in comprehending,
interpreting, analyzing, and using written texts, as such skills are valued in the labor market
and are a key foundation for further lifelong learning. Second, the wide spread of digital
technologies requires that workers develop digital skills to thrive in the workplace.

       Finally, future country-specific research should account for labor market
characteristics and institutional factors that could significantly affect the skills-earnings
relationship and provide insight into some of the heterogeneity in the payoffs to skills
observed across the countries in our sample.




                                            34
References
 
Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, and G. Violante. 2001. Deunionization, Technical Change and
   Inequality. Centre for Economic Policy Research. Discussion Paper No. 2764
Acemoglu, D., and D. Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
   Employment and Earnings.” Pp. 1043–1171 in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol.
   4, edited by O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard. Elsevier.
Acosta, P., N. Muller, and M. Sarzosa. 2015. Beyond Qualifications: Labor Market
   Returns to Cognitive and Socio-Emotional Skills in Colombia. Policy Research
   Working Paper no. WPS 7430. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Ajwad, M. I., I. Abdulloev, R. Audy, S. Hut, J. de Laat, I. Kheyfets, J. Larrison, Z.
   Nikoloski, and F. Torrachi. 2014. The Skills Road—Skills for Employability in
   Uzbekistan. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Autor, D. 2014. “Skills, Education and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the ‘Other
   99 Percent’.” Science 344 (6186): 843–51. [doi:10.1126/science.1251868]
Autor, D., L. Katz, and A. Krueger. 1998. “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
   Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4): 1169-1214.
Autor, D., F. Levy, and R. Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent Technological
   Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1279–
   1333.
Barone, C., and H. G. van de Werfhorst. 2011. “Education, Cognitive Skills and Earnings
   in Comparative Perspective.” International Sociology 26(4): 483–502.
Barrett, G. F. 2012. “The Return to Cognitive Skills in the Australian Labour Market.” The
   Economic Record 88(280): 1–17.
Bassi, M., M. Busso, S. Urzúa, and J. Vargas. 2012. Disconnected: Skills, Education and
   Employment in Latin America. Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.
Becker, G. S. 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, With Special
   Reference to Education. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Berman E., J. Bound, and S. Machin. 1998. “Implications of Skill-Biased Technological
   Change: International Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4): 1245–79.
Blau, F. D., and L. M. Kahn. 2001. “Do Cognitive Test Scores Explain Higher U.S. Wage
   Inequality?” Working Paper 8210. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Borghans, L., A. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel. 2008. “The Economics and
   Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal of Human Resources 43(4): 972–1059.
Borghans, L., and B. ter Weel. 2003. “Are Computer Skills the New Basic Skills? The
   Returns to Computer, Writing and Math Skills in Britain.” IZA Discussion Paper 751.
   Bonn: IZA (Institute for the Study of Labor).
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne. 2001. “The Determinants of Earnings: A Behavior
   Approach.” Journal of Economic Literature 39(4): 1137–76.



                                            35
Card, D. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” In Handbook of Labor
   Economics, vol. 3, edited by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card. Elsevier.
______. 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
   Econometric Problems.” Econometrica 69(5): 1127–60.
Card, D., and J. E. DiNardo. 2002. Skill Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
   Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles. Working Paper 8769. Cambridge, Mass.:
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cawley, J., K. Conneely, J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil. 1996. Measuring the Effects
  of Cognitive Ability. Working Paper 5645. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Cawley, J., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil. 2001. “Three Observations on Wages and
  Measured Cognitive Ability.” Labour Economics 8(4): 419–42.
Colclough, C., G. Kingdon, and H. A. Patrinos. 2010. “The Changing Patterns to Wage
   Returns to Education and Its Implications.” Development Policy Review 28(6): 737-
   747.
D. Card and J. E. DiNardo. 2002. “Skilled Biased Technological Change and Rising
   Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics 20(4):
   733-783.
DiNardo, J. E., and J-S. Pischke. 1997. “Have Pencils Changed the Wage Structure
   Too?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 291-303.
Duryea, S. 1998. “Children’s Advancement through School in Brazil: The Role of
   Transitory Shocks to Household Income.” Inter-American Development Bank
   Research Department Publication 4124. Washington, DC: IADB.
Educational Testing Service. 2014. A Guide to Understanding the Literacy Assessment
   of the STEP Skills Measurement Program. Princeton, NJ.
Fasih, T., A. Patrinos, and C. Sakellariou. 2013. “Functional Literacy, Heterogeneity and
   the Returns to Schooling: Multi-Country Evidence.” Policy Research Working Paper
   6697. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Falk, O., A. Heimisch, and S. Wiederhold. 2016. “Returns to ICT Skills.” CESifo Working
   Paper Series 5720. Munich, Germany: Center for Economic Studies and Ifo Institute.
Goldberg, L. 1990. “An Alternative ‘Description of Personality’—The Big-Five Factor
   Structure.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 59(6): 1216–29.
Green, D. A., and W. C. Riddell. 2003. “Literacy and Earnings: An Investigation of the
   Interaction of Cognitive and Unobserved Skills in Earnings Generation.” Labor
   Economics 10: 165–84.
Handel, M. J. 2007. “Computers and the Wage Structure.” In Aspects of Worker Well-
   being, edited by S. W. Polachek and O. Bargain, Research in Labor Economics, vol.
   26.
Hanushek, E. A., G. Schwerdt, S. Weiderhold, and L. Woessmann. 2013. “Returns to
   Skills Around the World—Evidence from PIAAC.” Working Paper 19762. Cambridge,
   Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                         36
Hanushek, E. A., and L. Zhang. 2006. “Quality-consistent Estimates of International
   Returns to Skill.” Working Paper 12664. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
   Economic Research.
Heckman, J. J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica
   47(1): 153–61.
Heckman, J. J., L. Lochner, and P. E. Todd. 2001. “Earnings Functions, Rates of
   Returns, and Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond.” Pp. 307-458 in
   Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 1, edited by E. A. Hanushek and F.
   Welch. Netherlands: Elsevier.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and
   Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of
   Labor Economics 24(3): 411–82.
Heckman, J. J., and E. J. Vytlacil. 2001. “Identifying the Role of Cognitive Ability in
   Explaining the Level of and Change in the Return to Schooling.” Review of
   Economics and Statistics 83(1).
Heineck, G., and S. Anger. 2010. “The Returns to Cognitive Abilities and Personality
   Traits in Germany.” Labour Economics 17: 535–46.
Jacoby, Hanan G., and E. Skoufias. 1997. “Risk, Financial Markets, and Human Capital
   in a Developing Country.” Review of Economic Studies 64(3): 311–35.
John, O. P., and F. De Fruyt. 2015. Education and Social Progress: Framework for the
   Longitudinal Study of Social and Emotional Skills in Cities. Report
   EDU/CERI/CD(2015)13. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Katz, L. F., and D. H. Autor. 1999. “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
   Inequality.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, edited by O. Ashenfelter and D.
   Card.
Katz, L. F., and K. M. Murphy. 1992. “Changers in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
   and Demand Factors.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 35-78.
Klasen, S., and J. Pieters. 2013. What Explains the Stagnation of Female Labor Force
   Participation in Urban India? IZA Discussion Paper 7597. Bonn: Institute for the
   Study of Labor.
Krueger, A. B. 1993. “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 108(1): 33–61.
Landy, F. J., and L. J. Shankster. 1994. “Personnel Selection and Placement.” Annual
   Review of Psychology 45: 261–96.
Leung, S. F., and S. Yu. 1996. “On the Choice Between Sample Selection and Two-Part
   Models.” Journal of Econometrics 72: 197–229.
Leuven, E., H. Oosterbeek, and H. van Ophem. 2004. “Explaining International
   Differences in Male Skill Wage Differentials by Differences in Demand and Supply of
   Skills.” Economic Journal 114 (495): 466–86.
MacCrory, F., G. Westerman, Y. Alhmaddi, and E. Brynjolfsson. 2014. “Racing With and
  Against the Machine: Changes in Occupational Skill Composition in an Era of Rapid




                                           37
   Technological Advance.” Research paper presented at the Thirty-Fifth International
   Conference on Information Systems, December 14–17, 2014, Auckland.
Mincer, J. 1974. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. Cambridge, Mass.: National
   Bureau of Economic Research.
Montenegro, C. E., and H. A. Patrinos. 2014. Comparable Estimates of Returns to
  Schooling Around the World. Policy Research Working Paper WPS 7020.
  Washington, DC: World Bank.
Mueller, G., and E. Plug. 2006. “Estimating the Effect of Personality on Male and Female
  Earnings.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 60(1): 3-22.
Murphy, K., and F. Welch. 1992. “The Structure of Wages.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 107: 285–326.
Nikoloski, Z., and M. I. Ajwad. 2014. “Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills Affect
   Employment Outcomes: Evidence from Central Asia.” Unpublished manuscript,
   Retrieved from http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/60025/
Nyhus, E. K., and E. Pons. 2005. “The Effects of Personality on Earnings.” Journal of
   Economic Psychology 26(3): 363–84.
OECD. 2013. OECD Skills Outlook 2013—First Results from the Survey of Adult Skills.
     Paris: OECD.
Partnership for 21st Century Learning. 2015. “Framework for 21st Century Learning.”
   Retrieved from http://www.p21.org/our-work/p21-framework
Pierre, G., M. L. Sanche Puerta, A. Valerio, and T. Rajadel. 2014. STEP Skills
    Measurement Surveys – Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills. Washington, DC:
    World Bank.
Psacharopoulos, G. 1985. “Returns to Education: A Further International Update and
   Implications.” Journal of Human Resources 20(4): 583–604.
______. 1994. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update.”
   World Development 22(9): 1325–43.
Psacharopoulos, G., and H. A. Patrinos. 2004. “Returns to Investment in Education – An
   Update.” Economics of Education 12(2): 111-34.
Puhani, P. A. 2000. “The Heckman Correction for Sample Selection and Its Critique.”
   Journal of Economic Surveys 14: 53–68.
Ramos, J., D. Coble, R. Elfernan, and C. Soto. 2013. “The Impact of Cognitive and
  Noncognitive Skills on Professional Salaries in an Emerging Economy, Chile.” The
  Developing Economies 51(1): 1-33.
Sakellariou, C. N., and H. A. Patrinos. 2003. “Technology, Computers and Wages:
   Evidence From a Developing Economy.” Policy Research Working Paper 3008.
   Washington, DC: World Bank.
Sanchez, J. I., and E. L. Levine. 2012. “The Rise and Fall of Job Analysis and the Future
   of Work Analysis.” Annual Review of Psychology 63: 397–425.




                                         38
Sánchez Puerta, M. L., A. Valerio, and M. Gutiérrez. 2016. Taking Stock of Programs to
   Develop Socio-Emotional Skills: A Systematic Review of Program Evidence
   Directions in Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Schultz, T. P. 1999. “Health and Schooling Investments in Africa.” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 13(3): 67–88.
Skoufias, E., and S. W. Parker. 2001. Labor Market Shocks and their Impacts on Work
   and Schooling: Evidence from Urban Mexico. FCND Discussion Paper 129.
   Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Tognatta, N., A. Valerio, and M. L. Sánchez Puerta. Forthcoming. Explaining the Gender
   Wage Gap – New Evidence From Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Washington,
   DC: World Bank.
United States Department of Labor. 1991. What Work Requires of Schools: A SCANS
   Report for America 2000. Retrieved from The Secretary’s Commission on Achieving
   Necessary Skills, http://www.academicinnovations.com/report.html
Vivarelli, M. 2012. “Innovation, Employment and Skills in Advanced and Developing
   Countries: A Survey of the Literature.” IZA Discussion Paper 6291. Bonn: Institute for
   the Study of Labor.
Wooldridge, J. M. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross-Section and Panel Data.
  Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.




                                         39
 Appendix: Additional Information

Table A.1. Means and SD for key variables in empirical models, by country, ages 25 to 64

                     Armenia         Georgia          Ghana             Kenya        Ukraine         Vietnam          Bolivia       Colombia
                    M       SD      M       SD      M       SD      M       SD      M       SD      M       SD      M       SD      M       SD
 Age               42.94   11.50   41.31   10.74   38.00   10.78   35.89    9.49   41.27   10.65   41.09   10.15   39.94   10.46   39.16   10.31
 Experience        23.24   12.27   20.08   11.00   20.05   11.67   20.50   11.94   21.87   11.07   24.07   11.59   22.80   12.59   23.15   12.08
 Schooling         13.69    3.12   15.23    2.77   11.95    3.60    9.39    4.99   13.40    2.21   11.02    4.33   11.14    4.80   10.01    3.96
 Openness           0.11    1.02    0.04    0.97    0.01    0.99    0.04    1.00    0.09    1.01   -0.01    1.01    0.06    1.01    0.01    0.95
 Conscientiousne
 ss                0.17    0.95     0.23   0.88    0.12    0.94    -0.09   0.95     0.05   1.03     0.14   0.98    0.15    0.94    0.10    0.99
 Extraversion      0.01    1.02     0.01   0.97    0.07    0.99     0.01   0.98    -0.06   1.02    -0.05   0.99    0.00    0.98    0.05    0.96
 Agreeableness     0.04    0.98    -0.01   0.96    0.07    0.98    -0.04   0.96    -0.02   1.07    -0.01   1.00    0.13    0.99    0.06    0.97
 Emotional
 Stability         0.07    0.95    0.14    0.99    0.10    1.05    -0.05   0.97    0.10    1.02    0.08    0.98    0.07    0.96     0.06   0.98
 Grit              0.09    0.97    0.27    0.92    0.13    1.01    -0.04   0.99    0.08    1.01    0.14    0.96    0.18    0.97     0.16   0.91
 Decision-making   0.06    1.02    0.05    0.96    0.03    1.00    -0.11   0.94    0.05    0.97    0.00    1.01    0.02    1.01    -0.07   1.02
 Browser-based
                   0.03    0.18    0.04    0.20    0.00    0.06    0.01    0.09    0.03    0.16    0.02    0.15    0.02    0.12    0.00    0.07
 tasks
 Basic MS Office
                   0.22    0.42    0.18    0.39    0.04    0.21    0.05    0.22    0.17    0.38    0.17    0.37    0.12    0.33    0.16    0.36
 Tasks
 Basic
 programming       0.09    0.29    0.11    0.32    0.02    0.15    0.07    0.25    0.16    0.37    0.05    0.22    0.06    0.23    0.09    0.29
 tasks
 Advanced
 programming       0.08    0.27    0.11    0.31    0.05    0.22    0.11    0.31    0.06    0.24    0.11    0.31    0.18    0.38    0.10    0.30
 tasks
 Active (Dummy)    0.96    0.19    0.93    0.26    0.96    0.18    0.97    0.18    0.96    0.20     0.96   0.19     0.95   0.22    0.94    0.23
 Asset Index       0.05    0.98    0.07    0.97    0.39    0.85    0.02    1.02    0.05    0.97    -0.05   1.00    -0.06   0.98    0.00    0.92
 Shocks            0.27    0.62    0.26    0.61    0.73    1.03    1.08    1.41    0.29    0.66     0.52   0.95     1.50   1.75    0.89    1.19
 SES Status        6.07    2.07    5.95    1.83    5.15    1.93    4.62    1.72    4.98    1.61     4.09   1.58     3.94   1.68    4.23    1.80




                                                                   40
Table A.2. Means and SD for key variables in empirical models, by country – Wage workers, ages 25 to 64
                  Armenia         Georgia         Ghana           Kenya            Ukraine         Vietnam         Bolivia           Colombia
                  M       SD      M       SD      M       SD      M        SD      M       SD      M       SD      M         SD      M       SD
Age               42.95   11.46   40.98   10.91   38.24   11.29   35.05    9.06    41.15   10.70   39.13   9.82    38.11     10.12   37.51   9.61
                                                                                                                                             11.0
Experience        23.06   12.31   19.42   11.17   19.04   12.21   18.39    11.12   21.71   11.18   20.97   11.05   19.77     11.73   20.96   6
Schooling         13.89   3.08    15.56   2.67    13.21   3.57    10.66    4.71    13.44   2.21    12.16   4.28    12.34     4.44    10.55   3.79
Openness          0.16    1.00    0.08    0.94    0.10    0.97    0.02     0.97    0.10    0.99    0.10    0.96    0.07      0.98    0.01    0.95
Conscientiousne
ss                0.18    0.94    0.20    0.89    0.25    0.92    -0.09    0.93    0.07    1.03    0.24    0.99    0.16      0.96    0.09    1.02
Extraversion      -0.01   1.02    0.04    0.91    0.11    0.96    0.00     0.99    -0.06   0.99    -0.04   0.99    0.08      0.97    0.02    0.94
Agreeableness     0.05    0.99    0.02    0.94    0.10    0.95    -0.05    0.97    0.00    1.06    0.03    1.03    0.09      0.99    -0.05   0.93
Emotional
Stability         0.08    0.94    0.14    0.96    0.23    0.94    -0.10    0.98    0.12    0.99    0.19    0.94    0.15      0.97    0.13    0.97
Grit              0.10    0.96    0.26    0.90    0.14    1.00    0.00     0.97    0.07    1.01    0.16    0.96    0.15      0.93    0.11    0.92
Decision-making   0.05    1.03    0.08    0.93    0.15    0.99    -0.10    0.98    0.08    0.97    0.08    0.97    0.13      0.99    -0.05   1.01
Browser-based
                  0.03    0.18    0.04    0.19    0.01    0.10    0.01     0.09    0.03    0.16    0.02    0.15    0.02      0.13    0.00    0.07
tasks
Basic MS Office
                  0.23    0.42    0.20    0.40    0.10    0.31    0.08     0.27    0.17    0.38    0.23    0.42    0.16      0.37    0.16    0.37
Tasks
Basic
programming       0.10    0.29    0.13    0.33    0.05    0.23    0.10     0.30    0.16    0.37    0.08    0.27    0.09      0.29    0.11    0.31
tasks
Advanced
programming       0.08    0.27    0.12    0.33    0.11    0.32    0.16     0.37    0.06    0.25    0.16    0.37    0.26      0.44    0.11    0.32
tasks
Active (Dummy)    1.00    0.00    1.00    0.00    1.00    0.00    1.00     0.00    1.00    0.07    1.00    0.00    1.00      0.00    1.00    0.00
Asset Index       0.06    0.98    0.14    0.95    0.51    0.91    0.19     1.08    0.06    0.97    0.03    1.04    0.11      1.00    0.04    0.90
Shocks            0.27    0.63    0.25    0.59    0.74    0.99    0.90     1.25    0.29    0.67    0.46    0.97    1.40      1.64    0.82    1.16
SES Status        6.00    2.07    5.95    1.88    5.06    1.92    4.73     1.65    5.01    1.63    4.20    1.57    4.07      1.55    4.40    1.69




                                                                      41
Table A.3. Means and SD for key variables in empirical models, by country – Self-employed workers, ages 25 to 64
                   Armenia         Georgia          Ghana           Kenya            Ukraine          Vietnam         Bolivia           Colombia
                   M       SD      M         SD     M       SD      M        SD      M         SD     M       SD      M         SD      M       SD
 Age               46.29   10.36   46.30     8.49   38.88   9.91    37.02    9.35    41.47     9.44   44.14   9.30    43.23     10.16   42.84   10.66
 Experience        28.15   10.11   25.42     9.03   22.68   10.41   23.36    11.22   22.51     9.31   29.21   10.22   28.28     12.41   27.60   12.38
 Schooling         12.15   3.20    14.88     3.08   10.20   2.88    7.66     4.60    12.96     2.28   8.93    3.61    8.95      4.80    9.24    4.10
 Openness          -0.36   0.97    -0.11     1.00   -0.10   1.02    0.12     1.02    0.08      1.07   -0.21   1.03    -0.05     1.08    0.01    0.97
 Conscientious-
 ness              0.32    0.93    0.13      1.00   -0.05   0.94    -0.05    0.98    -0.25     1.06   -0.06   0.94    0.08      0.91    0.18    0.93
 Extraversion      -0.20   0.88    -0.08     1.09   0.04    1.03    0.05     0.97    -0.05     1.33   -0.05   0.99    -0.16     1.01    0.12    0.94
 Agreeableness     -0.26   1.05    -0.11     1.05   0.06    0.99    -0.02    0.94    -0.36     1.10   -0.07   0.93    0.14      1.02    0.21    0.97
 Emotional
 stability         0.26    0.97    0.25      1.00   -0.01   1.16    0.02     0.93    0.37      0.96   -0.10   0.97    0.01      0.95    0.03    0.93
 Grit              0.03    1.04    0.29      0.93   0.15    1.02    -0.05    1.03    0.18      1.06   0.07    0.95    0.16      1.06    0.28    0.87
 Decision-
 making            0.11    0.89    -0.15     1.19   -0.15   0.98    -0.07    0.88    -0.42     0.93   -0.15   1.07    -0.17     1.04    -0.09   1.01
 Browser-based
                   0.04    0.20    0.04      0.20   0.00    0.00    0.01     0.08    0.02      0.13   0.02    0.14    0.01      0.11    0.00    0.06
 tasks
 Basic MS Office
                   0.10    0.30    0.02      0.14   0.00    0.03    0.01     0.11    0.23      0.43   0.05    0.22    0.05      0.22    0.14    0.35
 tasks
 Basic
 programming       0.05    0.23    0.02      0.14   0.00    0.04    0.02     0.13    0.17      0.38   0.00    0.04    0.01      0.08    0.05    0.22
 tasks
 Advanced
 programming       0.04    0.20    0.03      0.17   0.01    0.10    0.02     0.13    0.01      0.07   0.01    0.12    0.05      0.21    0.07    0.26
 tasks
 Active
 (Dummy)           1.00    0.00    1.00      0.00   1.00    0.00    1.00     0.00    1.00      0.00   1.00    0.00    1.00      0.00    1.00    0.00
 Asset Index       -0.04   0.95    -0.03     0.80   0.29    0.74    -0.25    0.83    -0.04     0.94   -0.18   0.92    -0.34     0.83    -0.06   0.99
 Shocks            0.26    0.61    0.24      0.62   0.71    1.10    1.28     1.45    0.36      0.53   0.58    0.88    1.73      1.84    1.05    1.22
 SES Status        6.59    2.02    5.93      1.46   5.22    2.02    4.41     1.79    4.73      1.55   3.92    1.55    3.42      1.72    3.72    1.78




                                                                        42
Table A.4. Weighted OLS estimates, urban adults 25 to 64 years
                       Armenia    Bolivia    Colombia    Georgia    Ghana      Kenya      Ukraine    Vietnam
 Schooling             0.039***   0.053***   0.060***    0.070***   0.047***   0.068***   0.047***   0.060***
                       (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.01)
 Reading               0.020      0.122**    0.088*      0.124***   0.200***   0.163***   0.075**    0.149***
                       (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.04)     (0.06)     (0.05)     (0.03)     (0.03)
 Browser-based         0.115      0.023      0.054       0.3911**   0.880**    0.878***   0.124      0.453***
                       (0.12)     (0.14)     (0.07)      (0.16)     (0.37)     (0.14)     (0.10)     (0.16)
 MS Office             0.238***   0.241      0.370***    0.576***   0.363      0.904***   0.238***   0.406***
                       (0.07)     (0.15)     (0.10)      (0.10)     (0.27)     (0.12)     (0.09)     (0.09)
 Basic Prog.           0.393***   0.124      0.583***    0.596***   1.010***   0.962***   0.300***   0.557***
                       (0.10)     (0.14)     (0.10)      (0.12)     (0.22)     (0.1175)   (0.0812)   (0.09)
 Adv Prog.             0.383***   0.408***   0.609***    0.679***   0.857***   1.087***   0.182      0.475***
                       (0.10)     (0.15)     (0.11)      (0.13)     (0.26)     (0.1296)   (0.1467)   (0.09)
 Openness              0.040      0.056      -0.014      0.055      0.106      0.079**    0.097**    0.111***
                       (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.07)     (0.0380)   (0.0383)   (0.03)
 Conscientiousness     -0.010     0.041      -0.005      0.024      0.090      0.063      -0.001     0.022
                       (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.03)      (0.04)     (0.09)     (0.0426)   (0.0271)   (0.02)
 Extraversion          0.028      0.002      -0.024      -0.011     0.037      0.037      -0.028     0.013
                       (0.02)     (0.04)     (0.03)      (0.04)     (0.07)     (0.0307)   (0.0274)   (0.03)
 Agreeableness         -0.065**   0.023      0.062       -0.012     0.100      -0.063*    -0.005     -0.011
                       (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.07)     (0.0355)   (0.0303)   (0.03)
 Emotional Stability   0.026      0.060      0.035       0.041      -0.027     0.031      -0.013     0.070**
                       (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.07)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
 Grit                  0.048*     -0.013     -0.030      0.031      -0.028     0.017      0.039      -0.031
                       (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.06)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
 Decision-making       -0.026     -0.032     0.070*      0.016      0.052      0.074**    -0.039     0.039
                       (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.06)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.03)




                                                         43
  Observations            530            653            830             481         560         1159         731           1384
  R-squared               0.24-0.32      0.24-0.29      0.20-0.31       0.30-0.42   0.16-0.19   0.24-0.39    0.15-0.22     0.16-0.23
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
The sample includes wage and self-employed workers. Schooling is measured as completed years of education. Reference category for self-
employed, gender variables and computer complexity is those not self-employed, males and no computer use, respectively. Scores on the reading
proficiency assessment and personality and behavior traits have been standardized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. The wage model
controls for gender, self-employed workers, experience and occupation




                                                                        44
