                                                      WPS7992


Policy Research Working Paper                        7992




Antidiscrimination Law and Shared Prosperity
    An Analysis of the Legal Framework of Six Economies
     and Their Impact on the Equality of Opportunities
         of Ethnic, Religious, and Sexual Minorities

                               Elaine Panter
                              Tanya Primiani
                               Tazeen Hasan
                          Eduardo Calderon Pontaza




Development Economics
Global Indicators Group
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7992


  Abstract
 This paper looks at the structural marginalization of ethnic,                      The idea driving the study is that institutional measures that
 religious, and sexual minorities in six pilot economies (Bul-                      hamper the access of ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities
 garia, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Tanzania, and                             to the labor market and financial systems directly affect
 Vietnam) and proposes a new methodology for collecting                             their economic performance and, as a consequence, rep-
 cross-country comparable data on antidiscrimination legal                          resent a cost for the economy. Among the findings of the
 frameworks. The data cover six areas of law, addressed by                          study is that antidiscrimination labor legislation is well
 six indicators: (a) access to institutions, (b) access to edu-                     developed in all six pilot economies, but many gaps still
 cation, (c) access to the labor market, (d) access to property,                    exist in access to property and in access to public goods
 (e) access to public services and social protection, and (f )                      and social services. The study also found that, of the three
 protection from hate crimes and hate speech. The laws,                             groups covered by the study, the least protected under
 policies, and regulations presented fall under one of these                        the law are the sexual minorities. Although data from six
 indicators. For each, the paper attempts to identify the                           economies cannot provide statistical evidence, findings
 minority gap, the difference between the legal treatment                           suggest the need for further research. The authors hope
 of the ruling majority and that of the minority. Data were                         to encourage a wider debate on the consequences of sys-
 collected through two sources: first, standardized surveys                         tematic discrimination against minorities and to help
 submitted to ombudsman institutions, lawyers, academics,                           governments critically review their legal frameworks to
 and civil society organizations; second, public government                         ensure equal opportunities for all citizens, regardless of
 records on laws and regulations and data from interna-                             religion, ethnicity, gender identity or sexual orientation.
 tional legal databases and human rights organizations.




  This paper is a product of the Global Indicators Group, Development Economics. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at epanter@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Acknowledgments
I. Introduction

The economic marginalization of ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities is a problem that affects all nations around the
world and is one that policy makers can no longer afford to ignore. Exclusion of minorities from the labor force is be-
coming politically and economically unsustainable for many states that are struggling to retain their legitimacy and
strengthen their competitive potential in an increasingly global market (Hamm 2014; see also Economist 2015). As a con-
sequence, governments, international development agencies, and academic institutions are now looking seriously at ways
to develop policies that guarantee a more equal and sustainable economic development—economic development that
addresses both short- and long-term economic goals. Among the long-term goals is the promotion of equality of oppor-
tunities for those members of society who, because of prejudice, legacies of the colonial period, and discriminatory cul-
tural norms, are marginalized and discouraged from fully participating in and contributing to the growth of their country
(World Bank 2013a).

Promoting equal opportunities for all requires introducing new economic models and political changes in the way insti-
tutions are structured and power dynamics are regulated within society (Stiglitz 2013). In other words, a radical change
in mentality must occur so that everyone, regardless of his or her parents’ socioeconomic status—including aspects of
ethnicity and race—is seen as a valuable member of society and is given the same opportunities to succeed (Roemer and
Trannoy 2013).

Despite extensive documentation on discrimination against minorities around the world, the lack of data on laws that
should protect those groups from discrimination and on the effect those laws have on the economic growth of a country
is worrisome. Recent studies show that laws that protect minorities from discrimination contribute to the economic em-
powerment of such groups and that empowerment, in turn, contributes to the development of the country by serving
economic and, particularly, efficiency-based
ends (Deakin, Malmberg, and Sarkar 2013; see
also Badgett and others 2014). Results in this         The UN experts called on governments to establish appropri-
field are mostly anecdotal, however, and availa-       ate anti-racism action plans as well as equality bodies and to
ble data are still scarce and patchy. Data sets in     provide adequate redress to the victims. They also highlighted
related fields do exist but are often not presented    the need for collecting reliable data to monitor changes. (Unit-
in a cross-country comparable manner that can          ed Nations 2016)
give rise to actionable data (see appendix A).
The reason is partially that hard data on discrim-
ination are notoriously difficult to acquire and often come down to some kind of self-reporting. Although such reporting
may be indicative of underlying trends, it relies heavily on individuals’ interpretation of what is happening. As reported
by the International Labour Organization (ILO), “Data [on discrimination] are typically collected through ad hoc re-
search or situation tests, but seldom in a systematic way” (ILO 2011b, xi). Also, when collected, data often are not dis-
aggregated in a manner that can help develop policies to prevent discrimination and promote equality (FRA 2013, 4).

Furthermore, data available on equality legislation are limited geographically. The great majority of the existing studies
focus on Europe and North America.1 Several countries in other regions also have extensive literature because of their
particular institutional history. For example, South Africa has been the focus of studies on its apartheid and post-
apartheid periods (see, for example, Human Rights Watch 2015, 2016). Profound disparities also exist in the coverage of
the different forms of discrimination. Gender discrimination is the most widely researched, followed by racial and ethnic
discrimination and religious discrimination. Discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity has only re-
cently emerged as an international concern, and it is less commonly researched and documented in the literature (Fred-
man 2012, 13).

This paper is the World Bank Group’s first study on the antidiscrimination legal framework of a country and its effect
on equal opportunities for ethnic (including indigenous), religious, and sexual minorities. The authors of this paper
acknowledge that a country’s legal framework is only one of the many factors that contribute to the creation of equality

1
  Notably, studies address discrimination against Roma people in Europe (European Commission 2016); racial discrimination and
overrepresentation of minorities in prisons in the United States (Amnesty International n.d.); and discrimination against indigenous
persons, particularly women, in Canada (Amnesty International 2009).



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                     3
of opportunity. It is one that has gained increased attention in recent years, however, especially after the global financial
crisis and recognition of the need for more stringent regulatory frameworks in the labor and financial sectors (Stiglitz
2013; see also Ferreira and Peragine 2015). By developing a methodology for the collection of comparable cross-country
global data, the researchers aim to create a framework for the identification of gaps in the legislation of countries around
the world that, if addressed, may help tackle the marginalization of minorities and ultimately strengthen the economy of
those countries.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II provides definitional clarifications. Section III discusses the theo-
retical underpinnings of the research and relevant literature on equality of opportunity and equality legislation. Section
IV presents the survey design and data collection methodology. Section V is divided into six subsections and is a sum-
mary of some of the major findings in the six pilot countries for the six indicators. Section VI concludes.


II. Definitions

Discrimination was defined in the 1989 Human Rights Committee’s Comment on Non-Discrimination as follows:

          any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference which is based on a number of identified grounds
          and which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise
          by all persons, on an equal footing, of all rights or freedoms.2

The definition of minorities used in this paper is the one used in the United Nations human rights system, which was
provided in 1977 by Francesco Capotorti, special rapporteur of the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, who stated the following:

          [A minority is] a group numerically inferior to the rest of the population of a State, in a non-
          dominant position, whose members—being nationals of the State—possess ethnic, religious or lin-
          guistic characteristics differing from those of the rest of the population and show, if only implicitly, a
          sense of solidarity, directed towards preserving their culture, traditions, religion or language.3

Since 1977, the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights has further defined this concept
and specified that to be a minority, a group does not need to be numerically inferior to the majority. Although in most
instances, a minority group will be a numerical minority, in other instances, a numerical majority may also find itself in a
minority-like or nondominant position.4

Indigenous peoples are defined thus:

          Indigenous communities, peoples and nations are those which, having a historical continuity with pre-
          invasion and pre-colonial societies that developed on their territories, consider themselves distinct
          from other sectors of the societies now prevailing on those territories, or parts of them. They form at
          present non-dominant sectors of society and are determined to preserve, develop and transmit to fu-
          ture generations their ancestral territories, and their ethnic identity, as the basis of their continued ex-
          istence as peoples, in accordance with their own cultural patterns, social institutions and legal system.
          (United Nations 2004)

Under international law, indigenous peoples are granted their own set of rights and duties (UNOHCHR 2010). Among
them are communal land rights, which are at times violated by the central government or the ruling group.5 Like ethnic

2
  Human Rights Committee 1989. Authoritative interpretation that formulates a legal definition and understanding of the meaning
and reach of nondiscrimination at the international level.
3
  See UNOHCHR n.d.
4
  Ibid.
5
  For many indigenous peoples, traditional lands are an integral part of their beliefs and traditions and are essential to their existence.
Countries around the world are gradually recognizing those practices and are granting exceptions from laws that may interfere with



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                            4
and religious minorities, indigenous peoples often are among the poorest in society and face institutionalized discrimina-
tion at different levels of power, forcing them into economic marginalization and financial insecurity. For this reason, the
study also covers indigenous populations and includes a question on the laws regulating communal land rights.6

Sexual minorities refers to people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or intersex. Lesbian women are women who
are attracted to women, and gay men are men who are attracted to other men. Bisexuals are attracted to both men and
women. As for transgender, the United Nations defines the term as follows:

          [A]n umbrella term used to describe a wide range of identities—including transsexual people, cross-
          dressers (sometimes referred to as “transvestites”), people who identify as third gender, and others
          whose appearance and characteristics are perceived as gender atypical. Transwomen identify as women
          but were classified as males when they were born. Transmen identify as men but were classified female
          when they were born. (Free and Equal Initiative n.d.)

Further, an intersex person is someone

          born with sexual anatomy, reproductive organs, and/or chromosome patterns that do not fit the typi-
          cal definition of male or female. This may be apparent at birth or become so later in life. An intersex
          person may be identified as male or female or as neither. Intersex status is not about sexual orientation
          or gender identity: intersex people experience the same range of sexual orientations and gender identi-
          ties as non-intersex people. (Free and Equal Initiative, n.d.)

International law in the field of LGBTI rights is still in its infancy, and the World Bank Group has only recently
acknowledged the economic fragility of those populations (SOGI Task Force 2015) and the effect that exclusion of sexu-
al minorities can have on the economic growth of a country (Kim 2014). As highlighted in a World Bank report on
LGBTI communities around the world, data on LGBTI people are scarce, even in developed countries (Koehler and
Menzies, forthcoming).

Two terms often used in the LGBTI literature are sexual orientation and gender identity. The closest to generally accepted
definitions of those terms are those provided by the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human
Rights Law in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity:

          Sexual orientation is understood to refer to each person’s capacity for profound emotional, affectional
          and sexual attraction to, and intimate and sexual relations with, individuals of a different gender or the
          same gender or more than one gender.

          Gender identity is understood to refer to each person’s deeply felt internal and individual experience
          of gender, which may or may not correspond to the sex assigned at birth, including the personal sense
          of the body (which may involve, if freely chosen, modification of bodily appearance or function by
          medical, surgical or other means) and other expressions of gender, including dress, speech and man-
          nerisms. (ICJ 2007)

Finally, adopting the more developed language used in the gender equality and women’s rights literature—which often
talks about gender gap to refer to the gender-based disparities in the economic, political, education, and health spheres7—
the study refers to disparities in the same fields between ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities and the respective majori-
ties as the minority gap. The term is clearly a gross generalization of the myriad differences among the three groups and
within each group; however, it is useful in highlighting the existence of the phenomenon and is used in this paper.


their usufructuary traditions. Unfortunately, in many countries, indigenous peoples have seen their traditional lands eroded through
mass deforestation. Mining and oil and mineral exploitation are notable problems in large swaths of Africa and Latin America.
6
  Because many of the issues concerning ethnic minorities also affect indigenous peoples, issues related to indigenous peoples are in-
cluded in the ethnic minorities survey.
7
  The Global Gender Gap Index, World Economic Forum, http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2015/the-global-
gender-gap-index-2015/.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                       5
III. The Theory behind the Study: Equality of Opportunities and Discrimination Against Minorities

Rising income inequality between the rich and the poor
has dominated political and economic debates in recent
years. Today, 48 percent of the global wealth is owned by         “Extreme inequality isn’t just a moral wrong. We
                                                                  know that it hampers economic growth and it
less than 1 percent of the world population (Oxfam 2014).
                                                                  threatens the private sector’s bottom line.”
High-income countries generate 55 percent of the global
income but account for only 16 percent of the world’s             Winnie Byanyima, executive director, Oxfam Inter-
population.8 Low-income countries create just over 1 per-         national (Oxfam International 2015)
cent of the global income even though they contain 72
percent of the global population (UNDESA 2013, 25).
Also, in countries where inequality has risen, income is
concentrated increasingly at the very top of the distribution ladder (UNDESA 2013). In the United States, income dis-
parities have become so pronounced that Americans in the top 1 percent earn on average more than 38 times more in-
come than the bottom 90 percent, and the top 0.1 percent earns more than 184 times the income of the bottom 90
percent.9

Classical economic theories had not predicted such profound income inequality. On the contrary, classical economists
believed that the invisible hand of the free market and the laws of supply and demand would automatically allocate re-
sources efficiently.10 According to those theories, everyone who participates in a free economy will eventually reap the
benefits of growth because benefits at the top are bound to “trickle down” to those at the lower end of the distribution.
As a consequence, the economic progress of a country is simply assessed by measuring the growth of gross domestic
product per capita.

The recent growth in income inequality at the global and national levels has forced governments around the world to
reconsider some of those theories and look at new policies to tackle the increased poverty within their societies (ILO
2011a). Interestingly, in countries where inequality has declined, the expansion of education and public transfers to the
poor seem to have played a more important role than free-market allocation (Dabla-Norris and others 2015). In Latin
America and the Caribbean, for instance, an increase in public expenditure on education since the early 1990s led to ris-
ing secondary school enrollment and completion rates and became a major determinant of the fall in wage inequality
(Ferreira and others 2013; López-Calva and Lustig 2010).

The rise in income inequality has generated a rich literature on the causal links between inequality and development,
with many researchers suggesting that inequality has a negative effect on economic growth.11 Stiglitz (2012) argues that
income inequality hinders economic growth because it skews the economy toward rich households, which have a lower
propensity to consume and spur aggregate demand, rather than to middle- and low-income households. Herzer and
Vollmer (2012, 489) also found in their study on per capita income in 46 countries over the period 1970–95 that “ine-
quality has a negative long-run effect on income.”12 The World Bank (2013a, 54) highlights that “social inclusion mat-
ters because exclusion is too costly. These costs are social, economic, and political and are often interrelated.” Also, recent
International Monetary Fund studies provide statistical evidence that income inequality (as measured by the Gini coeffi-
cient) negatively affects growth and its sustainability (Berg and Ostry 2011; Ostry, Berg, and Tsangarides 2014).




8
  High-income countries are those with a gross national income per capita of US$12,476 or more in 2011, whereas low-income coun-
tries are those with a gross national income per capita of US$1,025 or less, according to the World Bank. See UNDESA 2013, 25,
http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/documents/reports/InequalityMatters.pdf.
9
  See Inequality.org, “Income Inequality,” http://inequality.org/income-inequality/.
10
   Most notably Mill (1848), Smith (1776), and Ricardo (1817).
11
   Surveys on this issue can be found in Bénabou (1996); Aghion, Caroli, and García-Peñalosa (1999); Bourguignon (2004); Bertola
et al. (2005) and Ehrhart (2009). See also World Development Report 2006: Equity and Development (World Bank 2006), which
provides a strong empirical underpinning to the claim that interventions that narrow inequality can be good for growth and long-term
prosperity.
12
   Herzer and Vollmer 2012, 489.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                     6
Researchers have advanced different theories on the determinants of inequality. Some researchers believe that inequality
can be traced back to inequality of opportunities, namely, unequal access to opportunities arising from circumstances
outside the individual’s control, including parental background, gender, ethnicity, and religion. The major proponents of
this theory (also identified as luck egalitarianism by philosophers and political scientists) are, among others, John Roemer
(2009), Xavier Ramos and Dirk Van de Gaer (2012), Marc Fleurbaey and Vito Peragine (2013), and Gustavo Marrero
Juan Gabriel Rodriguez (2013). Those economists believe that the “circumstances” a person is born into—such as gen-
der, location, and parental, social, and economic background—should not determine outcomes but that the individual’s
achievements in life should depend only on effort and innate ability. The principle is based on ideas developed by a long
list of influential thinkers on issues of fairness and rights that underscore fairness of process and opportunities rather than
outcomes (Dworkin 1981a, 1981b; Rawls 1971).

To address the rising income inequality and in response to these developments in economic theories, in 2013, the World
Bank Group redefined its mission and gave itself two goals: ending extreme poverty by 2030 and boosting shared pros-
perity (World Bank 2013c). The twin-goal paradigm adopts a multidisciplinary approach recognizing that sustainable
development can occur only when countries achieve progress in both monetary and nonmonetary dimensions of welfare.
At the heart of the twin goals is the normative principle laid out by Basu (2001, 2006), which states that one should fo-
cus on the country’s “quintile income” (per capita income of the poorest 20 percent of the country) in evaluating a coun-
try’s well-being (Basu 2013). In other words, to help the poor and achieve real welfare for all, countries must adopt
sound and robust economic policies while also promoting equal access to and participation in all aspects of the econom-
ic, social, and political arenas, including, among others, education, health care, water, sanitation, and essential infrastruc-
ture. This “new” World Bank mission contends that (a) unless all members of society partake in the development of the
country, that country cannot possibly eradicate poverty and move toward shared prosperity; and (b) without institutions
that encourage the ruling majorities to share resources equitably, the existing inequality among sectors of society will
likely perpetuate over time, and the traditionally marginalized sectors will be further excluded and trapped in a cycle of
low income and few opportunities for generations.

Among the factors that can hamper equality are laws and regulations that exclude certain sectors of society from reaping
the benefits of economic growth. Such exclusion happens when minorities are discouraged and, at times, prevented from
participating in the development of a country because of prejudice, racial stereotypes, and discriminatory cultural atti-
tudes by the ruling majority. Often, those attitudes are enshrined in the laws that perpetually reinforce—both conceptu-
ally and in practice—the economic marginalization of members of society who could otherwise be a force for economic
progress. Initial studies suggest that such discriminatory legal frameworks represent real costs for the economy that could
be prevented. For example, a recent World Bank study on the cost of excluding minorities in Eastern Europe quantified
the annual productivity losses resulting from Roma exclusion in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Romania, and Serbia to
range from €230 million to €900 million (World Bank 2010). Another World Bank study on the exclusion of lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) individuals in India shows that the cost of such discrimination in em-
ployment and health sectors in the country could be as high as US$30.8 billion (Badgett 2014).

Discrimination against ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities is widely documented by international institutions and
human rights groups. The most obvious manifestations of such divisions are the ongoing civil conflicts and the surge of
the extremist group Daesh in the Middle East, which followed the Arab Spring and are, arguably, the consequence of
deep-rooted hostility between Shia and Sunni Muslims. The immediate and long-term economic consequences of those
wars in the region are incalculable. Similar struggles have affected Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Pakistan,
South Sudan, and Sudan for many years (Lattimer and Verbakel 2015). But even in non-war-torn countries, minorities
often are the people most discriminated against. Following the economic downturn of 2008, racial discrimination in the
workplace increased, posing, according to recent International Labour Office studies, tough questions about policies that
have existed in the past decade (ILO 2011a). In the report titled State of the World’s Minorities and Indigenous Peoples
2015, Minority Rights Group International reports that in Southeast Asia in 2014, minorities were evicted to make way
for infrastructure and high-income housing developments in urban centers in Cambodia and Thailand. Similarly, in
Myanmar, the Rohingya urban minority populations in Sittwe were at times openly discriminated against and violently
targeted (Grant 2015, 148).

Discrimination often seems to go hand-in-hand with poverty and marginalization. In Vietnam, World Bank data show
minorities face more barriers to obtaining access to education, credit, land, and the marketplace than do the Kinh major-


Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                7
ity (2009, 2). World Bank data also show that the general
poverty rate for ethnic minority groups in Vietnam in 2006       “Institutionalized discrimination is bad for people and
was 52 percent, more than five times that of ethnic majority     for societies. Widespread discrimination is also bad
groups (Dang 2010). The country made some reforms in             for economies. There is clear evidence that when
recent years to address the problem, but the economic di-        societies enact laws that prevent productive people
vide between the majority Kinh and the ethnic minorities—        from fully participating in the workforce, economies
as highlighted by the United Nations Committee on the            suffer.”
Elimination of Racial Discrimination (UNCERD 2012)—is
still profound, even when those groups live in the same          Jim Yong Kim, president, World Bank Group (Kim
mountainous area.                                                2014)

In 2013, the United Nations independent expert (now spe-
cial rapporteur on minority issues) warned that hundreds of minority groups in Africa were in need of attention and pro-
tection because minorities remain among the poorest people, trapping them in a cycle of discrimination, exclusion, pov-
erty, and underdevelopment.13 As reported by Minority Rights Group International, the Batwa people, a pastoralist
minority in the Great Lakes Region in Africa, are among the poorest of the poor. A combination of lack of access to cul-
tivable lands, poor health, and poor education places them as one of the most marginalized and poorest minorities on the
continent.14

Similarly, indigenous peoples (who include about 5 percent of the world’s population) are estimated to represent 15 per-
cent of the world’s poor (Hall and Patrinos 2012). In Mexico, as in most Latin American countries, they consistently
rank lower than nonindigenous peoples on poverty indicators (Garcia-Moreno and Patrinos 2011). As noted by the
World Bank Latin America and the Caribbean [LAC] Equity lab, “Even if the Latin American and Caribbean region has
seen significant progress in terms of poverty reduction over the past decade, the indigenous populations have benefited
little and remain among the poorest in LAC. In some areas, the difference in poverty between them and other groups has
grown even wider.”15

Also, a recent World Bank study shows that from the early to the late 2000s, although the proportion of indigenous
people living in moderate poverty (US$4/day) and extreme poverty (US$2.50/day) has decreased, the poverty gap be-
tween indigenous and nonindigenous people increased by 32 percent in Bolivia, 13 percent in Ecuador, and 99 percent
in Brazil, but in Guatemala the gap decreased 0.36 percent. As a result of those gaps, in the Latin American countries for
which data are available, the proportion of indigenous households living in poverty today (a) still doubles the proportion
of nonindigenous households living in poverty, (b) is 2.7 times as high for extreme poverty, and (c) is three times as high
for people living on less than US$1.25 a day (see figure 1).16




13
    UNOHCHR 2014b, paras. 17 and 31, https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G14/100/72/PDF/G1410072
.pdf?OpenElement.
14
   Minority Rights Group International 2008.
15
   See LAC Equity Lab, “Overview,” http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/lac-equity-lab1/overview.
16
   World Bank 2015a, 59.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                            8
Figure 1: Percentage of People Living on Less Than US$1.25, US$2.50, and US$4 per Day, Late 2000s Weighted
Average for Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, and Peru

                                 50

                                                                43

                                 40



                                 30
                       Percent



                                                   24
                                                                                                    21
                                 20


                                         9                                              9
                                 10

                                                                             3

                                  0
                                      <$1.25    <$2.50       <$4.00      <$1.25       <$2.50      <$4.00

                                               Indigenous                         Nonindigenous

Source: SEDLAC data (CEDLAC and the World Bank) in World Bank 2015a.



Even in the more developed economies of Europe, minorities often are among the most disadvantaged. The European
Union (EU) Special Eurobarometer 437—a public opinion survey conducted regularly on behalf of the European
Commission, which looks into attitudes and perceptions of Europeans toward discrimination based on different
grounds—reports that “discrimination on the grounds of ethnic origin continues to be regarded as the most widespread
form of discrimination in the EU (64 percent), and it is more likely to be seen as widespread than was the case in 2012
(+8 percentage points). More than half of respondents in the EU say that discrimination is widespread in their country
on the basis of sexual orientation (58 percent; +12) and gender identity (56 percent; +11), both showing substantial in-
creases from the 2012 survey” (European Commission 2015). As in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, discrimination in
Europe seems to be associated with poverty and economic marginalization. In a recent study on poverty and unemploy-
ment rates among the Roma population in 11 EU member states, the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights
concluded that, despite being the largest ethnic minority in the EU, 90 percent of the Roma people surveyed “live in
households with an equivalised income below national poverty lines” and that “on average, around 40 percent of Roma
live in households where somebody had to go to bed hungry at least once in the last month since they could not afford to
buy food” (FRA 2014, 11).



IV. Indicators and Methodology

This paper proposes six new indicators for the collection of comparable cross-country data on discriminatory legal
frameworks and tests the data collection methodology in six pilot economies (Bulgaria, Mexico, Morocco, the Nether-
lands, Tanzania, and Vietnam).17


17
  The pilot countries were selected to represent the various regions and legal traditions of the world. They range from low- to high-
income economies, and all of them contain segments of the population that are considered minorities and that face discrimination.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                      9
The methodology consists in a survey-based dataset and is drawn from the experience of the World Bank’s Doing Busi-
ness18 and Women, Business, and the Law19 reports, which have produced global objective quantitative indicators of
business regulation and gender discrimination.20 The dataset presents laws and policies in three main areas:

     1.   Laws that establish discriminatory treatment based on ethnicity, religion, gender identity, and sexual orienta-
          tion
     2.   Laws that prohibit discrimination against ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities
     3.   Policies and other enforcement mechanisms to implement existing antidiscrimination laws

The six indicators identified to measure the equal treatment of people belonging to ethnic, religious, and sexual minori-
ties are:

     1.   Access to institutions
     2.   Access to education
     3.   Access to the labor market
     4.   Access to property
     5.   Access to public services and social protection
     6.   Protection from hate crimes or hate speech

Data were collected from two sources, namely, surveys to experts of the pilot countries and desktop research. In particu-
lar, three surveys were developed: (a) one for ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples, (b) one for religious minorities,
and (c) one for sexual minorities. Each survey was then divided into six sections, one for each indicator. The surveys were
distributed to legal experts in the six pilot countries, including lawyers, ombudsman institutions, judges, academics, and
civil society organizations (see appendix B).

The survey on ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples includes questions on laws, policies, and regulations related to
obtaining citizenship and how they differ, if at all, from those that apply to the country’s ethnic majority. The survey al-
so includes questions on the rights of indigenous peoples to obtain collective land titles under access to property and
questions on whether legal provisions on bilingual education exist, among others.

Under the indicator for access to institutions, the survey on religious minorities includes questions that address constitu-
tional provisions that guarantee the freedom of belief and religion. Under access to education, the survey includes ques-
tions that attempt to identify whether legal quotas exist for religious minorities in primary, secondary, and tertiary
education. The section on protection from hate crimes and hate speech addresses the existence of criminal provisions on
hate speech that incites religious hatred and hate crimes motivated by religious bias.

The sexual minorities’ survey includes questions that address legal discrimination and legal protection from discrimina-
tion for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) communities. Under each indicator, questions attempt
to capture the laws related to those communities and whether those same laws apply to the majority of the population
(that is, heterosexual or cisgender). For example, the survey determines whether the country has a comprehensive law
that specifically mentions sexual orientation and gender identity as protective characteristics. The equal treatment of
LGBTI communities in schools is addressed under access to education, which assesses whether the state has introduced
laws and policies to combat bullying of LGBTI students in schools. The topic of access to public services and social pro-
tection mechanisms is especially important for LGBTI communities, and it is covered through questions about access to
health care, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) preventive services, and gender reassignment surgery, among others.
The indicator for hate crimes and hate speech includes questions on the criminalization of hate crimes and hate speech

18
   For further details on the Doing Business database and reports, see http://www.doingbusiness.org/.
19
   For further details on the Women, Business, and the Law database and reports, see http://wbl.worldbank.org/.
20
   The Doing Business indicators are recognized as being extremely influential and successful in attracting the attention of senior poli-
cy makers, government officials, and members of the business community in many countries. Thus, they have contributed significant-
ly to benchmarking economies against good practices and motivating policy makers to improve their laws and regulations. Similarly,
in the period following the publication of Women, Business, and the Law 2014 (World Bank 2013b), 65 countries reformed 94 laws
that had discriminated against women.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                         10
motivated by bias against sexual minorities and questions on the existence of policies that mandate training for police
officers on the identification and investigation of hate crimes.

The data collected from the surveys were then cross-referenced with public legal databases from international organiza-
tions and local human rights nongovernmental organizations. When the answers to the surveys were unclear, the experts
were contacted again for clarification and the data verified through desk-top research. The findings were subsequently
codified and submitted to experts within and outside the World Bank Group for peer review.

Disagreement often arises about which groups constitute a minority in a country. To control for different interpretations
and to guarantee uniformity in the data collection, the experts who completed the surveys were given a predetermined
list of ethnic and religious minorities in each of the pilot countries drawn from internationally recognized studies of mi-
norities, including work by the International Labour Organization,21 United Nations Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination,22 United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNOHCHR 2010,
2014),23 United Nations Universal Periodic Review Process,24 Minority Rights Group International,25 and the European
Union Agency for Fundamental Rights.26

Equality of opportunities for minorities in society depends on the interplay of a variety of factors. This paper focuses on
only one of those factors: the formal legal and regulatory environment (de jure) for six indicators; it does not cover the
practice or implementation of the law (de facto) more than tangentially through the identification of policies and other
enforcement mechanisms seen as proxies of implementation. Also, not everything of importance is covered. For example,
although access to institutions includes laws covering quotas in parliament, it does not include political party laws—an
important factor in determining minority representation in political parties. The indicator for access to education covers
only public—not private—education. The indicator for protection from hate speech and hate crimes does not include
the crime of genocide. Although genocide may be regarded as a crime inherently motivated by hate or bias, it is not in-
cluded in the study because the study concerns only individually motivated crimes, not mass atrocities that constitute
international crimes.

Also, the study focuses on laws governing the formal economy. Although many people belonging to ethnic, religious, and
sexual minorities work in the informal economy, one of the main goals of the study is to define features of the formal
economy that prevent those individuals from making the transition from the informal to the formal economy.

The study does not include immigrants and migrant workers unless they have been living in the country long enough to
justify, on the basis international standards, the right to citizenship.27 The contribution of migrant workers to the econ-
omy of the host country is undeniable. Their labor and residency rights should thus be respected. Also undeniable is the
widespread discrimination suffered by those minorities. Because the primary responsibility of governments is to provide
safe and equal economic environments to their citizens, however, the authors defer to the many existing studies on the
cost of exclusion of migrant workers (see, for example, OECD 2014; World Bank 2010b).




21
   Even if ILO Convention 169 does not define indigenous or tribal peoples, it is the only international treaty that deals with the rights
of those peoples. See http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/equality-and-discrimination/indigenous-and-tribal-peoples/lang--en/.
22
   For example, see General Recommendation XXVII on Discrimination against Roma, 57th session (2000), and General Recom-
mendation XXIII on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, 51st session (1997); both are available on the United Nations Treaty Body
Database, http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/TBSearch.aspx?Lang=en&TreatyID=6&DocTypeID=11.
23
    See UNOHCHR, “Combating Discrimination against Minorities”, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Discrimination/Pages/
discrimination_minorities.aspx.
24
   See UNOHCHR, “Universal Periodic Review” website, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/UPRMain.aspx.
25
    Minority Rights Group International provides a nonexhaustive list of minorities in many countries on its website,
http://minorityrights.org/.
26
    See “EU-MIDIS: European Union Minorities and Discrimination Survey,” http://fra.europa.eu/en/project/2011/eu-midis-
european-union-minorities-and-discrimination-survey.
27
   On average, migrant workers around the world have to be legally employed and reside in the host country for 10 years before be-
coming eligible to apply for citizenship. Thus, the project sets 10 years as the length of time after which migrant workers should be
covered by the study.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                          11
Finally, the study does not cover customary or religious law because of their often-uncodified status and the resulting dif-
ficulties in defining their rules.

The survey data are current as of December 31, 2015. If a law was enacted but did not come into force before that date,
the law was not included in the country data. Nonetheless, it was mentioned in the paper.


V. Findings and Analysis

The main goal of this paper is twofold: (a) to test six new indicators and the methodology for the collection of cross-
country comparable data on discriminatory legal frameworks related to ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities; and (b) to
present some findings from the data collection in six economies, highlighting some good and bad practices in the legal
frameworks as they relate to equality of opportunities for minorities and their access to institutions, education, property,
the labor force, social services, and protection from hate speech and hate crimes (the indicators). In doing so, the study
aims to fill a gap in the existing literature related to poverty and development, which seldom looks at the issue of dis-
crimination against those minorities through the prism of the effect that such exclusion might have on their economic
potential and the overall cost for the country.

Following is an overview of the data collected (a) in the six pilot countries through the three surveys distributed to local
experts and (b) from international legal databases and human rights organizations. The results are divided by indicators.
Details of the specific variables examined and the answers to the surveys may be found in appendix C.


1. Access to Institutions
The access to institutions indicator explores the ability of
individuals within a minority group to interact and influ-
                                                                  Parliaments as institutions can do more to extend
ence the decision-making process of public authorities in
                                                                  some procedural accommodation for the participa-
the same way as people belonging to the majority or ruling
                                                                  tion of minorities and indigenous groups in legislative
minority. The indicator also covers certain fundamental           process.
political rights, such as the freedom of expression and free-
dom of religion. Participation of minorities in all three         (Inter-Parliamentary Union and the United Nations
branches of government—legislative, executive, and judici-        Development Programme 2010)
ary—is a fundamental component of economic empower-
ment. If a group is unable to gain equal access to institu-
tions that determine the allocation of national resources (both monetary and nonmonetary), the allocation will likely be
skewed in favor of the ruling group. Participation and representation of minorities in parliaments and local governments
can affect government spending priorities toward more inclusive and equitable economic reforms. Similarly, representa-
tion of minorities in the judiciary can encourage respect for antidiscrimination laws and implementation of policies pro-
moting the fair allocation of resources. As stated by the Inter-Parliamentary Union, “The parliamentary representation of
minorities and indigenous peoples is essential for ensuring these groups’ effective participation in public affairs” (Protsyk
2010). Such disaggregated data in national parliaments are scarce, however, forcing the Leadership Council of the Unit-
ed Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network (2015, 149) to call for action and urge states to collect such
data as a necessary step toward the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals.

Of the six pilot economies analyzed, none has a formal legal quota system for the minimum participation of ethnic, reli-
gious, or sexual minorities in parliament. Vietnam, however, has a mechanism that allows for representation in Parlia-
ment of the 54 ethnic minority groups registered in the country. The Council of Ethnic Minorities is a body consisting
of 40 deputies, and its main duties are to contribute to, investigate, and oversee legal documents (laws, acts, ordinances)
and legal procedures regarding ethnic affairs. As a consequence, the Vietnamese parliament has passed various pieces of
legislation that target the interests of ethnic minorities (Palmieri 2010, 11). Examples include (a) Decision 1592 related
to land cultivation, housing, and water required to support ethnic minority households; (b) a provision that gives priority
to ethnic minorities in accessing educational facilities, and (c) a law providing for interpreters for minorities using the
courts.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                             12
Survey results also revealed that although all six economies ratified the 1969 UN International Convention on the Elim-
ination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD)—Article 2 of which calls on all ratifying states to “prohibit and
bring to an end, by all appropriate means, including legislation as required by circumstances, racial discrimination by any
persons, group or organization”—only Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Netherlands have a comprehensive nondiscrimination
law (see table 1). In all three of those economies, the law provides protection from discrimination on ethnic, religious,
and sexual orientation grounds. Only in Bulgaria does the law also protect individuals from discrimination on gender
identity grounds.28 In Morocco and Tanzania, homosexuality is a crime and, therefore, no reference to the rights of
LGBTI communities exists in the legislation of those two pilot countries.



Table 1: Does the Country Have an Antidiscrimination Law That Prohibits Discrimination Based on Ethnicity, Reli-
gion, and Sexual Orientation or Gender Identity?

                                Bulgaria           Mexico            Morocco          Netherlands           Tanzania          Vietnam
Ethnic minorities                    ü                  ü                                     ü
Religious minorities                 ü                  ü                                     ü
Sexual orientation                   ü                  ü                                     ü
Gender identity                      ü

Source: World Bank Equality Project.



In Morocco, the only relevant law is Dahir 19-68, a 1969 royal decree giving effect to ICERD in national jurisdiction. Alt-
hough Morocco is a monist state29 and thus the decree is, strictly speaking, a national law, the articles of the Convention are
not as detailed as a nondiscrimination law, thus the decree can hardly be considered a sufficient tool to effectively protect
the rights of ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities in the country.

In addition to ratifying the ICERD, all of the pilot economies have ratified the UN International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights; the UN International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; ILO 100, the Convention on
Equal Remuneration; and ILO 111, the Convention on Discrimination (Employment and Occupation), all of which
provide some form of protection for the rights of people belonging to ethnic and religious minorities. Only Mexico and
the Netherlands have also ratified ILO 169, the Convention on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples30 (table 2).

28
   On March 25, 2015, the Bulgarian parliament adopted on second hearing (final) a bill to amend two provisions of the Protection
Against Discrimination Act: (a) Article 9 on the shift of the burden of proof and (b) a new provision that partially defines sex as a pro-
tected ground to include transgender status. New Subsection 17 in Section 1 of the Additional Provision reads, “Within the meaning
of art. 4, section 1 [listing the protected grounds] the ground of ‘sex’ includes also gender reassignment cases,”
http://www.equalitylaw.eu/downloads/2756-52-bg-nd-amendments-adl-adopted.
29
   In a monist legal system, international law is considered joined with and part of the internal legal order of a state. In a dualist legal
system, on the other hand, international law stands apart from national law, and to have any effect on rights and obligations at the
national level, international law must be domesticated through legislative process.
30
   Bulgaria voted in favor of adopting the 2007 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and ratified the
Rome Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in 1992. Mexico voted in favor of the adoption
of the 2007 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and ratified the American Convention on Human
Rights, “Pact of San Jose, Costa Rica,” in 1981. Morocco was absent during the session that adopted the 2007 United Nations Decla-
ration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and has not ratified the African (Banjul) Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, as it is
not a member of the African Union. The Netherlands voted in favor of the adoption of the 2007 United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples and ratified the Rome Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in
1954. Tanzania voted in favor of the adoption of the 2007 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and rati-
fied the African (Banjul) Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights in 1984. Vietnam voted in favor of the adoption of the 2007 United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Although the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                            13
Table 2: Treaties Ratified, by Country

                                             Bulgaria         Mexico         Morocco        Netherlands        Tanzania       Vietnam
International Convention on the                   ü              ü                ü                ü               ü             ü
Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (ICERD)
International Covenant on Civil                  ü               ü                ü                ü               ü             ü
and Political Rights (ICCPR)
International Covenant on Eco-                   ü               ü                ü                ü               ü             ü
nomic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICERD)
Convention on Equal Remunera-                    ü               ü                ü                ü               ü             ü
tion (ILO Convention 100)
Convention on Discrimination                     ü               ü                ü                ü               ü             ü
(Employment and Occupation)
(ILO Convention 111)
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples                                    ü                                 ü
Convention (ILO Convention 169)

Source: World Bank Equality Project.



In the field of LGBTI rights, the United Nations has yet to adopt a convention against discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity. In June 2016, however, the UN Human Rights Council passed a resolution to appoint
an “independent expert” to investigate the causes of violence and discrimination against people because of their sexual
orientation and gender identity and to discuss their protection with governments.31 Although a resolution does not im-
pose any legal obligation on the states, it represents a step forward toward the development of an international consensus
on the need to protect sexual minorities from violence and discrimination.

At the regional level, both Bulgaria and the Netherlands are bound by the European Union Directives 2000/43 (Racial
Equality Directive)32 and 2000/78 (Employment Equality Directive),33 which prohibit discrimination on grounds of
ethnic origin, disability, age, and sexual orientation. Mexico ratified the 1969 American Convention on Human Rights34
and the 1988 “Protocol of San Salvador,”35 which recognizes the right to work, health, and education.36 Tanzania is a
party to the African Charter and ratified the 1980 African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights,37 which, in addition
to protecting civil and political rights, recognizes the right to development (Art. 22), especially relevant for minorities.
Vietnam signed the 2012 ASEAN Human Rights Declaration,38 which incorporates the principle of nondiscrimination
in General Principles 2 and 9. Finally, Morocco is a party of the League of Arab States and signed—but has not rati-
fied—the Arab Charter on Human Rights, which calls on ratifying states to provide equality of opportunity without dis-


Peoples, as a declaration, is not a formally binding treaty, it contains rights and freedoms, such as self-determination and nondiscrimi-
nation, set out in binding international human rights treaty law, of which some may be considered customary international law.
31
   http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=54385#.V9M540-V-Uk.
32
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32000L0043&from=EN.
33
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32000L0078&from=EN.
34
   http://www.oas.org/dil/treaties_B-32_American_Convention_on_Human_Rights.htm.
35
   http://oas.org/juridico/english/treaties/a-52.html.
36
   A recent effort that may potentially benefit minorities is the adoption of the Inter-American Convention Against All Forms of Dis-
crimination and Intolerance (2013), which emphasizes that discrimination may be based on “sexual orientation, gender identity and
expression, religion, and cultural identity.” The treaty has not entered into force, however, and Mexico has not ratified it.
37
   http://www.achpr.org/instruments/achpr/.
38
   2012 ASEAN Human Rights Declaration, http://www.iglhrc.org/sites/default/files/629-1.pdf.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                         14
crimination of any kind on grounds of race, sex, religion, language, political opinion, membership in a union, national
origin, social origin, disability, or any other situation.39

Other results of the surveys related to access to institutions show that hidden forms of institutionalized discrimination
can cause certain groups to have difficulty exercising their political rights and, as a consequence, equal access to public
services. For example, in Bulgaria, regulations on the issuance of identification cards require a registered address. Those
regulations adversely affect mostly Roma minorities, who often have problems obtaining housing and do not have a reg-
istered address. Also, the Bulgarian Act on Social Benefits for Children, introduced in 2015, suspends child benefits for
children of underage girls, affecting mostly Roma women, who tend to have children at a younger age than do women in
the rest of the population. Those laws, coupled with the widely reported economic underperformance of Roma minori-
ties in Bulgaria (Gatti and others 2016), give rise to interesting research questions on the correlation between seemingly
neutral laws and the disproportionate effect that such laws can have on the continual economic marginalization of mi-
norities in the country.

Similar findings come from Morocco, where the Nationality Law of 1958, as amended in 2007, provides that Moroccan
nationality is acquired by birth except when the minister of justice opposes it. The Amazigh people from the south, how-
ever, usually lack birth certificates. As a result, the law setting out the requirements for foreigners to obtain Moroccan
nationality—including knowledge of the Arabic language, which those ethnic minorities often do not speak—also ap-
plies to them. That apparently neutral provision in the nationality law makes obtaining nationality harder for the
Amazigh people than for the Moroccan Arabic majority and, as a consequence, hinders access to social services and the
labor market (UNCERD 2010). In the area of cultural rights, however, Morocco has made some progress in the new
2011 Constitution by recognizing Tamazight, the language of the Amazigh people, as an official language.40

All six economies have constitutional provisions that guarantee the freedom of religion or belief;41 however, lack of har-
monization with national legislation sometimes means that such rights are severely curtailed. In Morocco, although the
law permits voluntary conversion, the authorities have used Article 220 of the penal code (see box 1) to actively prohibit
attempts to proselytize Sunni Maliki Muslims.42 In Vietnam, the Ordinance on Belief and Religion (Ordinance 21) and
government Decree 92, which implements the law, have been criticized by international observers for the excessive dis-
cretion they give to the government in regulating, restricting, and forbidding the free exercise of religion or belief in the
country.43


     Box 1: Article 220 of the Moroccan Penal Code
     Article 220 of the Moroccan Penal Code states that “anyone who has impeded or prevented one or more
     persons from worship or from attending worship services of any religion may be punished by six-months’ to
     three-years’ imprisonment and a fine of 200 to 500 dirhams.” Although Article 220 appears favorable to re-
     ligious freedom, it applies the same penalty to “anyone who employs enticements to shake the faith of a
     Muslim or to convert him to another religion.”

     Source: Penal Code of Morocco, Art. 220


With regard to enforcement mechanisms, the surveys highlight an encouraging practice in Mexico, where the 2003 Fed-
eral Law to Prevent and Eliminate Discrimination requires the judiciary and the police to receive training on existing an-


39
   Art. 34 of the Arab Charter of Human Rights, http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/instree/loas2005.html.
40
   Art. 5, Constitution of Morocco, 2011.
41
   Bulgaria, art. 37, para. 1; Mexico, art. 24; Morocco, art. 3; the Netherlands, art. 6, para. 1; Tanzania, art. 19 (1); and Vietnam, art.
24 (2013).
42
   United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Doc. A/HRC/WG.6/13/Mar/3, Summary Prepared by the
Office of the high commissioner for human rights in accordance with paragraph 5 of the annex to Human Rights Council Resolution
16/21 Morocco, Para. 42.
43
   United Nations Doc. A/HRC/28/66/Add.2, Report of the special rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief, Heiner Bielefeldt,
Addendum, Mission to Vietnam (July 21–31, 2014).



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                           15
tidiscrimination legislation. No other country studied shows a similar commitment to training the front-liners. Also, all
economies except Vietnam have established a specialized body to receive complaints for violations of human rights. In
Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Netherlands, those human rights bodies hear complaints of discrimination against ethnic, reli-
gious, and LGBTI groups. The Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance in Tanzania hears complaints of
discrimination only on ethnic and religious grounds. In Morocco, the National Council for Human Rights is concerned
mostly with the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities, detainees, and migrant workers.44 The newly estab-
lished Authority for Equality and the Combat of All Forms of Discrimination addresses discrimination based on ethnic
and religious grounds but does not include a judicial mandate to hear complaints45 (see figure 2).



Figure 2: Does the Country Have a Specialized Body Tasked with Hearing Complaints of Discrimination against
Ethnic, Religious, or Sexual Minorities?




                                 Bulgaria        Mexico      Morocco       Netherlands   Tanzania   Vietnam


                             Ethnic minorities      Religious minorities       Sexual orientation   Gender identity


Source: World Bank Equality Project.


This brief overview of the results of the sections of the three surveys covering access to institutions enables one to make a
few general considerations. First, all countries have some provisions to protect the rights of ethnic and religious minori-
ties, but the level of protection varies greatly, with some countries directly or indirectly discriminating against those
groups through other national legislation and other countries lacking appropriate legislation. Second, LGBTI communi-
ties are the least protected under the law, particularly in countries such as Morocco46 and Tanzania,47 where homosexual-
ity is criminalized. Bulgaria is the only economy that has passed a comprehensive law that protects against discrimination
on both sexual orientation and gender identity grounds. Finally, enforcement mechanisms for the implementation of
nondiscrimination legislation are scarce and do not always equally address the needs of all targeted groups.

44
   United Nations Doc. A/HRC/WG.6/13/MAR/1, National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 5 of the annex to Hu-
man Rights Council resolution 16/21, March 8, 2012, para. 20.
45
      HuffPost Moroc, Le projet de loi sur l’Autorité pour la parité adopté (May 10, 2016),
http://www.huffpostmaghreb.com/2016/05/10/loi-autorite-parite-maroc_n_9886560.html.
46
   Penal Code (2015), art. 489.
47
   Penal Code of 1945, art.154 and art. 157. A careful analysis of the law suggests that only gay, not lesbian, relationships are prohibit-
ed under the law.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                           16
2. Access to Education
Receiving a good education is arguably the most im-
portant factor for the development of a child into a      “Education is key to a better life and the foundation of every
mature and productive member of society. If children      strong society—but far too many children are still being left
receive substandard education and are discriminated       behind. To realize all our development goals, we need every
against throughout their formative years, they will not   child in school and learning.”
develop the skills and the confidence they need to be
competitive in the labor market.48 That is especially      Anthony Lake, executive director, UNICEF (UNICEF 2015)
true in today’s emerging knowledge-based global
economy, and numerous studies demonstrate that
learning and skills play an increasingly important role in shaping prospects for economic growth, shared prosperity, and
poverty reduction (Leitch 2006; Sapir 2003). Unfortunately, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Or-
ganization (UNESCO 2010, 5) reports, “Around a third of all children in developing countries, or 175 million annually,
enter primary school having experienced malnutrition that irreparably damages their cognitive development.” Often, such
deprivation is the consequence of circumstances beyond the control of the children and their families. “Marginalization in
education is the product of inherited disadvantage, deeply ingrained social processes, uneven power relationships, unfair
economic arrangements—and bad policies. The overall effect of marginalization is to restrict opportunity as a result of cir-
cumstances over which children have no control, such as parental wealth, gender, ethnicity, and language” (UNESCO
2010, 272).

The access to education indicator examines legislation related to the access of minority groups to education and whether
those laws differ from those applicable to the majority groups. In some countries—such as the Netherlands—education
is well developed and offers children and their families a variety of educational curricula and the opportunity to choose a
school according to one’s ethnic, religious, and cultural preferences.49 Liberal legislation in education, however, is not
necessarily a guarantee of equal opportunity for all, as demonstrated by the recent discussions in the Netherlands on the
segregation of children of Moroccan, Turkish, Surinamese, and Netherlands Antillean origins to so-called black schools
(Hamilton 2015) (see box 2).

In addition to identifying the minority gap in accessing education, the indicator attempts to measure the quality of edu-
cation and, in particular, the quality of the national school curriculum. That measurement is very important in overcom-
ing prejudicial attitudes. A national study on structural discrimination in education in Pakistan highlights the many ways
in which prejudice against religious minorities is reinforced by biased and outdated curricula that contain stereotypes of
non-Muslims. The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom found that textbooks used in Pakistani prima-
ry and secondary schools foster prejudice and intolerance of religious minorities, especially Hindus and Christians
(Hussain and Salim 2011, 9). According to its report, Hindus are repeatedly described in social studies textbooks as ex-
tremists and eternal enemies of Islam (Hussain and Salim 2011, 15). Finally, the sections of the three surveys covering
access to education attempt to capture discrimination or nondiscrimination laws and policies at all stages of education,
including primary, secondary, and tertiary education. That distinction is motivated by the vast literature in the field that
suggests that intervention at the early stages of a child’s education is important to address systematic inequalities (Human
Rights Commission of New Zealand 2012, 30; see also Bishop 2010, 61).




48
    For more information on the importance of quality education, see Sustainable Development Goal 4: Quality Education,
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/education/.
49
    Center on International Education Benchmarking, “System and School Organization,” http://www.ncee.org/programs-
affiliates/center-on-international-education-benchmarking/top-performing-countries/netherlands-overview/netherlands-system-and-
school-organization/. See also Patrinos (2014).



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                               17
    Box 2: The “Black Schools” of the Netherlands
    Parental choice regarding education in the Netherlands is sacrosanct. This derives partly from Article 23 of
    the Constitution, which was passed in 1917 and guaranteed equal government funding for both public and pri-
    vate schools, including denominational schools and institutions following specific pedagogical principles, such
    as Montessori schools. That system worked in the past, when schools were divided into Catholic, Protestant,
    and public schools. Following the influx of low-skilled immigrants in the 1950s and 1960s, however—especially
    Surinamese and Antilleans from former Dutch colonies, Moroccans, and Turks—native Dutch parents began
    selecting schools that were attended mostly by native-Dutch children, segregating the children of immigrants
    to predominantly “black” schools. Today, approximately 500 black schools operate in the Netherlands. (Ham-
    ilton 2015)

    According to Mohammed Jaater, the policy assistant for the Department of Education: “Even though a school
    is not allowed to officially refuse children, it may use many strategies to deter certain families from bringing
    their child to a school. Schools may emphasize the identity of the school. For example, a school with a partic-
    ular religious affiliation may place obstacles in the way of Muslim families. Also, many immigrant families are
    deterred by schools’ requests for high voluntary monetary donations. While giving money is never required,
    schools may choose not to emphasize this fact when addressing ethnic minorities. Currently, schools are not
    made accountable for their selection process so there is often no accurate documentation available which one
    may consult in cases of presumed (instrumental) discrimination.”

    Source: Arts and Nabha (2001)



In Bulgaria, nearly 25 percent of Roma children ages 7–15 have never attended school, compared with 12 percent of
ethnic Turks and only 6 percent of ethnic Bulgarians. Further, about 70 percent of ethnic Turks and 93 percent of Ro-
ma have not completed secondary education. By comparison, only 30 percent of ethnic Bulgarians have not completed
secondary education (World Bank 2015c). Also, as shown in table 3, all economies surveyed have a law prohibiting dis-
crimination on ethnic and religious grounds in education. Only Bulgaria and the Netherlands explicitly prohibit discrim-
ination on sexual orientation and gender identity grounds, however.50 In Morocco, worth noticing is the 2003 Circulaire
Ministérielle 108, which introduced the teaching of Amazigh language in primary schools.51 According to UNESCO, the
reform contributed to increased school attendance, with the percentage of children who had never been to school falling
from 9 percent in 2003 to 4 percent in 2009.52



Table 3: Does the Law Explicitly Prohibit Discrimination on Ethnic, Religious, Sexual Orientation, and Gender Iden-
tity Grounds in Education?

                               Bulgaria          Mexico          Morocco         Netherlands           Tanzania          Vietnam
Ethnic minorities                  ü                ü                ü                  ü                  ü                ü
Religious minorities               ü                ü                ü                  ü                  ü                ü
Sexual orientation                 ü                                                    ü
Gender identity                    ü                                                    ü

Source: World Bank Equality Project.



50
   Bulgaria explicitly prohibits discrimination in education based on sexual orientation and gender identity grounds in the Protection
Against Discrimination Act but not in its education law. Bulgaria recently passed a law on preschool and school education which en-
tered into force in August 2016. Although articles 3, 4, 5, and 7 of the law include various antidiscrimination provisions, they do not
explicitly mention LGBTI communities as a protected group. http://www.mon.bg/?go=page&pageId=7&subpageId=57.
51
   Circulaire ministérielle 108, 2003.
52
   UNESCO 2014.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                       18
In the realm of enforcement mechanisms, a good example comes from Vietnam, where the Education Act of 2005 pre-
scribes nomination quotas53 for admission to secondary education and university for children belonging to ethnic minor-
ities.54 Also, article 61 of the same law calls on the government to establish and give priority in the budget allocation to
boarding schools and pre-university schools for ethnic minority children.55 That law has guaranteed access to education
and skills development for many traditionally marginalized children and has increased their chances of being competitive
in the labor market. In Bulgaria, the Action Plan for the Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy sets
out a detailed program to promote the right to equal access to quality education and integration of Roma children and
students in kindergartens and schools.56 Also, in Bulgaria and Mexico, the laws require the reform of outdated curricula
that include prejudicial language against minorities and the training of primary and secondary education teachers on
nondiscrimination.57 To evaluate the efforts of the pilot economies in sensitizing students to the principles of equality,
the surveys also included a question on the teaching of cultural sensitivity courses in primary, secondary, and tertiary
schools. Although the approaches vary, Bulgaria, Mexico, the Netherlands, and Vietnam have policies that attempt to
educate students about human rights and nondiscrimination. No similar provisions could be identified in Morocco and
Tanzania.

As revealed by the results of the surveys, all of the pilot economies have taken some positive steps to improve access to
education for minorities; however, gaps remain. Especially in the realm of LGBTI rights, lack of protective legislation for
sexual minorities may be a factor contributing to the widely reported discrimination against LGBTI individuals in
schools.58 In a recent assessment of the protection of LBGTI individuals in Vietnam, the U.S. Agency for International
Development reports: “In summary, education institutions are not safe for LGBT students due to the lack of anti-
bullying and non-discrimination policies. Furthermore, education on sex and on sexual orientation and gender identifi-
cation (SOGI) is still limited in Vietnam and are considered sensitive topics that teachers usually avoid. There are also no
government initiatives to teach diversity and tolerance, or interpersonal skills.” (UNDP and USAID 2014, 28).


3. Access to the Labor Market
Access to the labor market is the most intuitive of the indicators. When individuals are prevented from obtaining and
keeping a job because of a cultural prejudice against their ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or gender identity—not
because of their skills or performance—human capital is wasted, resources are not efficiently allocated, and the economy
as a whole suffers. Also, if people are discriminated against in the workplace, their productivity decreases, and unem-
ployment grows as people are discouraged from applying for a job because of fear of discrimination and distrust in the
labor market. Employment discrimination also burdens the employer who, by giving up productive minority employees,
must bear higher average labor costs and lose profit opportunities (Hanouz 2015). That situation causes higher levels of
unemployment and consequential costs for the economy. Nonetheless, discrimination against minorities in the work-
place is widely acknowledged and documented.59

53
   Article 1.1 of Decree 49/2015/ND-CP defines nomination as follows: “Nomination means the enrollment of students into profes-
sional secondary education, college, and university without taking enrollment examination in order to train public officials according
to the tasks, job positions, and payroll norms; to train public employees according to working demand, job positions, professional title
standards, and salary fund of public administration units for areas meeting with extraordinary socio-economic difficulties and ethnic
minorities with no or few officials of college, university, or professional secondary education degrees.” Given the above definition,
“nomination quotas” in the context of Article 90.2 of Law on Education 2005 means the maximum number of students who may be
enrolled into professional secondary education, college and university without taking an enrollment examination, which the State sets
aside for an ethnic minority.
54
   Education Law (2005), art. 90 para 1.
55
   Education Law (2005), art. 61.
56
   “Action Plan for Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria (2012–2020) and the Dec-
ade of Roma Inclusion 2005–2015,” http://www.romadecade.org/cms/upload/file/9305_file2_bg-action-plan-updated.pdf.
57
   See art. 35, para. 1 and 3, Protection Against Discrimination Act, Bulgaria; and art. 8 and art. 12, para. 3, General Education Law,
Mexico.
58
    Bulgaria recently enacted the new Primary and Secondary Education Act. The law entered into force on August 1, 2016, and in-
cludes provisions for the protection of LGBTI individuals in education.
59
    See the International Labour Organization NATLEX database, which contains national laws regarding equal opportunity in em-
ployment and occupation, including specific laws on ethnic minorities or indigenous peoples, at http://www.ilo.org/natlex. See also
OECD (2008) and ILO (2015).



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                        19
In the United Kingdom, a test commissioned by the Department for Work and Pensions found that people with minori-
ty ethnic or foreign-sounding names are one-third less likely to be shortlisted for jobs than people with “white”-sounding
names (Wood and others 2009). Also in the United Kingdom, among those age 16 years old and older, almost all ethnic
minority groups have a higher proportion of their male population unemployed than do their white counterparts (Sims
2012, 11). In the United States, the General Society Survey, a national probability survey representative of the U.S. pop-
ulation, reports that, between 2003 and 2008, 38 percent of the lesbian, gay, and bisexual people who were open about
their sexual orientation in the workplace and 78 percent of transgender people experienced at least one form of discrimi-
nation, be it in hiring, promotion, or job retention (Sears and Mallory 2011). In Belgium in 2009, 45 percent of all em-
ployment discrimination complaints received by the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism were
race related; of those, 36.5 percent concerned access to employment and 56.1 percent concerned conditions of work
(ILO 2011a, 28).

The access to the labor market indicator identifies restrictions to accessing the job market, such as limitations to certain
forms of discriminatory employment or hiring practices, and the existence of workplace protections for people belonging
to ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities. The surveys revealed that all six pilot economies have constitutional provisions
or national laws that prohibit discrimination in the workplace on ethnic and religious grounds.60 In Bulgaria, Mexico,
and the Netherlands, that prohibition also applies to sexual orientation,61 and in Bulgaria, it also applies to gender identi-
ty. All of the pilot economies prescribe equal remuneration for work of equal value for individuals belonging to religious
and ethnic minorities. The same applies to LGBTI communities in Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Netherlands.62 The sur-
veys also found that, in 2014, the government of the Netherlands passed a comprehensive action plan against labor mar-
ket discrimination, targeting discrimination on the grounds of age, disability, race or ethnic origin, gender, and sexual
orientation. The plan includes a wide range of measures, including the creation of the Labor Market Discrimination
Team, which is charged with visiting companies to check on whether they have an effective antidiscrimination policy in
place (Holtmaat 2016).

Even where nondiscriminatory labor laws exist, they will be effective only if the states ensure that no other barriers—such
as high legal or administrative fees, lack of language interpreters, or other procedural hurdles—prevent or discourage mi-
norities from lodging a claim for employment discrimination (see box 3). As stated by the United Nations Rule of Law
Indicators’ report on access to justice, administrative hurdles and lack of transparent procedures can prevent a victim of
discrimination from obtaining remedy.63 The indicator for access to labor thus aims to assess the access to remedies for
individuals who have been subject to employment discrimination and examines the ease of bringing a claim for employ-
ment discrimination on racial, religious, or sexual grounds in the public sector. Given the growing role of companies in
the global economy, the indicator also assesses whether corporations have effective mechanisms for filing and addressing
grievances from employees and communities that may be discriminated against by the companies’ operations. In that
regard, the surveys revealed that all six economies have laws that allow an employee to bring a claim for employment dis-
crimination on ethnic and religious grounds in both the private and public sectors. In Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Nether-
lands, that holds true also for claims of employment discrimination on sexual orientation and gender identity grounds
(see table 4).




60
   Bulgaria, Labor
 Code (1992), Art. 8, Para 3; Mexico, Federal Labor Law (1970), Articles 3, 133; Morocco, Labor Code (2011), Art. 9; the Nether-
lands, Equal Treatment Act (1994), Sec. 5(1); Tanzania, Employment and Labour Relations Act, (2004), Art. 7(4); Vietnam, Labor
Code (2012), Art. 8.
61
   Bulgaria, Labor Code (1992), Art. 8, Para 3; Mexico, Labor Law (1970), Articles 3, 133; the Netherlands, Equal Treatment Act
(1994), Sec. 1(1)(b).
62
   Protection Against Discrimination Act (2004), Art. 12, Para. 1 and Art. 4, Para. 1
63
   The United Nations Rule of Law Indicators is a tool for assessing the rule of law in post-conflict situations. See UNOHCHR
(2011).



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                20
      Box 3: Article 283(12) of the Mexican Federal Labor Act
      Indigenous workers in the rural economy are particularly vulnerable to labor rights violations, the lack of
      training on rights and entitlements being one reason. In Mexico, 2012 amendments to the Federal Labor Act
      have introduced a provision requiring employers to use interpretation services when rural workers do not
      speak Spanish. Mexico has also launched a specific program to disseminate information on the rights of daily
      agricultural workers through community leaders and local authorities.

      Source: Federal Labor Act of Mexico, Art. 283(12)



Table 4: Does the Law Allow an Employee to Bring a Claim for Employment Discrimination on Religious, Ethnic,
Sexual Orientation, or Gender Identity Grounds in the Public and Private Sectors?

                                 Bulgaria          Mexico          Morocco        Netherlands      Tanzania    Vietnam
Ethnic minorities                   ü               ü                 ü                ü             ü            ü
Religious minorities                ü               ü                 ü                ü             ü            ü
Sexual orientation                  ü               ü                                  ü
Gender identity                     ü               ü                                  ü

Source: World Bank Equality Project.




Recently, the International Labour Organization highlighted a global trend in nondiscrimination legislation in the work-
place that shifts the burden of proof to the employer in cases of alleged discrimination (ILO 2011b, x). The survey re-
sults show that Bulgaria, Mexico, the Netherlands, and Tanzania are in line with such international trends. In all four
economies, once an employee has brought a claim for discrimination, the burden of proof shifts to the employer, who
must demonstrate that discrimination did not take place. Vietnam’s new Civil Proceedings Code adopts a hybrid ap-
proach. According to the new law, the burden of proof shifts to the employer when the employer is the repository of the
evidence or, in other words, holds the documentation related to the employment claim.64 At present, Morocco has no
similar forms of protection for its employees.

Discriminatory hiring practices, unfair labor treatment, and prejudicial attitudes toward certain minority groups may
hinder their full participation in the labor market, wasting their potential and lowering the competitiveness of the econ-
omy. Survey results suggest that legislation in the field of nondiscrimination labor law is fairly well developed in all six
economies. Interestingly, despite the fact that such economies have profoundly different legal traditions, they are adopt-
ing similar forms of enforcement mechanisms to implement the laws. Certainly, that trend is a reflection of the work of
international organizations such as the International Labour Organization that have tirelessly worked for many years on
the promotion of labor standards and harmonization of the law in that field. As mentioned, however, discrimination
against minorities in the workplace is still a reality, which suggests that stronger enforcement mechanisms must be put in
place to ensure equal opportunity in the labor market. Figure 3 shows that, as with the results of the surveys related to
the previous indicators, the weakest body of law protecting access to the labor market is that related to LBGTI commu-
nities. In Morocco and Tanzania—where homosexuality is a crime—all existing protective legislation in the workplace
applies only to ethnic and religious minorities.




64
     Decree 92/2015/QH13 on Civil Procedures Code (2015), Art. 91(1)(b), effective July 1, 2016.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                            21
Figure 3: Legal protection in the workplace

          Protection against discrimination
          on ethnic grounds
          Protection against discrimination
          on religious grounds
          Protection against discrimination
          on sexual orientation

          Protection against discrimination
          on gender identity grounds

          Protection for equal
          remuneration regardless of ethnicity

          Protection for equal
          remuneration regardless of religion

          Protection for equal remuneration
          regardless of sexual orientation

          Protection for equal remuneration
          regardless of gender identity
                                                 Bulgaria   Mexico     Morocco   Netherlands   Tanzania   Vietnam

Source: World Bank Equality Project.




4. Access to Property
Access to property is the cornerstone of economic security. Land ownership is important not only as a means of capital
accumulation but also as a source of income. Moreover, property reinforces bargaining power and agency. In addition,
the ability to leverage property as collateral is important for obtaining credit and starting a business.

The access to property indicator seeks to capture the minority gap in the ability to own, manage, control, and inherit real
property and to register and transfer a private business. The initial findings show that, although many property-related
laws are apparently minority neutral, hidden regulations and gaps in the law are at the root of many forms of indirect
discrimination regarding access to land and property rights.

In Mexico, “inequality has a particular effect on
the most vulnerable sectors of the population,
such as indigenous peoples—among whom the             Around one-quarter of the world’s urban population continues
poverty rate is four times higher” (Inter-            to live in slums and informal settlements. An increasing number
                                                      of urban dwellers, especially the most poor and vulnerable
American Commission on Human Rights 2015,
                                                      groups, are living in precarious conditions, addressing their
42). Article 27 of the Mexican constitution rec-
                                                      housing needs informally, lacking access to basic services and
ognizes indigenous peoples’ lands, protects their
                                                      living space, isolated from livelihood opportunities and vulnera-
property, and grants them preferential rights         ble to forced evictions or homelessness. … Efforts to improve
over their traditionally occupied territories. Still, access to adequate housing for women, migrants, refugees,
the struggle remains in the way the property law      people with disabilities, indigenous and minorities have made
translates into inclusion and economic empow-         little progress so far. (UN Habitat 2015)
erment. Mexico has not implemented a law on
free, prior, and informed consultation of indige-
nous peoples regarding development projects
that are implemented in their territories or that affect them in a direct manner. That situation has a negative effect on
their use of their land and property by causing instability. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights acknowl-




Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                           22
edged the problem in the latest human rights report on Mexico: “The granting of permits or concessions in or around
indigenous lands without free, prior, and informed consent has triggered social unrest and even violence” (2015, 120).

Another finding related to access to indigenous land concerns Tanzania, where the hunter-gatherer Akie and Hadzabe
and the pastoralist Barabaig and Maasai tribes face similar insecurity in land tenure as a consequence of discriminatory
land legislation. As reported by the International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs (IWGIA), those four peoples “all
share a strong attachment to the land, distinct identities, vul-
nerability, and marginalization. They also experience similar
                                                                     Social protection policies directly improve resili-
problems in relation to tenure insecurity, poverty, and inade-
                                  65                                 ence by helping people insure against drops in
quate political representation.” The 1999 Village Land Act
                                                                     well-being from a range of shocks and improve
allows rural people to formalize their land holdings by register-
                                                                     equity by reducing poverty and destitution and
ing their land as “village land.” The law grants indigenous peo-     promoting equality of opportunity. (World Bank
ples little real tenure security however, because the law also       2012)
provides that all lands, including “village land,” are “public
land vested in the President as trustee for and on behalf of all
citizens of Tanzania.”66 These provisions could potentially allow a head of state to convert village land into general public
land or reserved land on the grounds of “public interest”67 or because the land is considered to be “hazard land” (IWGIA
2016, 23).68 This can weaken land security for pastoralists and hunter-gatherers who can be evicted on these grounds
without any guarantee that the land will be used for the public interest. Although the new draft constitution grants wider
recognition of the rights of indigenous populations, it leaves unchanged the grounds of eviction under the Village Land
Act (IWGIA 2015b).

With regard to access to housing, discrimination against LGBTI communities often is a reality in all six pilot economies
covered by the study. In Tanzania, because of the criminalization of homosexuality, LGBTI individuals often are denied
rental housing. According to the chief operations officer of Amka Empowerment, a nonprofit organization that focuses
on health and human rights issues of sexual minorities and sex workers in Tanzania, “Almost all house owners don’t ac-
cept LGBT people” as tenants and “take it as a curse to their house to rent [to] LGBT.”69

Detecting institutionalized discrimination against ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities in the area of access to property
is more challenging than in the other indicators. Some forms of legal discrimination could be identified, but discrimina-
tion in this sector often happens in practice through de facto discriminatory behaviors by property managers and owners.
The laws on contract formation, licensing, and inheritance also seem to be, for the vast majority, neutral with regard to
ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, and gender identity. Those results suggest the need for more targeted legislation to
discourage discriminatory behaviors and to guarantee equal access to property, which is key in promoting financial stabil-
ity and equal access to public services and social safety nets for vulnerable populations.


5. Access to Public Services and Social Protection
Social protection can be defined as “all public and private initiatives that provide income or consumption transfers to the
poor, protect the vulnerable against livelihood risks, and enhance the social status and rights of the marginalized; with
the overall objective of reducing the economic and social vulnerability of poor, vulnerable, and marginalized groups.”70
World Bank Group research has consistently reaffirmed the importance of social protection in achieving the twin goals
of “reducing extreme poverty” (World Bank 2014, 33) and helping “achieve visible impacts in terms of reducing inequal-


65
   International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs, “Indigenous Peoples in Tanzania,” http://www.iwgia.org/regions/africa/tanzania.
66
   See Village Land Act, Part II.
67
   See Village Land Act, part III on Transfers and Hazard Land, section 4 (I).
68
   Hazard land is land that, if developed, may endanger life or lead to degradation or environmental destruction.
69
   Correspondence from the chief operations officer of Amka Empowerment to the Research Directorate, Immigration and Refugee
Board of Canada, July 28, 2014, http://www.refworld.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/rwmain?page=search&docid=540421f24&skip
=0&query=AMKA.
70
   This definition is from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO 2015), quoting Devereux and Sa-
bates‐Wheeler (2004, 9). For a more thorough discussion about the differences between social protection, social security, social insurance,
and social safety nets, see Morlachetti 2015 (2–4).



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                           23
ity” (World Bank 2015b, 48). Although a rapid expansion of social assistance programs has taken place in developing
countries over the past 15 years (Morlachetti 2015, 4), not everyone is benefiting equally from those programs. The
United Nations reports, “Because indigenous peoples often engage in informal work, they tend to lack coverage under
existing social security schemes and, even where covered, they may not meet the conditions for the realization of their
entitlements or are unable to access effectively programs and benefits (e.g., due to geographical and linguistic barriers,
lack of adequate infrastructure)” (United Nations Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Issues 2014, 9).

The indicator for access to public services and social protection examines the ability of individuals belonging to a minori-
ty group to access public services and social protections—including health care, social housing, electricity, water supply,
microcredit, subsidized health insurance, social pensions, and child benefits—in the same way as does the dominant
population in the country. The indicator also attempts to capture whether laws encourage nongovernmental organiza-
tions (NGOs) to provide similar services and whether the government imposes funding limitations on the provision of
such services and allows tax deductions for donations to such NGOs.

The data show that Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Netherlands have comprehensive legal frameworks for nondiscrimination
against minorities in the provision of social services. As shown in figure 4, those three economies prohibit discrimination
(either in a clause in the constitution, in their respective nondiscrimination laws, or in a specific law that regulates each
of the social services) in access to health care, housing, electricity, water supply, microcredits, health insurance, and social
pensions. The Protection Against Discrimination Act of Bulgaria and the Equal Treatment Act of the Netherlands also
prohibit discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities and LGBTI communities in obtaining child benefits. Mo-
rocco and Vietnam prohibit discrimination against minorities in the provision of some but not all of those services. In
Tanzania, where the indigenous pastoralists and hunter-gatherers have little access to basic public services—such as edu-
cation, health care, and water (IWGIA 2015a, 86–88)—no relevant laws could be identified.71


Figure 4: Does the Law Prohibit Discrimination against Ethnic and Religious Minorities and LGBTI Groups in Ob-
taining Social Protection Floors?

                       Health care


                       Social housing


                       Electricity


                       Water supply


                       Microcredits


                       Health insurance


                       Social pensions


                       Child benefits
                                               Bulgaria     Mexico      Morocco    Netherlands   Tanzania   Vietnam

Source: World Bank Equality Project.
Note: Services listed are covered by the surveys; however, the list is not exhaustive, and the economies may have
legal provisions prohibiting discrimination in obtaining other forms of social services. No relevant laws were found
in Tanzania.


71
     For a detailed analysis of Tanzania’s social protection framework, see ILO (2008).



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                24
The case of Mexico is particularly interesting. First, Mexico has a comprehensive constitutional framework that covers
economic and social rights. Also, its Federal Law to Prevent and Eliminate Discrimination prohibits discrimination in
obtaining those services for religious minorities, ethnic minorities, and LGBTI persons. In addition, Mexican laws on
social security, health, housing, water, electricity, and financial services all contain an article that prohibits discrimination
in the provision of the respective services.

In Morocco, the only relevant provision is Article 31 of the constitution, which guarantees equal access of its citizens to
health care, housing, water supply, health insurance, and social pensions. Article 31 does not address equality in the pro-
vision of financial services, but the country has adopted a law on microcredits—Dahir 1-99-16 of 1999, modified by
Dahir 1-04-12 of 2004—which provides for the disbursement of up to DH 50,000 to destitute people to help them ei-
ther start a business for the production of goods or services, improve their housing conditions, or gain access to electricity
and clean water.72 Although the law does not refer specifically to minorities, many of the minorities are among the poor-
est in the country and are therefore covered by the law.73

In Vietnam, the 2013 constitution includes some—but not all—of the social services covered by the study. In particular,
the Vietnamese constitution regulates health care and health insurance (Articles 38 and 58), welfare, social security, and
housing (Art. 59). Despite such constitutional protections, other national laws in Vietnam limit access to social services
for ethnic minorities in the country. In particular, the hộ khẩu, or system of household registration, represents a barrier
to ethnic minorities, especially children, to obtaining access to education, health insurance, and other services74 (see box
4).


    Box 4: Vietnamese Household Registration System
    The hộ khẩu, or system of household registration, was established by law in 1964 and stated that every citi-
    zen was to be registered as a resident in one and only one household at the place of permanent residence,
    and movements could take place only with the permission of authorities. Registration was linked to the pro-
    vision of public services and employment. As shown in a recent World Bank Group report on Vietnam’s
    Household Registration System, although the system has become less rigid over time, concerns persist that
    hộ khẩu limits the rights and access to public services of those who lack permanent registration. Incidentally,
    extremely few ethnic minorities are permanent registrants—just 1.8 percent of the overall permanent regis-
    trant population. (Nationally, ethnic minorities constitute approximately 14 percent of the population.) Eth-
    nic minorities are a much larger fraction of temporary registrants. Children with temporary registration are
    substantially less likely to be enrolled in school at the lower and upper secondary levels, even after control-
    ling for individual and household characteristics. Also, despite a national policy of free health insurance for
    children under age 6, one-quarter of temporary registrant children in that age group lack health insurance.
    Qualitative evidence indicates that this is due in part to their registration status. Some temporary registrants
    also face obstacles in designating a local facility as their health care location, which means that they pay high-
    er fees for health care. Additionally, qualitative evidence suggests that policies on whether temporary regis-
    trants can qualify for social assistance are inconsistent. Temporary registrants are slightly less likely than
    comparable permanent registrants to appear on the “poor list,” but overall rates of appearing on the poor
    list and receiving most forms of social assistance are low (regardless of registration status) in areas where
    temporary registrants live. Temporary registrants also face difficulties in conducting basic government pro-
    cedures such as registering a motorcycle.

    Source: World Bank and Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences (2016)




72
    Dahir 1-99-16 of February 5, 1999, promulgating the law 18-97 related to microcredit, http://81.192.52.100
/BO/Fr/1999/BO_4678_Fr.pdf; and Dahir 1-04-12 of April 21, 2004, promulgating the law 58-03 modifying and supplementing
the law 18-97 related to microcredit, http://www.albaraka.ma/portail-des-administrateurs/wp-content/themes/albaraka/textes
%20reglementaires/Dahir%20Loi%20microcr%C3%A9dit/Dahir%201-04-12.pdf.
73
   World Bank 2011, 103.
74
   World Bank and Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences 2016, XI.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                 25
As shown previously, even when laws are neutral,
minorities tend to have less access to property be-       LGBT individuals are at particular risk of targeted violence
cause of de facto discrimination by property manag-       at the hands of private actors. Homophobic and tran-
ers and owners. As a consequence, minorities tend to      sphobic violence has been recorded in all regions. Such
depend more on public housing. Survey results in          violence may be physical (including murder, beatings, kid-
Bulgaria reveal that the government has created a         nappings, rape, and sexual assault) or psychological (in-
                                                          cluding threats, coercion, and arbitrary deprivations of
policy to address the issue. The National Roma Inte-
                                                          liberty). (UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human
gration Strategy aims to improve the living condi-
                                                          Rights 2012)
tions of neighborhoods with a high density of Roma
people and other ethnic minorities. The strategy in-
cludes building public housing and undertaking other measures to increase the ability of Roma populations and other
ethnic minorities to acquire public services and social protection floors, such as preventive maternal and child care,
health services, health awareness and information, and health insurance for long-term unemployed persons.

In Morocco, Article 3 of the Associations Act, as amended in 2002, imposes indirect restrictions on the access to services
for people belonging to religious minorities. According to that article, “An association that is founded for illegal purpose
or goal contrary to the public morals or that may aim at violating the Islamic religion or the unity of the national soil or
the royal regime or may call on all forms of discrimination will be invalid.”75 Although Article 3 can be justified by the
government’s need to restrict the operations of extremist religious groups, it is debatable whether such wide government
discretion on the formation of religious associations in general is conducive to equal opportunity and the protection of
religious freedom in the country.76

Finally, public services and social protection can be enhanced by the work of NGOs locally. Data collection from the six
economies revealed that none of them impose direct funding limitations to the work of NGOs. In Morocco and Tanza-
nia, however, where homosexuality is criminalized, the law applies only to the work of NGOs dealing with the interest of
ethnic and religious minorities but not the interests of sexual minorities. This situation can have some serious conse-
quences for the LGBTI community. Despite having the fourth-highest number of deaths from AIDS in the world, Tan-
zania does not provide specialized HIV services to LGBTI individuals (Human Rights Watch 2013).

This survey of the laws on provision of public services and social protection in the six economies has shown that most
countries acknowledge the importance of providing citizens basic access to public services and social protection, with
some countries addressing discrimination in some but not all of the public services and social protection floors covered
by the study. A notable exception on this topic is Tanzania, where the law is much less developed. In Vietnam, nondis-
crimination provisions in obtaining public services are present, but indirect discrimination occurs as a consequence of
other national laws that limit access of ethnic minorities in the country to certain public services.77


6. Protection from Hate Crimes or Hate Speech
The indicator for protection from hate crimes or hate speech examines the existence of laws and mechanisms that prose-
cute hate crimes and laws that prosecute hate speech and provide protection for individuals belonging to ethnic, reli-
gious, and sexual minorities (see box 5). In addition to being a violation of the fundamental rights of every human being

75
   International Center for Not-for-Profit Law, Morocco Act on the Right of Association, http://www.icnl.org/research/library/files
/Morocco/Act-2002-en.pdf.
76
   For example, see UNCERD (2010).
77
   Worth mentioning is that the government of Vietnam has recently taken the initial steps toward an alternative system that could
ultimately supplant the household registration system. Under the Law on Civil status, which came into effect at the beginning of
2016, the government is establishing a national population database and a citizen identification card with a citizen identification
number linked to the database. The national database will hold basic information on each individual, including gender, ethnicity, and
marital status. It will also include place of permanent registration and current residence. Public officials have described a gradual ex-
pansion of the system, with citizen identification cards linked to the national database largely replacing other administrative papers,
such as the hộ khẩu booklet. See World Bank and Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences 2016, http://documents.worldbank
.org/curated/en/158711468188364218/pdf/106381-PUB-P132640-ADD-ISBN-ON-BACK-COVER-PUBLIC.pdf; See also World
Bank and Ministry of Planning and Investment of Vietnam 2016, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23724 Li-
cense: CC BY 3.0 IGO.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                         26
to life and security,78 violence against minorities (in the case of hate crimes) affects the economic outcomes of individuals
and of the country as a whole (Crehan and McCleary-Sills 2015, 6). Countries that criminalize homosexuality also have
costs associated with police enforcement, judicial proceedings, and incarceration. In the particular case of transgender
prisoners, for example, reports reveal that they are susceptible to abuse when they are placed within the general prison
population, and avoiding the abuse increases the costs associated with the incarceration of those individuals
(UNOHCHR 2012, 24). A recent World Bank study on the cost of discrimination against LGBT people in India esti-
mates that the cost of violence against LGBT people in the country could be as high as US$30.8 billion (Badgett 2014).


     Box 5: What Are Hate Crimes and Hate Speech?
     Hate crimes are criminal acts motivated by bias or prejudice toward particular groups of people. To be con-
     sidered a hate crime, the offense must meet two criteria: First, the act must constitute an offense under
     criminal law; second, the act must have been motivated by bias. Bias motivations can be broadly defined as
     preconceived negative opinions, stereotypical assumptions, intolerance or hatred directed to a particular
     group that shares a common characteristic, such as race, ethnicity, language, religion, nationality, sexual ori-
     entation, gender, or any other similar common factor.

     Source: OSCE (2009)



As shown in table 5, data gathered by the study show no uniformity among the pilot economies in confronting the issue
of bias-motivated crimes. In general, three different approaches were found: (a) countries with specific legislation con-
cerning hate crimes and laws concerning hate speech (Bulgaria); (b) countries with legislation regarding hate speech but
no laws related to hate crimes (Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, and Vietnam); and (c) countries with no legislation
regarding either hate crimes or hate speech (Tanzania). One good practice is found in Bulgaria’s criminal code, which
contains specific provisions regarding bias-motivated crimes in Articles 162–165. Article 162(2) concerns “crimes against
national and racial equality” and punishes anyone who “uses violence against another or damages his property because of
his nationality, race, religion, or political convictions.”


Table 5: Does the Law Criminalize Hate Crime or Hate Speech?

                          Bulgaria         Mexico          Morocco          Netherlands          Tanzania            Vietnam
Hate crime                    ü
Hate speech                   ü               ü                 ü                  ü                                     ü

Source: World Bank Equality Project.



Mexico criminalizes hate speech but does not provide for autonomous hate crime legislation at the federal level. Article
138(VIII) of the Penal Code of Mexico City, however, considers “hate” an aggravating circumstance that augments the
punishment of the “base crimes” of homicide and bodily harm or injuries. Interestingly, this code provides that “hate”
includes the religious and ethnic origin of the victim, but it also expressly mentions sexual orientation and gender identi-
ty as characteristics that constitute a bias when committing the crimes of homicide or bodily harm or injuries.79 The
gender identity characteristic is not expressly mentioned in any of the penal codes of the other countries. In Morocco,
the penal code criminalizes inciting hatred during sports events. Vietnam’s penal code does not regulate hate crimes, but
it does prohibit hate speech as the action of “sowing hatred, ethnic bias and/or division, infringing upon the rights to

78
   See Article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which reads, “Everyone has the right to life, liberty, and security of
person.”
79
   Criminal Code for the Federal District (2002), Art. 138, Para. VIII.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                     27
equality among the community of Vietnamese nationalities.”80 The Netherlands created a system of prosecutorial guide-
lines, called BOS/Polaris,81 which require prosecutors to seek higher sentences when bias motivation is found in a crime.
The implementation of those guidelines imposes increased penalties on the perpetrator if an element of hate is present in
a crime. The target groups of bias crimes are defined on the basis of race, ethnicity, religion and faith, sexual orientation,
and disabilities (Ringnalda and Kool 2012).

Finally, to assess whether the economy is committed to the implementation of the law, the indicator for protection from
hate crime or hate speech assesses the existence of policies or other forms of enforcement mechanisms that mandate the
training of the judiciary in hate crime legislation so judges can effectively address crimes motivated by ethnic, religious,
and sexual orientation or gender identity bias. None of the economies surveyed in the study have such detailed provi-
sions in their laws. Some notable results with regard to enforcement mechanisms were found in Bulgaria, however, where
Articles 377–384 of the Judiciary System Act require government agencies to collect data on hate crimes and Articles 21–
22 of the Legal Aid Act guarantee free legal aid to the victims.


VI. Conclusions

Findings from the six pilot economies seem to confirm anecdotal information regarding a correspondence between gaps
in equality laws and policies and the economic marginalization of certain ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities. Ten
main findings resulted from the data collection and analysis for the six indicators:

     1.   All of the pilot economies have some laws addressing discrimination against minorities. Some countries—
          Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Netherlands—have a comprehensive law that addresses discrimination on the basis of
          ethnic, religious, and sexual orientation grounds. Following a 2015 amendment, the Bulgarian law also covers
          discrimination on gender identity grounds. The other countries—Morocco, Tanzania, and Vietnam—have
          some form of legislation aimed at protecting ethnic and religious minorities but not sexual minorities, who are
          subject to criminal prosecution in Morocco and Tanzania.
     2.   Of the laws surveyed for the six indicators (access to institutions, access to education, access to the labor market,
          access to property, access to public good and social protection, protection from hate crimes and hate speech),
          nondiscrimination legislation in access to the labor market is the most advanced. In that area, all pilot econ-
          omies have provisions in their labor codes that prohibit discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities in
          the workplace. In Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Netherlands, those provisions also cover sexual minorities. In all
          six economies, a claim can be filed for employment discrimination in both the public and the private sectors.
          Also, in Bulgaria, Mexico, the Netherlands, and Tanzania, the burden of proof (that is, proving that no dis-
          crimination occurred) is shifted to the employer, in line with recent international developments.82 A recent
          amendment to the Vietnamese labor law includes a similar provision.
     3.   Of the laws surveyed under the access to property indicator, the only de jure discrimination identified relates
          to indigenous lands. That suggests that discrimination in this area is mostly de facto (that is, in practice) rather
          than de jure (that is, by law). It also suggests that wider government intervention is needed to prevent discrimi-
          nation in this area.
     4.   All pilot economies have adopted some enforcement mechanism for the implementation of existing nondis-
          crimination laws. Bulgaria, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, and Tanzania all have specialized agencies
          tasked with hearing complaints of discrimination. In Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Netherlands, such agencies hear
          complaints of discrimination on ethnic, religious, and sexual orientation grounds. In Tanzania the agency only
          hears complaints of discrimination on ethnic and religious grounds. In Morocco, the National Council for
          Human Rights addresses the rights of ethnic minorities but only if they are migrant workers. The country re-
          cently established a specialized agency to address other forms of discrimination, but that agency is not charged


80
   Criminal Code (1999), Art. 87, Para. 1(b).
81
   The guidelines were created to establish uniformity and standardize decision making with regard to the scale of punishment for
crimes because similar crimes should be judged similarly.
82
        International        Labour        Organization,        Labour       Legislation     Guidelines,        chapter      VII,
http://www.ilo.org/legacy/english/dialogue/ifpdial/llg/noframes/ch7.htm#28.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                 28
        with hearing complaints. Vietnam does not have a similar institution, but the Council of Ethnic Minorities in
        the National Assembly has been instrumental in the adoption of various pro-ethnic minority laws.
    5. In all pilot economies, some good practices have been identified. Among them are (a) the inclusion of
        transgender individuals in the Protection Against Discrimination Act of Bulgaria; (b) the training of individuals
        in the judiciary and the police under Mexico’s Federal Law to Prevent and Eliminate Discrimination; (c) the
        recognition of Tamazight as an official language in the new constitution of Morocco; (d) the Labor Market
        Discrimination Team established by the Dutch Action Plan against Labor Market Discrimination; (e) the
        recognition of ethnic minorities and the introduction of a special provision for their protection in Tanzania’s
        new draft constitution; and (f) the Vietnamese Education Act of 2005, which sets quotas for children belonging
        to ethnic minorities, allowing them to gain access to education.
    6. De jure discrimination can be direct—such as Article 220 of the Moroccan penal code, which prohibits the
        proselytization of Sunni Malik Muslims by other sects and religions—and indirect—such as the Vietnamese
        household registration system, which limits Protestant minorities’ access to services by requiring a household
        registration booklet to obtain services that is often denied to those communities by local wardens.
    7. At times, discrimination is an unintended effect of liberal laws that were intended to promote freedom of
        choice—such as in the Netherlands, where liberal laws in education have contributed to segregating Moroccan,
        Turkish, Surinamese, and Netherlands Antillean children to so-called black schools.
    8. Lack of protective legislation can also contribute to discrimination against certain groups. For example, in
        Mexico, the lack of a law on free, prior, and informed consultation with indigenous peoples regarding devel-
        opment projects in their territories has limited their access to property.
    9. The absence of harmonization between pieces of national legislation can have the unintended consequence of
        affecting one group more than another. For example, in Bulgaria, the equal access to services guaranteed by the
        Protection Against Discrimination Act is hampered by regulations that require a registered address—which
        Roma minorities often do not possess—for obtaining national identification documents.
    10. Of the three groups—ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities—the least protected under the law are sexual
        minorities. In Bulgaria, Mexico, and the Netherlands, the laws protecting LGBTI communities from discrimi-
        nation are slowly being developed, but more must be done in the realm of enforcement mechanisms. In Vi-
        etnam, homosexuality is not a crime, but same-sex couples are ineligible for the legal protections available to
        heterosexual couples. In Morocco and Tanzania, homosexuality is a crime, and sexual minorities are marginal-
        ized and denied even the most basic services, such as housing and health care.

A few general lessons can be drawn from this exercise. First, a worrisome dearth of systematic data exists in the field of
nondiscrimination legislation disaggregated by ethnicity, religion, and sexual orientation and gender identity. More re-
search is needed to understand the problem, calculate the economic costs of marginalization, and conduct comparable
cross-country analysis. In addition, the surveys must be revised to include questions that address other hidden forms of
institutionalized discrimination, especially in the area of access to property.

The premise of this study is that legislation and policies that discriminate against ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities
or lack of appropriate protective measures against discrimination has a reverse effect on the economy. The reasoning is
that excluding otherwise productive members of society from the labor market and financial systems (through marginali-
zation in institutions, education, property, public services, the labor market, and the criminal law) reduces the competi-
tiveness of the economy and its potential revenues. Admittedly, a much wider pool of data is needed to prove this
premise; however, what is clear is that people around the world are systematically discriminated against for reasons be-
yond their control. Also apparent is that countries with have adopted more inclusive laws and policies have seen im-
provements in their economies. That may be a coincidence—or maybe what is needed is a more critical look at legal
frameworks, with the underlying premise that human dignity is not negotiable and that everyone deserves equal oppor-
tunities, irrespective of ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or gender identity.




Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                             29
Appendix A: Existing Legal Datasets on Nondiscrimination

Database              Agency                           Focus                          How it differs from the World Bank
                                                                                                Equality Project
Legislationonline Organization     Legislationonline is a free, online legislative   Covers only OSCE countries and does
                  for Security     database created in 2002 to assist OSCE           not cover issues related to education,
                  and Co-          participating states in bringing their legisla-   property, social services and social
                  operation in     tion in line with relevant international hu-      protection, and the labor market (un-
                  Europe           man rights standards.                             less covered by the antidiscrimination
                  (OSCE)           Includes legislation on nondiscrimination,        legislation). Does not allow for cross-
                                   freedom of religion, citizenship, national        country comparison.
                                   human rights institutions, and hate crimes.
NATLEX            International    NATLEX is a database of national labor,           Covers only labor legislation and re-
                  Labour Or-       social security, and related human rights         lated human rights laws and not issues
                  ganization       legislation. Includes legislation on nondis-      related to institutions, education,
                  (ILO)            crimination in the labor market.                  property, public goods, social protec-
                                                                                     tion, and hate crimes or hate speech.
                                                                                     Does not allow for cross-country
                                                                                     comparison.
NORMLEX           ILO              NORMLEX is a database of national labor           Covers only labor legislation and in-
                                   and social security laws, ratification infor-     ternational instruments and does not
                                   mation, reporting requirements, and com-          cover issues related to institutions,
                                   ments of the ILO’s supervisory bodies.            education, property, public goods, so-
                                   Includes legislation on nondiscrimination in      cial protection, and hate crimes or
                                   the labor market and ratification of em-          hate speech. Does not allow for cross-
                                   ployment discrimination conventions.              country comparison.
General Surveys ILO                The General Surveys are reports examin-           Covers only labor legislation and does
(2012, 1996,                       ing law and practice in a particular subject      not cover issues related to institu-
1986) of the                       area related to labor in member states that       tions, education, property, public
Committee of                       have or have not ratified relevant ILO con-       goods, social protection, and hate
Experts                            ventions.                                         crimes or hate speech. Does not allow
                                   Includes legislation on nondiscrimination in      for cross-country comparison.
                                   the labor market.
The OHCHR         Office of the    The database includes existing measures           Does not cover issues related to insti-
antidiscrimina-   High Com-        and practices to combat address racism,           tutions, education, property, public
tion database     missioner for    racial discrimination, xenophobia, and re-        goods, social protection, and hate
                  Human Rights     lated intolerance at the international, re-       crime and hate speech (unless covered
                  (OHCHR)          gional and national levels.                       by nondiscrimination legislation). Does
                                                                                     not allow for cross-country compari-
                                                                                     son.
Planipolis        United Na-       The Planipolis database provides legisla-         Does not cover issues related to insti-
                  tions Educa-     tion, policies, and plans on education from       tutions, labor market, property, public
                  tional,          official sources of UNESCO member                 goods, social protection, and hate
                  Scientific and   states.                                           crime or hate speech. Does not allow
                  Cultural Or-                                                       for cross-country comparison.
                  ganization
                  (UNESCO)




Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                           30
The Internation- UNESCO            The IBE provides a country database that        Does not cover issues related to insti-
al Bureau of Ed-                   includes profiles of education systems (in-     tutions, labor market, property, public
ucation (IBE)—                     cluding laws and policies), a selection of      goods, social protection, and hate
legal dataset                      official reports from national education au-    crime or hate speech. Does not allow
                                   thorities, information on national curricula,   for cross-country comparison.
                                   and links to official information sources on
                                   education (including Ministries of Educa-
                                   tion).
European Equal- European           The network includes updates on legisla-        Does not cover non-European coun-
ity Law Net-    Equality Law       tive, policy, and case-law developments in      tries. Does not allow for cross-
work—Legal      Network            the field of nondiscrimination in the 35        country comparison.
Developments                       states that participate in the network.
WORLD Policy The WORLD             The WORLD Policy Forum includes laws Does not cover institutions, property,
Forum—Data   Policy Analy-         and public policies in 191 countries cover- public goods, social protection, and
on Education sis Center at         ing poverty, discrimination, education,      hate crime or hate speech.
             University of         health, child labor, child marriage, and pa-
             California, Los       rental care.
             Angeles
             (UCLA)
Compendium of Human Rights Compendium of blasphemy laws covers                     Covers only religious minorities. Does
blasphemy laws First       legislation that seeks to criminalize those             not cover other groups and does not
                           who insult or defame religions and related              cover labor market, education, prop-
                           legislation.                                            erty, public goods, social protections,
                           Includes legislation on freedom of religion             and hate speech and hate crimes.
                           and discriminatory laws against religious
                           minorities.
Sexual Orienta- International      The Sexual Orientation Laws in the World Covers only sexual minorities.
tion Laws in the Lesbian, Gay,     dataset includes criminalization, protection,
World            Bisexual,         and recognition laws related to sexual mi-
                 Trans and In-     norities.
                 tersex Asso-
                 ciation (ILGA)




Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                         31
Appendix B: Contributors

This report was possible with the contribution of nearly 50 experts who answered the surveys and provided guidance
with regard to local legislation in the six pilot countries. We greatly appreciate the time and effort they dedicated to the
Equality Research Paper.


 Ms.    Yordanska Bekirska              Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights                              Bulgaria
 Ms.    Dilyana Giteva                  Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights                              Bulgaria
 Ms.    Miriana Ilcheva                 Center for the Study of Democracy                               Bulgaria
 Mr.    Ilko Jordanov                   Open Society Institute Sofia                                    Bulgaria
 Ms.    Denitsa Lyubenova               LGBT Youth Association                                          Bulgaria
 Ms.    Ilina Maltzeva                  Boyanov & Co.                                                   Bulgaria
 Mr.    Dimitar Markov                  Center for the Study of Democracy                               Bulgaria
 Mr.    Hristo Peshev                   2G consultants                                                  Bulgaria
 Ms.    Monika Pisankaneva              Bilitis Resource Center Foundation                              Bulgaria
 Ms.    Sayuri Shimoda                  Shearman & Sterling LLP                                         Bulgaria
 Mr.    Deyan Terziev                   Boyanov & Co.                                                   Bulgaria
 Mr.    Simeon Vasilev                  Gays and Lesbians Accepted in Society (GLAS)                    Bulgaria
 Ms.    Maria Yordanova                 Center for the Study of Democracy                               Bulgaria

 Ms.    Andrea Melissa Alanis           Peña Mouret Abogados S.C.                                       Mexico
 Ms.    Yenesenia Barberena             Shearman & Sterling LLP                                         Mexico
 Ms.    Maria Jose Buccio               Peña Mouret Abogados S.C.                                       Mexico
 Ms.    Fiona Coffee                    Clifford Chance                                                 Mexico
 Ms.    Cinthia Aguilar Flores          Clifford Chance                                                 Mexico
 Ms.    Catherine Freeman               Clifford Chance                                                 Mexico
 Ms.    Ivonne Garza                                                                                    Mexico
 Ms.    Gladys Morales                  Clínica de Justicia y Género Marisela Escobedo                  Mexico
 Mr.    Luis Alberto Muñoz              Clínica de Justicia y Género Marisela Escobedo                  Mexico
 Ms.    Adriana Muro                    Elementa Asesoria en Derechos Humanos                           Mexico
 Mr.    Gabriel Peña Mouret             Peña Mouret Abogados S.C.                                       Mexico
 Mr.    Gizeh Polo                      Clifford Chance                                                 Mexico
 Ms.    Lisseth Rincon                  Shearman & Sterling LLP                                         Mexico
 Ms.    Nora Robledo                    Elementa Asesoria en Derechos Humanos                           Mexico
 Ms.    Catherine Romero                Elementa Asesoria en Derechos Humanos                           Mexico
 Mr.    Arturo Sotelo                   Oficina de Defensoría de los Derechos de la Infancia            Mexico
 Ms.    Mariana Villanueva              Peña Mouret Abogados S.C.                                       Mexico
 Ms.    Uttara Dukkipati                Shearman & Sterling LLP                                         Morocco
 Mr.    Thomas Parigot                  Shearman & Sterling LLP                                         Morocco

 Ms.    Byambadulam Enkhbayar           Clifford Chance                                                 Netherlands
 Ms.    Natasha Fricker                 Clifford Chance                                                 Netherlands
 Ms.    Jocelyn Huang                   Shearman & Sterling LLP                                         Netherlands
 Mr.    Folhino Telg                                                                                    Netherlands
 Ms.    Becky Wall                      Clifford Chance                                                 Netherlands




Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                              32
 Ms.    Juliana Apopo                  Clifford Chance                          Tanzania
 Ms.    Camilla Bunney                 Shearman & Sterling LLP                  Tanzania
 Ms.    Jessica Gladstone              Clifford Chance                          Tanzania
 Ms.    Phoebe Richardson              Clifford Chance                          Tanzania
 Mr.    Kevin Smith                    Clifford Chance                          Tanzania

 Mr.    Dang Duong Anh                 Vietnam International Law Firm (VILAF)   Vietnam
 Mr.    Savas Manoussakis              Shearman & Sterling LLP                  Vietnam
 Mr.    Hoang Anh Linh Nguyen          Vietnam International Law Firm (VILAF)   Vietnam
 Ms.    Yen Nguyen                     ICS Center                               Vietnam
 Mr.    Tran Hanh Linh Pahm            Vietnam International Law Firm (VILAF)   Vietnam
 Mr.    Le Trung Vu                    Vietnam International Law Firm (VILAF)   Vietnam




Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                              33
Appendix C: Country Data

Ethnic Minorities

INSTITUTIONS                               Bulgaria                      Mexico                        Morocco                     Netherlands                        Tanzania                      Vietnam
The Constitution and National Legislation
Under the Constitution:
Is there a general nondis-      Yes      Constitution of the Yes    Constitución Política de   No                         Yes    Constitution of the King-   Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Constitution of
crimination clause?                      Republic of Bulgaria       los Estados Unidos Mexi-                                     dom of the Netherlands            United Republic of Tan-         Vietnam (2013),
                                         (1991), Art. 6 Para.       canos (1917), Art. 1                                         (2008), Art. 1                    zania (1977), Arts. 9(g),       Art. 5 Para. 2
                                         2                                                                                                                         13(1)(2)
If yes, does it explicitly Yes           Constitution of the Yes    Constitución Política de   N/A                        Yes    Constitution of the King-   Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Constitution of
mention ethnic minorities?               Republic of Bulgaria       los Estados Unidos Mexi-                                     dom of the Netherlands            United Republic of Tan-         Vietnam (2013),
                                         (1991), Art. 6 Para.       canos (1917), Art. 1                                         (2008), Art. 1                    zania (1977), Arts. 9(g),       Art. 5 Para. 2
                                         2                                                                                                                         13(1)(2)
Is there a provision that  Yes           Constitution of the Yes    Constitución Política de   Yes   Constitution du Roy-  Yes   Constitution of the King-   Yes   Constitution of the     Yes     Constitution of
guarantees equality before               Republic of Bulgaria       los Estados Unidos Mexi-         aume du Maroc (2011),       dom of the Netherlands            United Republic of Tan-         Vietnam (2013),
the law?                                 (1991), Art. 6 Pa-         canos (1917), Art. 4             Art. 6                      (2008), Art. 1                    zania (1977), Arts. 12,         Art. 16 Para. 1
                                         ras. 1,2                                                                                                                  13(1)
If yes, does it explicitly Yes           Constitution of the Yes    Constitución Política de   No                         Yes    Constitution of the King-   Yes   Constitution of the      No
mention ethnic minorities?               Republic of Bulgaria       los Estados Unidos Mexi-                                     dom of the Netherlands            United Republic of Tan-
                                         (1991), Art. 6 Para.       canos (1917), Art. 2 Para.                                   (2008), Art. 1                    zania (1977), Art. 13(5)
                                         2                          A Sec. III
Is customary law recog-         No                           Yes.   Constitución Política de   No                         No                                 Yes   Judicature and Applica- No
nized as a valid source of                                          los Estados Unidos Mexi-                                                                       tion of Laws Act (1920),
law?                                                                canos (1917), Art. 2 Para.                                                                     Art. 11 (1)
                                                                    A Sec. II
If yes, is customary law        Not                          Yes    Constitución Política de   N/A                        N/A                                Yes   Judicature and Applica- N/A
invalid if it violates provi-   appli-                              los Estados Unidos Mexi-                                                                       tion of Laws Act (1920),
sions on nondiscrimination      cable                               canos (1917), Art. 2 Para.                                                                     Art. 11 (3)
or equality?                    (N/A)                               A Sec. II
Is there a provision that Yes            Constitution of the Yes    Constitución Política de   Yes   Constitution du Roy-  No                                No                             Yes    Contitution of
guarantees the freedom of                Republic of Bulgaria       los Estados Unidos Mexi-         aume du Maroc (2011),                                                                         Vietnam (2013),
ethnic minorities to ex-                 (1991), Arts. 36, 54       canos (1917), Art. 2 Para.       Art. 6                                                                                        Art. 5 Para. 3; Art.
press their cul-                                                    A Sec. IV                                                                                                                      42
ture/traditions or speak
their language?
Under National Legislation:
Is there a specific law on      Yes           Protection     Yes          Ley Federal para     No                         Yes    Equal Treatment Act         No                             No
nondiscrimination?                            Against Dis-                Prevenir y Eliiminar                                   (1994)
                                              crimination                 la Discriminación
                                              Act (2004)                  (2003)




               Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                         34
If yes, does it provide pro- Yes          Protection     Yes            Ley Federal para     N/A                                   Yes   Equal Treatment Act         N/A                            N/A
tection from discrimina-                  Against Dis-                  Prevenir y Eliiminar                                             (1994), Sec. 1(b) is the
tion on ethnic grounds?                   crimination                   la Discriminación                                                most accurate answer
                                          Act (2004),                   (2003), Art. 1 Sec.                                              even though it does not
                                          Art. 4 Para. 1                III                                                              state the words ethnic or
                                                                                                                                         ethnicity
Are there any other laws Yes              Criminal       Yes            Ley General de      Yes        Code Pénal (1962),        Yes     Criminal Code (1881), Art. No                              Yes   Criminal Code
that protect ethnic minori-               Code (1968),                  Derechos Linguisti-            Art. 431-1, Art. 431-2            137                                                              (1999), Art. 3 Para.
ties from discrimination?                 Arts 162 Para.                cos de los Pueblos             Dahir n 1-79-186                                                                                   2
                                          1, 172 Para. 1                Indígenas (2003)               portant publication du
                                          Labor Code                    Ley de la Comisión             Pacte international
                                          (1992), Art. 8                Nacional para el               relatif aux droits
                                          Para. 3                       Desarrollo de los              économiques, sociaux
                                          National Edu-                 Pueblos Indígenas              et culturels et du Pacte
                                          cation Act                    (2003)                         international relatif aux
                                          (1991), Art. 4                                               droits civils et poli-
                                                                                                       tiques (1979), Art. 27


Political Rights
Is there a provision that     Yes         Constitution Yes              Constitución Políti- Yes       Constitution du Roy-  Yes         Constitution of the King-   Yes   Constitution of the     Yes    Constitution of
guarantees freedom of                     of the Repub-                 ca de los Estados              aume du Maroc (2011),             dom of the Netherlands            United Republic of Tan-        Vietnam (2013),
opinion and expression?                   lic of Bulgaria               Unidos Mexicanos               Art. 25                           (2008), Art. 7                    zania (1977), Art. 18          Art. 25
                                          (1991), Art.                  (1917), Arts. 6, 7
                                          39 Para. 1
Do laws and/or regulations relating to any of these categories differ between ethnic minorities and the ethnic majority?
Obtaining citizenship?        No          Constitution No               Constitución Políti- No        Code de la nationalité No         Constitution of the King-   No    Tanzania Citizenship Act No    Nationality Law
                                          of the Repub-                 ca de los Estados              moracaine (1958), Art.            dom of the Netherlands            (1995), Arts. 4–6              (2008), Art. 2 Para.
                                          lic of Bulgaria               Unidos Mexicanos               9                                 (2008), Art. 1                                                   2
                                          (1991), Art.                  (1917), Art. 30 Pa-                                              Netherlands Nationality
                                          25 Para. 1                    ra. A                                                            Act (2010), Art. 3
Registering birth?            No          Constitution No               Constitución Políti- No        Loi n°37-99 relative à      No    Constitution of the King-   No    Births and Deaths Regis- No    Decree
                                          of the Repub-                 ca de los Estados              l'état civil (2002), Art.         dom of the Netherlands            tration Act (1920), Art.       158/2005/ND-CP
                                          lic of Bulgaria               Unidos Mexicanos               16                                (2008), Art. 1                    11                             on Civil Status
                                          (1991), Art.                  (1917), Art. 4.                                                                                                                   Registration and
                                          25 Para. 3                                                                                                                                                      Management,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (2005), Artt. 13–16
Obtaining a passport?         No          Bulgarian Per- No             Constitución Políti- No        Décret n°2-08-310           No    Constitution of the King-   No    Tanzania Passports and   No    Decree No.
                                          sonal Docu-                   ca de los Estados              instituant le passeport           dom of the Netherlands            Travel Documents Act           136/2007 ND-CP
                                          ments Act                     Unidos Mexicanos               biométrique (2008),               (2008), Art. 1                    (2002), Art. 12                17 on Vietnamese
                                          (1999), Art. 4                (1917), Art. 4                 Art. 1                                                                                             Citizens' Exit and
                                          Para. 1                       Reglamento de                                                                                                                     Entry (2007), Art.
                                                                        Pasaportes y del                                                                                                                  8
                                                                        Documento de
                                                                        Identidad y Viaje
                                                                        (2011), Art. 14




                   Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                            35
Obtaining an ID card?      No           Bulgarian Per- No             Constitución Políti- No       Loi n° 35-06 (2007),       No    Constitution of the King-   No   Registration and Identifi- No   Decree No.
                                        sonal Docu-                   ca de los Estados             instituant la carte na-          dom of the Netherlands           cation of Persons Act           05/1999/ND-CP 3
                                        ments Act                     Unidos Mexicanos              tionale d'identité élec-         (2008), Art. 1                   (1986), Arts. 8, 9              on the People's
                                        (1999), Art. 4                (1917), Art. 4                tronique, Art. 1                                                                                  Identity Card
                                        Para. 1                                                                                                                                                       (1999), Art. 3 Para
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2 and 4
Do laws and/or regulations relating to freedom of movement differ between ethnic minorities and the ethnic majority?
In moving within the coun- No           Constitution No               Constitución Políti- No       Constitution du Roy-        No   Constitution of the King- No     Constitution of the      No     Constitution of
try?                                    of the Repub-                 ca de los Estados             aume du Maroc, Art. 24           dom of the Netherlands           United Republic of Tan-         Vietnam (2013),
                                        lic of Bulgaria               Unidos Mexicanos              Dahir n 19-68 portant            (2008), Art. 1                   zania (1977), Art. 17(1)        Art. 23
                                        (1991), Art.                  (1917), Art. 11               ratification et publication      Directive 2004/38/EC of
                                        35                                                          de la convention interna-        the European Parliament
                                                                                                    tionale sur l'élimination        and of the Council (2004),
                                                                                                    de toutes les formes de          Art. 3
                                                                                                    discrimination raciale
                                                                                                    (1969), Art. 5
In leaving and returning to No          Constitution No               Constitución Políti- No       Constitution du Roy-        No   Constitution of the King-   No   Constitution of the      No     Contitution of
the country?                            of the Repub-                 ca de los Estados             aume du Maroc, Art. 24           dom of the Netherlands           United Republic of Tan-         Vietnam (2013),
                                        lic of Bulgaria               Unidos Mexicanos              Dahir n 19-68 portant            (2008), Art. 1        Di-        zania (1977), Art. 17(1)        Art. 23
                                        (1991), Art.                  (1917), Art. 11               ratification et publication      rective 2004/38/EC of the
                                        35                                                          de la convention                 European Parliament and
                                                                                                    internationale sur l'élimi-      of the Council, (2004),
                                                                                                    nation de toutes les             Arts. 4, 5
                                                                                                    formes de discrimination
                                                                                                    raciale (1969), Art. 5

Are NGOs that promote the interests of ethnic minorities:
Permitted under the law?   Yes          Bulgarian        Yes          Constitución Políti- Yes      Dahir 1-58-376 régle- Yes        Constitution of the King- Yes    Non-Governmental Or- Yes        Decree No.
                                        Non-Profit                    ca de los Estados             mentant le droit d'as-           dom of the Netherlands           ganizations Act (2002),         12/2012/ND-CP
                                        Legal Entities                Unidos Mexicanos              sociation (1958), Art. 2         (2008), Art. 8                   Art. 2                          on registration and
                                        Act (2000),                   (1917), Art. 9                                                 Civil Code, Book 2 (1972),                                       management of
                                        Art. 2 Paras.                 Ley Federal de Fo-                                             Art. 2:285                                                       operation of non-
                                        1–2                           mento a las Ac-                                                                                                                 governmental or-
                                                                      tividades realizadas                                                                                                            ganizations in
                                                                      por Organizaciones                                                                                                              Vietnam, (2012),
                                                                      de la Sociedad Civil                                                                                                            Art. 3 Para. 1
                                                                      (2004), Art. 5, Sec.                                                                                                            Decree No. 30 on
                                                                      XIII                                                                                                                            social and charity
                                                                                                                                                                                                      funds (2012), Art.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2




              Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                             36
If yes, are the NGOs sub-     Yes         Bulgarian        Yes             Ley Federal de Fo- Yes     Dahir 1-58-376 régle- Yes   Civil Code, Book 2 (1972), Yes   Non-Governmental Or- Yes   Decree No.
ject to limitation by the                 Non-Profit                       mento a las Ac-            mentant le droit d'as-      Art. 2:20                        ganizations Act (2002),    12/2012/ND-CP on
state on the basis of na-                 Legal Entities                   tividades realizadas       sociation (1958), Art. 3                                     Art. 14(1)                 registration and
tional security, public or-               Act (2000),                      por Organizaciones                                                                                                 management of
der, morality, or other                   Art. 3 (2)                       de la Sociedad Civil                                                                                               operation of non-
grounds?                                                                   (2004), Art. 30                                                                                                    governmental or-
                                                                                                                                                                                              ganizations in
                                                                                                                                                                                              Vietnam, (2012),
                                                                                                                                                                                              Art. 4
                                                                                                                                                                                              Decree No. 30 on
                                                                                                                                                                                              social and charity
                                                                                                                                                                                              funds (2012), Art.
                                                                                                                                                                                              7.1
Representation in the Three Branches of Government (Legislative, Executive, and Judiciary)
Does the law:
Mandate quotas for ethnic No                               No                                    No                        No                               No                          No
minorities in parliament?
Does the law prohibit an individual belonging to a ethnic minority from:
Holding ministerial posts?    No                           No                                    No                        No                               No                          No
Enforcement of Antidiscrimination Laws and Policies
Does the law:
Require the judiciary to    No                             Yes             Ley Federal para      No                        No                               No                          No
receive training on the                                                    Prevenir y Eliminar
application of existing an-                                                la Discriminación
tidiscrimination laws deal-                                                (2003), Art. 20,
ing with ethnic minorities?                                                Para. XL, 34, Para.
                                                                           IV
Require the police to re- No                               Yes             Ley Federal para    No                          No                               No                          No
ceive training on the appli-                                               Prevenir y Eliminar
cation of existing                                                         la Discriminación
antidiscrimination laws                                                    (2003), Art. 20,
dealing with ethnic minori-                                                Para. XL, 34, Para.
ties?                                                                      IV
                                                                           Ley General del
                                                                           Sistema Nacional
                                                                           de Seguridad Públi-
                                                                           ca (2009), Art. 40,
                                                                           Secs. I, IV




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                  37
Establish a specialized    Yes           Ombudsman       Yes           Ley de la Comisión Yes     Dahir n 1-11-19          Yes    Institute for Human Rights Yes    Constitution of the       No
body tasked with receiving               Act (2003),                   Nacional de los            portant création du             Act, Sec.1.                       United Republic of Tan-
complaints for violations                Art. 2                        Derechos Humanos           Conseil national des            Institute for Human Rights        zania (1977), Art. 129(1)
of human rights (Human                                                 (1992), Art. 2:            droits de l'Homme               (formerly Equal Treatment         Commission for Human
Rights Committee, Om-                    Protection                    Comisión Nacional          (2011)      Constitution        Commission)                       Rights and Good Gov-
budsman, etc.)?                          Against Dis-                  de los Derechos            du Royaume du Maroc                                               ernance Act (2001), Art.
                                         crimination                   Humanos                    (2011), Artt. 19, 161,                                            6(1)(b)
                                         Act (2004),                   Ley Federal para           and 164
                                         Art. 40                       Prevenir y Eliminar
                                                                       la Discriminación
                                                                       (2003), Art. 16:
                                                                       Consejo Nacional
                                                                       para Prevenir la
                                                                       Discriminación (not
                                                                       a general human
                                                                       rights body, but
                                                                       specialized in dis-
                                                                       crimination)
If yes, does such body       Yes         Ombudsman       Yes           Ley de la Comisión No      Dahir n 1-11-19           Yes   Institute for Human Rights Yes    Commission for Human N/A
hear complaints of ethnic                Act (2003)                    Nacional de los            portant création du             Act (2011), Secs. 3(a),           Rights and Good Gov-
discrimination?                          Art. 19 Para.                 Derechos Humanos           Conseil national des            10(1)                             ernance Act (2001),
                                         1                             (1992), Art. 3             droits de l'Homme                                                 Arts. 6(1)(b), 28(1)(c)
                                                                       Ley Federal para           (2011), Artt. 1, 3, and 4
                                         Protection                    Prevenir y Eliminar
                                         Against Dis-                  la Discriminación
                                         crimination                   (2003), Arts. 1 Pa-
                                         Act (2004),                   ra. III, 43
                                         48 Para. 2
Is there a budget alloca-    Yes         Ombudsman       Yes           Constitución Políti- Yes   Dahir n 1-11-19          Yes    The Ministry of Justice has Yes   Commission for Human N/A
tion for the operation of                Act (2003),                   ca de los Estados          portant création du             the main responsibility for       Rights and Good Gov-
such body/bodies?                        Art. 7                        Unidos Mexicanos           Conseil national des            the Institute's budget. The       ernance Act (2001), Art.
                                         Protection                    (1917), Art. 102           droits de l'Homme               budget is regulated in the        29
                                         Against Dis-                  Para. B                    (2011), Art. 55                 Annual Budgets Act and
                                         crimination                   Ley de la Comisión                                         not in the Netherlands
                                         Act (2004),                   Nacional de los                                            Institute for Human Rights
                                         Art. 40 Para.                 Derechos Humanos                                           Act.
                                         3                             (1992), Arts. 2, 75
                                                                       Ley Federal para
                                                                       Prevenir y Eliminar
                                                                       la Disciminación
                                                                       (2003), Art. 16 (re-
                                                                       garding
                                                                       CONAPRED, not
                                                                       the Ombudsman)
EDUCATION                             Bulgaria                        Mexico                        Morocco                         Netherlands                        Tanzania                    Vietnam
Participation in Education
Does the law prohibit discrimination in school admission on ethnic grounds in:




              Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                        38
Primary education?      Yes         National Edu- Yes        Constitución Políti- Yes   Constitution du Roy-        Yes   Equal Treatment Act      Yes   Education Act (1978),      Yes   Decree No.
                                    cation Act               ca de los Estados          aume du Maroc (2011),             (1994), Sec. 7(1) (c).         Art. 56(2)                       38/2005/QH11
                                    (1991) Art. 4            Unidos Mexicanos           Art. 31           Dahir n                                        Law of the Child Act             on Education Law
                                    Para. 2                  (1917), Art. 3             19-68 portant ratification                                       (2009), Art. 5(2), 8(2)          (2005), Art. 10
                                                             Ley General de             et publication de la con-
                                                             Educación (1993),          vention internationale
                                                             Art. 2                     sur l'élimination de
                                                             Ley Federal para           toutes les formes de
                                                             Prevenir y Eliminar        discrimination raciale(
                                                             la Discriminación          1969), Art. 5 Dahir n 1-
                                                             (2003), Art. 9             79-186 portant publica-
                                                                                        tion du Pacte interna-
                                                                                        tional relatif aux droits
                                                                                        économiques, sociaux et
                                                                                        culturels et du Pacte
                                                                                        international relatif aux
                                                                                        droits civils et politiques
                                                                                        (1979), Art. 13
Secondary education?    Yes         National Edu- Yes        Constitución Políti- Yes   Constitution du Roy-        Yes   Equal Treatment Act      Yes   Education Act (1978),      Yes   Decree No.
                                    cation Act               ca de los Estados          aume du Maroc (2011),             (1994), Sec. 7(1) (c).         Art. 56(2)                       38/2005/QH11
                                    (1991) Art. 4            Unidos Mexicanos           Art. 31 Dahir n 19-68                                            Law of the Child Act             on Education Law
                                    Para. 2                  (1917), Art. 3             portant ratification et                                          (2009), Arts. 5(2), 8(2)         (2005), Art. 10
                                                             Ley General de             publication de la con-
                                                             Educación (1993),          vention internationale
                                                             Art. 2                     sur l'élimination de
                                                             Ley Federal para           toutes les formes de
                                                             Prevenir y Eliminar        discrimination raciale
                                                             la Discriminación          (1969), Art. 5
                                                             (2003), Art. 9             Dahir n 1-79-186
                                                                                        portant publication du
                                                                                        Pacte international
                                                                                        relatif aux droits
                                                                                        économiques, sociaux
                                                                                        et culturels et du Pacte
                                                                                        international relatif aux
                                                                                        droits civils et politiques
                                                                                        (1979), Art. 13




             Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                39
Tertiary education?         Yes           National Edu- Yes             Constitución Políti- Yes      Constitution du Roy-      Yes       Equal Treatment Act      Yes   Education Act (1978)   Yes   Decree No.
                                          cation Act                    ca de los Estados             aume du Maroc (2011),               (1994), Sec. 7(1) (c).                                      38/2005/QH11
                                          (1991) Art. 4                 Unidos Mexicanos              Art. 31 Dahir n 19-68                                                                           on Education Law
                                          Para. 2                       (1917), Art. 3                portant ratification et                                                                         (2005), Art. 10
                                                                        Ley General de                publication de la con-
                                                                        Educación (1993),             vention internationale
                                                                        Art. 2                        sur l'élimination de
                                                                        Ley Federal para              toutes les formes de
                                                                        Prevenir y Eliminar           discrimination raciale(
                                                                        la Discriminación             1969), Art. 5      Dahir
                                                                        (2003), Art. 9                n 1-79-186 portant
                                                                                                      publication du Pacte
                                                                                                      international relatif aux
                                                                                                      droits économiques,
                                                                                                      sociaux et culturels et
                                                                                                      du Pacte international
                                                                                                      relatif aux droits civils
                                                                                                      et politiques (1979),
                                                                                                      Art. 13
Does the law prescribe quotas for individuals belonging to ethnic minorities in:
Primary education?          No                            No                                No                                 No                                  No                           No
Secondary education?        No                            No                                No                                 No                                  No                           Yes   Decree No.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      38/2005/QH11
                                                                                                                                                                                                      on Education Law
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (2005), Art. 90
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Para. 1
Tertiary education?         No                            No                                No                                 No                                  No                           Yes   Decree No.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      38/2005/QH11
                                                                                                                                                                                                      on Education Law
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (2005), Art. 90
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Para. 1
Fighting Marginalization in Education
Does the law mandate the adoption of measures aimed at sensitizing the students to the principles of nondiscrimination and equality in:
Primary education?          Yes           Protection     Yes            Constitución Políti- No                                Yes        Primary Education Act    No                           Yes   Decree No.
                                          Against Dis-                  ca de los Estados                                                 (1981), Art. 46                                             38/2005/QH11
                                          crimination                   Unidos Mexicanos                                                                                                              on Education Law
                                          Act (2004),                   (1917), Art. 3 Para.                                                                                                          (2005), Arts. 5
                                          Art. 35 Paras.                4                                                                                                                             Para. 1, 7 Para 2.
                                          1, 3                          Ley General de
                                          National Edu-                 Educación (1993),
                                          cation Act                    Arts. 7, 8, 33
                                          (1991) Art. 15
                                          Para. 2




              Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                           40
Secondary education?         Yes           Protection     Yes   Constitución Políti- No                             Yes    Secondary Education Act     No                           Yes    Law No.
                                           Against Dis-         ca de los Estados                                          (1963), Art. 42                                                 38/2005/QH11
                                           crimination          Unidos Mexicanos                                                                                                           Education
                                           Act (2004),          (1917), Art. 3 Para.                                                                                                       Law(2005), Arts.
                                           Art. 35 Paras.       4                                                                                                                          5 Para. 1, 7 Para
                                           1, 3                 Ley General de                                                                                                             2.
                                           National Edu-        Educación (1993),
                                           cation Act           Arts. 7, 8, 33
                                           (1991), Art.
                                           15 Para. 2
Does the law:
Mandate the revision of      Yes           Protection     Yes   Ley General de          No                          No                                 No                           No
national textbooks in pri-                 Against Dis-         Educación (1993),
mary and secondary edu-                    crimination          Arts. 8, 12 Para. III
cation to eliminate                        Act (2004),
discriminatory language?                   Art. 35 Paras.
                                           1, 3
Mandate the training of    Yes             Protection     Yes   Ley General de          No                          No                                 No                           No
school teachers in primary                 Against Dis-         Educación (1993),
and secondary education                    crimination          Arts. 8, 12 Para. III
on antidiscrimination of                   Act (2004),
ethnic minorities?                         Art. 35 Paras.
                                           1, 3
LABOR                                   Bulgaria                Mexico                         Morocco                       Netherlands                       Tanzania                    Vietnam
Equality in Accessing the Labor Force
Does the law:
Prohibit individuals belong- No            Labor Code      No   Ley Federal para     No      Code du Travail          No   Constitution of the King-   No   Constitution of the       No   Decree No.
ing to ethnic minorities                   (1992) Art. 8        Prevenir y Eliminar          (2011), Art. 9, and Art.      dom of the Netherlands           United Republic of Tan-        10/2012/QH13
from obtaining employ-                     Para. 3              la Discriminación            478 Constitution du           (2008), Art. 19 Para. 3.         zania (1977), Art. 22 (1)      Labor Code
ment in specific sectors?                  Protection           (2003), Art. 9 Para.         Royaume du Maroc              Equal Treatment Act              Employment and Labour          (2012), Art. 5
                                           Against Dis-         III.                         (2011), Art. 31               (1994), Sec. 5(1)(b)             Relations Act (2004),          Para 1, Art. 8
                                           crimination                                                                                                      Art. 7(1)                      Para. 1
                                           Act (2004),
                                           Art. 12




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                              41
Prohibit discrimination on Yes      Labor Code Yes           Ley Federal para     Yes   Code du Travail          Yes    Equal Treatment Act          Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Decree No.
ethnic grounds in recruit-          (1992), Art. 8           Prevenir y Eliminar        (2011), Art. 9, and Art.        (1994), Sec. 5(1)                  United Republic of Tan-         10/2012/QH13
ment in the public sector?          Para. 3                  la Discriminación          478 Constitution du                                                zania (1977), Art. 22 (2)       Labor Code
                                    Protection               (2003), Art. 9 Para.       Royaume du Maroc                                                   Employment and Labour           (2012), Art. 5
                                    Against Dis-             III. Ley Federal del       (2011), Art. 31                                                    Relations Act (2004),           Para. 1
                                    crimination              Trabajo (1970),                                                                               Arts. 7(1), 7(4)(g)             Decree No.
                                    Act (2004),              Arts.3, 133                                                                                                                   05/2011ND-CP
                                    Art. 12                                                                                                                                                on Ethnic Minori-
                                    Civil Servants                                                                                                                                         ties Work, Art. 7
                                    Act (1999),                                                                                                                                            Para. 1
                                    Art. 7 Para. 6                                                                                                                                         Decree No.
                                                                                                                                                                                           58/2010/QH12
                                                                                                                                                                                           Law on Public
                                                                                                                                                                                           Employees
                                                                                                                                                                                           (2010), Art. 21
                                                                                                                                                                                           Paras. 1, 5
                                                                                                                                                                                           Decree No.
                                                                                                                                                                                           22/2008QH12 on
                                                                                                                                                                                           Cadres and Civil
                                                                                                                                                                                           Servants (2008),
                                                                                                                                                                                           Art. 38 Paras. 1, 4
Prohibit discrimination on Yes      Labor Code Yes           Ley Federal para     Yes   Code du Travail          Yes    Equal Treatment Act        Yes     Employment and Labour Yes       Decree No.
ethnic grounds in recruit-          (1992), Art. 8           Prevenir y Eliminar        (2011), Art. 9, and Art.        (1994), Sec. 5(1).                 Relations Act, (2004),          10/2012/QH13
ment in the private sector?         Para. 3                  la Discriminación          478 Constitution du             The exception is Equal             Art. 7(4)(g)                    Labor Code
                                    Protection               (2003), Art. 9 Para.       Royaume du Maroc                Treatment Act (1994), Sec.                                         (2012), Art. 8
                                    Against Dis-             III. Ley Federal del       (2011), Art. 31                 5(3)                                                               Para. 1
                                    crimination              Trabajo (1970),
                                    Act (2004),              Arts.3, 133
                                    Art. 12 Para.
                                    1
Prohibit an employer from Yes       Protection      No                           No                               No                                 No                             No
asking about an individual’s        Against Dis-
ethnicity during the re-            crimination
cruitment phase?                    Act (2004),
                                    Art. 12 Para.
                                    1
Prescribe equal remunera- Yes       Protection      Yes      Constitución Políti- Yes   Code du Travail           Yes   Equal Treatment Act          Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Decree No.
tion for work of equal              Against Dis-             ca de los Estados          (2011), Art. 9 and Art.         (1994), Sec. 5 (1)(e), (h)         United Republic of Tan-         10/2012/QH13
value for individuals be-           crimination              Unidos Mexicanos           478.                                                               zania (1977), Art. 23 (1)       Labor Code
longing to ethnic minori-           Act (2004),              (1917), Art. 123                                                                              Employment and Labour           (2012), Arts. 5
ties?                               Art. 14 Para.            Para. VII                                                                                     Relations Act (2004),           Para. 1 (a), 8
                                    1                        Ley Federal del                                                                               Art. 7(10)                      Para. 1 , 90 Para.
                                                             Trabajo (1970),                                                                                                               3
                                                             Art. 56




             Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                 42
Prohibit discrimination on Yes          Criminal       Yes           Ley Federal del     Yes       Code du Travail            Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour Yes      Law on Public
ethnic grounds in the dis-              Code (1968),                 Trabajo (1970),               (2011), Art. 9, Art. 36,         (1994), Secs. 5(1), 8            Relations Act, (2004),         Employees, Art.
missal of employees?                    Art. 172 Para.               Arts. 3, 133                  Para. 5                                                           Arts. 7(4)(c), 37(3)(b)(iii)   30, Decree No.
                                        1                                                                                                                                                           10/2012/QH13
                                        Protection                                                                                                                                                  Labor Code
                                        Against Dis-                                                                                                                                                (2012), Art. 3
                                        crimination                                                                                                                                                 Para. 7, and 194
                                        Act (2004),                                                                                                                                                 Para. 6
                                        Arts. 20–21
Access to Remedy
Does the law allow an employee to bring a claim for employment discrimination on ethnic grounds:
In the public sector?         Yes       Protection       Yes         Ley Federal del     Yes       Code du Travail            Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour Yes      Decree No.
                                        Against Dis-                 Trabajo (1970),               (2011), Arts.9, 41               (1994), Secs. 10, 12 (2)         Relations Act, (2004),         10/2012/QH13
                                        crimination                  Arts. 2, 3, 133                                                                                 Arts. 7(4)(c), 37(3).          Labor Code
                                        Act (2004),                  Ley Federal para                                                                                                               (2012), Art. 8
                                        Arts. 50, 71.                Prevenir la Dis-                                                                                                               Para. 1
                                                                     criminación (2003),
                                                                     Art. 43.
If there is a law, does it    Yes       Protection       No          No provisions       Yes       Code du Travail          Yes     Equal Treatment Act        No    No provisions could be   No    No provisions
prohibit retaliation by the             Against Dis-                 could be located              (2011), Art. 36, Para. 4         (1994), Sec. 8(a)                located                        could be located
employer for bringing a                 crimination
complaint or participating              Act (2004),
in any manner in an em-                 Arts. 5, addi-
ployment discrimination                 tional provi-
proceeding?                             sions, Sec. 1
                                        (3)
In the private sector?        Yes       Protection       Yes         Ley Federal del     Yes       Code du Travail            Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour Yes      Decree No.
                                        Against Dis-                 Trabajo (1970),               (2011), Arts. 9, 41              (1994), Secs. 10, 12 (2)         Relations Act, (2004),         10/2012/QH13
                                        crimination                  Arts.2, 3, 133.                                                                                 Arts. 7(4)(c), 37(3).          Labor Code
                                        Act (2004),                  Ley Federal para                                                                                                               (2012), Art. 3
                                        Arts. 50, 71.                Prevenir la Dis-                                                                                                               Para. 7, and 194
                                                                     criminación (2003),                                                                                                            Para. 6
                                                                     Art. 43
If there is a law, does it    Yes       Protection       No          No provisions       Yes       Code du Travail          Yes     Equal Treatment Act        No    No provisions could be   No    No provisions
prohibit retaliation by the             Against Dis-                 could be located              (2011), Art. 36, Para. 4         (1994), Sec. 8(a)                located                        could be located
employer for bringing a                 crimination
complaint or participating              Act (2004),
in any manner in an em-                 Arts. 5, addi-
ployment discrimination                 tional provi-
proceeding?                             sions, Sec. 1
                                        (3)
Does the law:




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                       43
Shift the burden of proof   Yes           Protection     Yes            Ley Federal del      Yes       Code du Travail       Yes   Equal Treatment Act   Yes   Employment and Labour No   Decree No.
for antidiscrimination                    Against Dis-                  Trabajo (1970),                (2011), Art. 63             (1994), Sec. 10 (1)         Relations Act, (2004),     10/2012/QH13
claims from the employee                  crimination                   Art. 784                                                                               Art. 7(8)(a)               Labor Code
to the employer?                          Act (2004),                                                                                                                                     (2012), Art. 192
                                          Art. 9                                                                                                                                          Para. 2(a); Civil
                                                                                                                                                                                          Proceeding Code
                                                                                                                                                                                          (2012), Art. 79
                                                                                                                                                                                          Para. 1
Allow class action lawsuits Yes           Protection     Yes            Ley Federal del      Yes       Code du Travail       Yes   Equal Treatment Act   No                         Yes   Civil Proceeding
for employment discrimi-                  Against Dis-                  Trabajo (1970),                (2011), Art. 549            (1994), Sec. 10 (2)                                    Code (2012), Art.
nation on ethnic grounds?                 crimination                   Art. 697                                                                                                          31 Para. 2(a)
                                          Act (2004),
                                          Art. 71 Paras.
                                          2, 3
                                          Civil Proce-
                                          dure Code
                                          (2007), Art.
                                          379 Para. 1
PROPERTY                              Bulgaria                         Mexico                             Morocco                    Netherlands                  Tanzania                Vietnam
Access to Land
Do laws and/or regulations relating to any of these transactions differ between ethnic minorities and the ethnic majority?
Obtain a title of land (e.g., No                         No                                  No                              No                          No                         No
for the purposes of trans-
fer or sale)?
Lease land?                 No                           No                                  No                              No                          No                         No
License land?               No                           No                                  No                              No                          No                         No
Obtain a mortgage?          No                           No                                  No                              No                          No                         No
Inherit land?               No                           No                                  No                              No                          No                         No
Does the law allow indigenous peoples:
To demarcate and obtain a No                             Yes            Constitución Políti- No                              No                          No                         Yes   Land Law (2013),
communal or collective                                                  ca de los Estados                                                                                                 Art. 5.3
title to property for their                                             Unidos Mexicanos
territories and lands?                                                  (1917), Art. 27 Pa-
                                                                        ra. VII
                                                                        Ley Agraria (1992),
                                                                        Art. 106
Contractual Capacity, Ownership and Private Businesses
Do laws and/or regulations relating to any of these transactions differ between ethnic minorities and the ethnic majority?
Sign a contract?            No                           No                                  No                              No                          No                         No
Register a company?         No                           No                                  No                              No                          No                         No




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                             44
Transfer a private busi-     No                            No                                  No                                No                                   No         No
ness?
PUBLIC SERVICES AND         Bulgaria                       Mexico                              Morocco                           Netherlands                          Tanzania   Vietnam
SOCIAL PROTECTION
Public Services Provided by the Government
Does the law prohibit discrimination against individuals belonging to ethnic minorities in accessing:
Health care?                Yes           Protection       Yes           Ley General de        Yes       Constitution du Roy- Yes        Equal Treatment Act          No         Yes       Decree No.
                                          Against Dis-                   Salud (1984), Art.              aume du Maroc (2011),           (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)                        40/2009/QH12
                                          crimination                    77 bis 36 Paras. VII,           Art. 31                                                                           Law on Medical
                                          Act (2004),                    XX                                                                                                                Examination and
                                          Art. 37                        Ley del Seguro So-                                                                                                Treatment
                                          Health Act                     cial (1995), Arts.                                                                                                (2009), Art. 9
                                          (2004), Art.                   214–217, 238                                                                                                      Para. 1
                                          85                             Ley Federal para
                                                                         Prevenir y Eliminar
                                                                         la Discriminación
                                                                         (2003), Art. 9 Para.
                                                                         XX

Social housing?             Yes           Social Assis- Yes              Ley General de       Yes        Constitution du Roy- Yes        Equal Treatment Act          No         No
                                          tance Act                      Vivienda (2006),                aume du Maroc (2011),           (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)
                                          (1998), Art. 3                 Art. 3                          Art. 31
                                                                         Ley Federal para
                                                                         Prevenir y Eliminar
                                                                         la Discriminación
                                                                         (2003), Art. 9 Para.
                                                                         XXI
Electricity?                Yes           Protection       Yes           Ley Federal para     No                                 Yes     Equal Treatment Act          No         Yes       Decree No.
                                          Against Dis-                   Prevenir y Eliminar                                             (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)                        28/2004/QH11
                                          crimination                    la Discriminación                                                                                                 Electricity Law
                                          Act (2004),                    (2003), Art. 9 Para.                                                                                              (2004), Art. 4.2
                                          Art. 37                        XXII
                                          Energy Act                     Ley de la Industria
                                          (2003), Art.                   Electrica (2014),
                                          31                             Art. 50
Water supply?               Yes           Protection       Yes            Ley Federal para    Yes        Constitution du Roy- Yes        Equal Treatment Act          No         Yes       Decree No.
                                          Against Dis-                   Prevenir y Eliminar             aume du Maroc (2011),           (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)                        15/2012/L/CTN
                                          crimination                    la Discriminación               Art. 31                                                                           Law on Water
                                          Act (2004),                    (2003), Art. 9 Para.                                                                                              Resources
                                          Art. 37                        XXII                                                                                                              (2012), Art. 3.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Para 5
Microcredits?               Yes           Protection       Yes           Ley para la Trans- Yes          Loi 18-97 relative au   Yes     Equal Treatment Act          No         No
                                          Against Dis-                   parencia y el Or-               micro-crédit (1999),            (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(d)
                                          crimination                    denamiento de los               Art. 6
                                          Act (2004),                    Servicios Financi-
                                          Art. 37                        eros (2007), Arts. 4
                                                                         bis 3 Para. III, 17




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                              45
Subsidized health insur-     Yes            Social Assis- Yes             Ley Federal para     Yes        Constitution du Roy- Yes            Equal Treatment Act          No                            Yes    Decree No.
ance?˚                                      tance Act                     Prevenir y Eliminar             aume du Maroc (2011),               (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)                                        23/2008/L-CTN
                                            (1998), Art. 3                la Discriminación               Art. 31                                                                                               Law on Health
                                                                          (2003), Art. 9 Para.                                                                                                                  Insurance (2009),
                                                                          VII                                                                                                                                   Art. 11 Para. 4
Social pensions?             Yes            Social Assis- Yes             Ley Federal para     No                                  Yes        Equal Treatment Act          No                            No
                                            tance Act                     Prevenir y Eliminar                                                 (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)
                                            (1998), Art. 3                la Discriminación
                                                                          (2003), Art. 9 Para.
                                                                          XX
Child benefits?              Yes            Constitution No                                     No                                 Yes        Equal Treatment Act          No                            No
                                            of the Repub-                                                                                     (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)
                                            lic of Bulgaria
                                            (1991), Art. 6
                                            Para. 2
                                            Protection
                                            Against Dis-
                                            crimination
                                            Act (2004),
                                            Arts. 4 Para.
                                            1, 37
                                            Social Assis-
                                            tance Act
                                            (1998), Art. 3
Public Services Provided by Civil Society
Does the law allow civil society organizations (CSOs) to provide social services specifically to individuals belonging to ethnic minorities including:
Vaccination?               Yes              Bulgarian        Yes          Ley Federal de Fo- Yes          Not explicit but should Yes         Not explicit but should be Yes    Not explicitly but should Yes   Not explicitly but
                                            Non-Profit                    mento a las Ac-                 be covered by Dahir 1-              covered by Constitution of        be covered by Non-              should be cov-
                                            Legal Entities                tividades realizadas            58-376 réglementant le              the Kingdom of The Neth-          Governmental Organiza-          ered by Decree
                                            Act (2000),                   por Organizaciones              droit d'association                 erlands (2008), Art. 8            tions Act (2002), Art. 2        No. 12/2012/ND-
                                            Art. 38                       de la Sociedad Civil            (1958), Art. 2                                                                                        CP on registra-
                                            Health Act                    (2004), Art. 5 Pa-                                                                                                                    tion and man-
                                            (2004), Art.                  ras. I, V, XI                                                                                                                         agement of
                                            222                                                                                                                                                                 operation of non-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                governmental
                                                                                                                                                                                                                organizations in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vietnam, (2012),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Art. 4




                  Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                                 46
Water?                   Yes           Bulgarian        Yes     Ley Federal de Fo- Yes   Not explicit but should Yes   Not explicit but should be Yes   Not explicitly but should Yes   Not explicitly but
                                       Non-Profit               mento a las Ac-          be covered by Dahir 1-        covered by Constitution of       be covered by Non-              should be cov-
                                       Legal Entities           tividades realizadas     58-376 réglementant le        the Kingdom of The Neth-         Governmental Organiza-          ered by Decree
                                       Act (2000),              por Organizaciones       droit d'association           erlands (2008), Art. 8           tions Act (2002), Art. 2        No. 12/2012/ND-
                                       Art. 38                  de la Sociedad Civil     (1958), Art. 2                                                                                 CP on registra-
                                                                (2004), Art. 5 Pa-                                                                                                      tion and man-
                                                                ras. I, V, XI                                                                                                           agement of
                                                                                                                                                                                        operation of non-
                                                                                                                                                                                        governmental
                                                                                                                                                                                        organizations in
                                                                                                                                                                                        Vietnam, (2012),
                                                                                                                                                                                        Art. 4
Sanitation?              Yes           Bulgarian        Yes     Ley Federal de Fo- Yes   Not explicit but should Yes   Not explicit but should be Yes   Not explicitly but should Yes   Not explicitly but
                                       Non-Profit               mento a las Ac-          be covered by Dahir 1-        covered by Constitution of       be covered by Non-              should be cov-
                                       Legal Entities           tividades realizadas     58-376 réglementant le        the Kingdom of The Neth-         Governmental Organiza-          ered by Decree
                                       Act (2000),              por Organizaciones       droit d'association           erlands (2008), Art. 8           tions Act (2002), Art. 2        No. 12/2012/ND-
                                       Art. 38                  de la Sociedad Civil     (1958), Art. 2                                                                                 CP on registra-
                                                                (2004), Art. 5 Pa-                                                                                                      tion and man-
                                                                ras. I, V, XI                                                                                                           agement of
                                                                                                                                                                                        operation of non-
                                                                                                                                                                                        governmental
                                                                                                                                                                                        organizations in
                                                                                                                                                                                        Vietnam, (2012),
                                                                                                                                                                                        Art. 4
Family Planning?         Yes           Bulgarian        Yes     Ley Federal de Fo- Yes   Not explicit but should Yes   Not explicit but should be Yes   Not explicitly but should Yes   Not explicitly but
                                       Non-Profit               mento a las Ac-          be covered by Dahir 1-        covered by Constitution of       be covered by Non-              should be cov-
                                       Legal Entities           tividades realizadas     58-376 réglementant le        the Kingdom of The Neth-         Governmental Organiza-          ered by Decree
                                       Act (2000),              por Organizaciones       droit d'association           erlands (2008), Art. 8           tions Act (2002), Art. 2        No. 12/2012/ND-
                                       Art. 38                  de la Sociedad Civil     (1958), Art. 2                                                                                 CP on registra-
                                                                (2004), Art. 5 Pa-                                                                                                      tion and man-
                                                                ras. I, V, XI                                                                                                           agement of
                                                                                                                                                                                        operation of non-
                                                                                                                                                                                        governmental
                                                                                                                                                                                        organizations in
                                                                                                                                                                                        Vietnam, (2012),
                                                                                                                                                                                        Art. 4
Does the law:
Impose funding limita-   No                             No                        No                            No                               No                              No
tions on CSOs on the
provision of such ser-
vices?
Taxation
Does the law:




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                           47
Allow tax deductions    Yes            Bulgarian        Yes     Ley del Impuesto     Yes   Loi n. 24-86 instituant Yes   Law on Giving Act, Geef-   Yes   Not explicitly but should No
for donations to NGOs                  Non-Profit               sobre la Renta             un impôt sur les socié-       wet (2012), Art. 8               be covered by the In-
that promote the inter-                Legal Entities           (2013), Arts. 79           tés (1986), Art. 7 Para.                                       come Tax Act, (2004)
ests of ethnic minori-                 Act (2000),                                         9 (b)                                                          Art. 16(1)
ties?                                  Art. 4
                                       Corporate
                                       Income Tax
                                       Act (2006),
                                       Art. 31
HATE CRIMES AND                   Bulgaria                      Mexico                       Morocco                       Netherlands                       Tanzania                    Vietnam
HATE SPEECH
Hate Crimes Legislation
Does the law:
Criminalize hate          Yes          Criminal     No          Codigo Penal Fed-    Yes   Code Pénal (1962),      Yes   Criminal Code (1881), Art. No                            Yes    Criminal Code
speech?                                Code (1968),             eral (1931), Art.          Art. 308-5 referring          137c                                                            (1999), Art. 87
                                       Arts. 162                149 Ter refers to          only to incitement of                                                                         Para. 1(b)
                                       Para. 1                  the crime of "dis-         hate during sport
                                                                crimination"               events.
Criminalize hate          Yes          Criminal      No                              No                            No                               No                            No
crimes?                                Code (1968),
                                       Arts. 162–165
If there is a law, does it Yes         Criminal     N/A                              N/A                           N/A                              N/A                           N/A
define hate crime as a                 Code (1968),
substantive offense?                   Art. 162
If there is a law, does it Yes         Criminal     N/A                              N/A                           N/A                              N/A                           N/A
define hate crime as an                Code (1968),
aggravating circum-                    Art. 116.
stance?
If there is a law, does it Yes         Criminal     N/A                              N/A                           N/A                              N/A                           N/A
define ethnic identity as              Code (1968),
a protected character-                 Art. 162
istic?
If there is a law, does it Yes         Criminal     N/A                              N/A                           N/A                              N/A                           N/A
protect property?                      Code (1968),
                                       Art. 163
If there is a law, does it No                           N/A                          N/A                           N/A                              N/A                           N/A
extend to victims by
association?
Awareness Raising and Training on Hate Crimes
Does the law:




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                            48
Require government       Yes             Judiciary Sys-   N/A                                N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
agencies to collect data                 tem Act
on hate crimes commit-                   (2007), Arts.
ted on ethnic grounds?                   377–384
Does the law mandate trainings of the following professionals on recognizing and identifying hate crimes?
Paramedics?              No                               N/A                                N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
Police officers?         No                               N/A                                N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
Prosecutors?             No                               N/A                                N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
Judges?                  No                               N/A                                N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
Social workers?          No                               N/A                                N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
Other?                   No                               N/A                                N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
Services to Victims of Hate Crimes
Does the law mandate the provision of any of the following services to victims of hate crimes:
Legal assistance (includ- Yes            Legal Aid Act N/A                                   N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
ing asylum applica-                      (2005), Arts.
tions)?                                  21, 22
                                         Asylum and
                                         Refugees Act
                                         (2002), Art.
                                         20
Shelter/Housing?         No                               N/A                                N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
Forensic or medical      Yes             Law on Sup- N/A                                     N/A            N/A   N/A   N/A
examinations?                            port and Fi-
                                         nancial
                                         Compensa-
                                         tion to Crime
                                         Victims
                                         (2006), Art. 8




               Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                  49
Religious Minorities

INSTITUTIONS                           Bulgaria                         Mexico                         Morocco                   Netherlands                       Tanzania                        Vietnam
The Constitution and National Legislation
Under the Constitution:
Is there a state         Yes        Constitution of the        No    Constitución Política de Yes   Constitution du Roy-  No                             No    Constitution of the Unit- No
religion?                           Republic of Bulgaria             los Estados Unidos             aume du Maroc (2011),                                      ed Republic of Tanzania
                                    (1991), Art. 13 Para. 3          Mexicanos (1917), Arts.        Art. 3                                                     (1977), Art. 3 (1)
                                                                     24, 40, 130
Is there a provision Yes            Constitution of the        Yes   Constitución Política de Yes   Constitution du Roy-  Yes   Constitution of the      Yes   Constitution of the Unit- Yes    Constitution of Vietnam
that guarantees the                 Republic of Bulgaria             los Estados Unidos             aume du Maroc (2011),       Kingdom of the Neth-           ed Republic of Tanzania          (2013), Art. 24
freedom of belief                   (1991), Art. 37 Para. 1          Mexicanos (1917), Art.         Art. 3                      erlands (2008), Art. 6         (1977), Art. 19 (1)
and religion?                                                        24                                                         Para. 1
Is there a general       Yes        Constitution of the        Yes   Constitución Política de No                         Yes    Constitution of the      Yes   Constitution of the Unit- Yes    Constitution of Vietnam
nondiscrimination                   Republic of Bulgaria             los Estados Unidos                                         Kingdom of the Neth-           ed Republic of Tanzania          (2013), Art. 16 Para. 2
clause?                             (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2           Mexicanos (1917), Art.                                     erlands (2008), Art. 1         (1977), Arts. 9(g),
                                                                     1                                                                                         13(1)(2)
If yes, does it ex-      Yes        Constitution of the        Yes   Constitución Política de N/A                        Yes    Constitution of the      Yes   Constitution of the Unit- No
plicitly mention                    Republic of Bulgaria             los Estados Unidos                                         Kingdom of the Neth-           ed Republic of Tanzania
religious minori-                   (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2           Mexicanos (1917), Art.                                     erlands (2008), Art. 1         (1977), Arts. 9(g), 13(5)
ties?                                                                1
Is there a provision Yes            Constitution of the        Yes   Constitución Política de Yes   Constitution du Roy-  Yes   Constitution of the      Yes   Constitution of the Unit- Yes    Constitution of Vietnam
that guarantees                     Republic of Bulgaria             los Estados Unidos             aume du Maroc (2011),       Kingdom of the Neth-           ed Republic of Tanzania          (2013), Art. 16 Para. 1
equality before the                 (1991), Art. 6 Paras. 1,         Mexicanos (1917), Art.         Art. 6                      erlands (2008), Art. 1         (1977), Arts. 12, 13(1)
law?                                2                                4
If yes, does it ex-      Yes        Constitution of the       No                             No                          Yes    Constitution of the      Yes   Constitution of the Unit- No
plicitly mention                    Republic of Bulgaria                                                                        Kingdom of the Neth-           ed Republic of Tanzania
religious minori-                   (1991), Art. 6 Paras. 1,2                                                                   erlands (2008), Art. 1         (1977), Art. 13(5)
ties?
Is customary law     No                                        Yes   Constitución Política de No                         No                              Yes   Judicature and Applica-    No
recognized as a                                                      los Estados Unidos                                                                        tion of Laws Act (1920),
valid source of law?                                                 Mexicanos (1917), Art.                                                                    Art. 11 (1)
                                                                     2 Para. A Sec. II
If yes, is customary     Not                                   Yes   Constitución Política de N/A                        N/A                             Yes   Judicature and Applica-    N/A
law invalid if it vio-   applica-                                    los Estados Unidos                                                                        tion of Laws Act (1920),
lates provisions on      ble                                         Mexicanos (1917), Art.                                                                    Art. 11 (3)
nondiscrimination        (N/A)                                       2 Para. A Sec. II
or equality?
Is personal law      No                                        No                            No                          No                              No                               No
recognized as a
valid source of law?




                   Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                      50
If yes, is personal    N/A                                N/A                               N/A                                 N/A                             N/A                              N/A
law invalid if it vio-
lates provisions on
nondiscrimination
or equality?
Under National Legislation:
Is there a law on  Yes          Protection Against Dis- Yes       Ley Federal para Preve- No                                    Yes    Equal Treatment Act      No                               No
nondiscrimination?              crimination Act (2004)            nir y Eliminar la Dis-                                               (1994)
                                                                  criminación (2003)
If yes, does it pro-   Yes      Protection Against Dis- Yes       Ley Federal para Preve- N/A                                   Yes    Equal Treatment Act      N/A                              N/A
vide protection                 crimination Act (2004),           nir y Eliminar la Dis-                                               (1994), Sec. 1(b)
from discrimina-                Art. 4 Para. 1                    criminación (2003), Art.
tion on religious                                                 1 Sec. III
grounds?
Are there any oth- Yes          Criminal Code (1968), Yes         Ley de Asociaciones       Yes      Penal Code (1962), Art. Yes       Criminal Code (1881),    No                               Yes   Ordinance No. 21/2004
er laws that pro-               Arts 162 Para 1, 172              Religiosas y Culto Públi-          431-1, Art 431-2                  Art. 137                                                        (2004) on Belief and
tect religious                  Para. 1                           co (1992)                          Dahir n 1-79-186                                                                                  Religion, Art. 1
minorities from                 Labor Code (1992),                                                   portant publication du                                                                            Decree 92/2012/ND-CP
discrimination?                 Art. 8 Para. 3                                                       Pacte international                                                                               (2012) on detailed regu-
                                National Education Act                                               relatif aux droits                                                                                lations and enforcement
                                (1991), Art 4.                                                       économiques, sociaux et                                                                           measures
                                Religious Denomina-                                                  culturels et du Pacte
                                tions Act (2002), Art. 4                                             international relatif aux
                                Para. 4                                                              droits civils et politiques
                                                                                                     (1979), Art. 27
Political Rights
Is there a provision Yes        Constitution of the       Yes     Constitución Política de Yes       Constitution du Roy-       Yes    Constitution of the      Yes   Constitution of the Unit- Yes    Constitution of Vietnam
that guarantees                 Republic of Bulgaria              los Estados Unidos                 aume du Maroc (2011),             Kingdom of the Neth-           ed Republic of Tanzania          (2013), Art. 25
freedom of opinion              (1991), Art. 39 Para. 1           Mexicanos (1917), Arts.            Art. 25                           erlands (2008), Art. 7         (1977), Art. 18
and expression?                                                   6, 7
Do laws and/or regulations relating to any of these categories differ between religious minorities and the majority?
Obtaining citizen-     No       Constitution of the       No      Constitución Política de No        Code de la nationalité   No       Constitution of the     No     Tanzania Citizenship Act   No    Nationality Law (2008),
ship?                           Republic of Bulgaria              los Estados Unidos                 moracaine (1958), Art. 9          Kingdom of the Neth-           (1995), Arts. 4–6                Art. 2 Para. 2
                                (1991), Art. 25 Para. 1           Mexicanos (1917), Art.                                               erlands (2008), Art. 1
                                                                  30 Para. A                                                           Netherlands Nationality
                                                                                                                                       Act (2010), Art. 3
Registering birth?     No       Constitution of the       No      Constitución Política de No        Loi n°37-99 relative à       No   Constitution of the      No    Births and Deaths Regis-   No    Decree 158/2005/ND-
                                Republic of Bulgaria              los Estados Unidos                 l'état civil (2002), Art. 16      Kingdom of the Neth-           tration Act (1920), Art.         CP on Civil Status Reg-
                                (1991), Art. 25 Para. 3           Mexicanos (1917), Art.                                               erlands (2008), Art. 1         11                               istration and Manage-
                                                                  4.                                                                                                                                   ment (2005), Artt. 13–
                                                                                                                                                                                                       16




                   Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                             51
Obtaining a pass-     No     Bulgarian Personal    No           Constitución Política de No       Décret n°2-08-310 in-    No      Constitution of the       No    Tanzania Passports and       No    Decree No. 136/2007
port?                        Documents Act (1999),              los Estados Unidos                stituant le passeport            Kingdom of the Neth-            Travel Documents Act               ND-CP 17 on Vietnam-
                             Art. 4 Para. 1                     Mexicanos (1917), Art.            biométrique (2008), Art.         erlands (2008), Art. 1          (2002), Art. 12                    ese Citizens' Exit and
                                                                4. Reglamento de                  1                                                                                                   Entry (2007), Art. 8
                                                                Pasaportes y del Docu-
                                                                mento de Identidad y
                                                                Viaje (2011), Art. 14
Obtaining an ID       No     Bulgarian Personal    No           Constitución Política de No       Loi n° 35-06 (2007) in-    No    Constitution of the       No    Registration and Identifi-   No    Decree No.
card?                        Documents Act (1999),              los Estados Unidos                stituant la carte natio-         Kingdom of the Neth-            catino of Persons Act              05/1999/ND-CP 3 on
                             Art. 4 Para. 1                     Mexicanos (1917), Art.            nale d'identité                  erlands (2008), Art. 1          (1986), Arts. 8, 9                 the People's Identity
                                                                4                                 électronique, Art. 1                                                                                Card (1999), Artt. 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Para. 2 and 4
Do laws and/or regulations relating to freedom of movement differ between religious minorities and the majority?
In moving within      No     Constitution of the      No        Constitución Política de No       Constitution du Roy-        No   Constitution of the       No    Constitution of the Unit- No       Contitution of Vietnam
the country?                 Republic of Bulgaria               los Estados Unidos                aume du Maroc, Art. 24           Kingdom of the Neth-            ed Republic of Tanzania            (2013), Art. 23
                             (1991), Art. 35                    Mexicanos (1917), Art.            Dahir n 19-68 portant            erlands (2008), Art. 1          (1977), Art. 17(1)
                                                                11                                ratification et publication      Directive 2004/38/EC
                                                                                                  de la convention                 of the European Parlia-
                                                                                                  internationale sur l'élim-       ment and of the Coun-
                                                                                                  ination de toutes les            cil (2004), Art. 3
                                                                                                  formes de discrimination
                                                                                                  raciale( 1969), Art. 5
                                                                                                  Para. d.1
In leaving and re-    No     Constitution of the      No        Constitución Política de No       Constitution du Roy-       No    Constitution of the       No    Constitution of the Unit- No       Contitution of Vietnam
turning to the               Republic of Bulgaria               los Estados Unidos                aume du Maroc (2011),            Kingdom of the Neth-            ed Republic of Tanzania            (2013), Art. 23
country?                     (1991), Art. 35                    Mexicanos (1917), Art.            Art 5. Para. d.1                 erlands (2008), Art. 1          (1977), Art. 17(1)
                                                                11                                                                 Directive 2004/38/EC
                                                                                                                                   of the European Parlia-
                                                                                                                                   ment and of the Coun-
                                                                                                                                   cil (2004), Arts. 4, 5
Are NGOs that promote the interests of religious minorities:
Permitted under       Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit     Yes       Constitución Política de Yes      Dahir 1-58-376 régle-      Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Non-Governmental Or-         Yes   Decree No.
the law?                     Legal Entities Act                 los Estados Unidos                mentant le droit d'asso-         Kingdom of the Neth-            ganizations Act (2002),            12/2012/ND-CP on reg-
                             (2000), Art. 2 Paras. 1–           Mexicanos (1917), Art.            ciation (1958), Art. 2           erlands (2008), Art. 8          Art. 2                             istration and manage-
                             2                                  9     Ley Federal de                                               Civil Code, Book 2                                                 ment of operation of
                                                                Fomento a las Activida-                                            (1972), Art. 2:285                                                 nongovernmental organ-
                                                                des realizadas por Or-                                                                                                                izations in Vietnam,
                                                                ganizaciones de la                                                                                                                    (2012), Art. 3 Para. 1
                                                                Sociedad Civil (2004),                                                                                                                Decree No. 30 on so-
                                                                Art. 5, Sec. XIII                                                                                                                     cial and charity funds
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (2012), Art. 2
If yes, are the       Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit     Yes       Ley Federal de Fomento Yes        Dahir 1-58-376 régle-      Yes   Civil Code, Book 2        Yes   Non-Governmental Or-         Yes   Decree No.
NGOs subject to              Legal Entities Act                 a las Actividades real-           mentant le droit d'asso-         (1972), Art. 2:20               ganizations Act (2002),            12/2012/ND-CP on reg-
limitation by the            (2000), Art. 3 (2)                 izadas por Organi-                ciation (1958), Art. 3                                           Art. 14(1)                         istration and manage-
state on the basis                                              zaciones de la Sociedad                                                                                                               ment of operation of
of national securi-                                             Civil (2004), Art. 30                                                                                                                 nongovernmental organ-
ty, public order,                                                                                                                                                                                     izations in Vietnam,



               Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                                52
morality, or other                                                                                            (2012), Art. 4
grounds?                                                                                                      Decree No. 30 on so-
                                                                                                              cial and charity funds
                                                                                                              (2012), Art. 7.1


Representation in the Three Branches of Government (Legislative, Executive, and Judiciary)
Does the law:
Mandate quotas         No                               No                               No    No   No   No
for religious mi-
norities in parlia-
ment?
Does the law prohibit an individual belonging to a religious minority from:
Holding ministerial No                                  No                               No    No   No   No
posts?
Enforcement of Antidiscrimination Laws and Policies
Does the law:
Require the judici- No                                  Yes       Ley Federal para Preve- No   No   No   No
ary to receive                                                    nir y Eliminar la Dis-
training in the ap-                                               criminación (2003), Art.
plication of existing                                             20, Para. XL, 34, Para.
antidiscrimination                                                IV
laws dealing with
religious minori-
ties?
Require the police     No                               Yes       Ley Federal para Preve- No   No   No   No
to receive training                                               nir y Eliminar la Dis-
in the application                                                criminación (2003), Art.
of existing antidis-                                              20, Para. XL, 34, Para.
crimination laws                                                  IV
dealing with reli-                                                Ley General del Sistema
gious minorities?                                                 Nacional de Seguridad
                                                                  Pública (2009), Art. 40,
                                                                  Secs. I, IV




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                       53
Establish a special- Yes      Ombudsman Act             Yes   Ley de la Comisión       Yes   Dahir n 1-11-19 portant Yes    Institute for Human       Yes   Constitution of the Unit- No
ized body tasked              (2003),                         Nacional de los                création du Conseil na-        Rights Act, Sec. 1              ed Republic of Tanzania
with receiving                Art. 2                          Derechos Humanos               tional des droits de           Institute for Human             (1977), Art. 129(1)
complaints for vio-                                           (1992), Art. 2: Comisión       l'Homme (2011)                 Rights (formerly Equal          Commission for Human
lations of human              Protection Against Dis-         Nacional de los                Constitution du Roy-           Treatment Commis-               Rights and Good Gov-
rights (Human                 crimination Act (2004),         Derechos Humanos.              aume du Maroc (2011),          sion)                           ernance Act (2001), Art.
Rights Committee,             Art. 40                         ALSO,                          Artt. 19, 161, and 164                                         6(1)(b)
Ombudsman, etc.)?                                             Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                              nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                                                              criminacio (2003), Art.
                                                              16: Consejo Nacional
                                                              para Prevenir la Dis-
                                                              criminación (not a gen-
                                                              eral human rights body,
                                                              but specialized in dis-
                                                              crimination)
If yes, does such      Yes    Ombudsman Act             Yes    Ley de la Comisión     No     Dahir n 1-11-19 portant Yes    Institute for Human      Yes    Commission for Human N/A
body hear com-                (2003)                          Nacional de los                création du Conseil na-        Rights Act (2011), Secs.        Rights and Good Gov-
plaints of religious          Art. 19 Para. 1                 Derechos Humanos               tional des droits de           3(a), 10(1)                     ernance Act (2001), Arts.
discrimination?                                               (1992), Art. 3                 l'Homme (2011), Artt. 1,                                       6(1)(b), 28(1)(c)
                              Protection Against Dis-         Ley Federal para Preve-        3, and 4
                              crimination Act (2004),         nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                              Art. 48 Para. 2                 criminación (2003),
                                                              Arts. 1, Para. III, 43
Is there a budget      Yes    Ombudsman Act           Yes     Constitución Política de Yes   Dahir n 1-11-19 portant Yes    The Ministry of Justice Yes     Commission for Human       N/A
allocation for the            (2003),                         los Estados Unidos             création du Conseil na-        has the main responsi-          Rights and Good Gov-
operation of such             Art. 7                          Mexicanos (1917), Art.         tional des droits de           bility for the Institute's      ernance Act (2001), Art.
body/bodies?                  Protection Against Dis-         102 Para. B                    l'Homme (2011), Art. 55        budget. The budget is           29
                              crimination Act (2004),         Ley de la Comisión                                            regulated in the Annual
                              Art. 40 Para. 3                 Nacional de los                                               Budgets Act and not in
                                                              Derechos Humanos                                              the Netherlands Insti-
                                                              (1992), Arts. 2, 7                                            tute for Human Rights
                                                              Ley Federal para Preve-                                       Act.
                                                              nir y Eliminar la Disci-
                                                              minación (2003), Art. 16
                                                              (regarding CONAPRED,
                                                              not the Ombudsman)
LABOR                            Bulgaria                        Mexico                         Morocco                      Netherlands                        Tanzania                        Vietnam
Equality in Accessing the Labor Force
Does the law:
Prohibit individuals No       Constitution of the     No      Ley Federal para Preve- No     Code du Travail (2011),   No   Constitution of the       No    Constitution of the Unit- No     Decree No.
belonging to reli-            Republic of Bulgaria            nir y Eliminar la Dis-         Art. 9 and Art. 478            Kingdom of the Neth-            ed Republic of Tanzania          10/2012/QH13 Labor
gious minorities              (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2          criminación (2003), Art.       Constitution du Roy-           erlands (2008), Art. 19         (1977), Art. 22 (1)              Code (2012), Art. 5 Pa-
from obtaining                Protection Against Dis-         9 Para. III                    aume du Maroc (2011),          Para. 3                         Employment and Labour            ra. 1, Art. 8 Para. 1
employment in                 crimination Act (2004),                                        Art. 31                        Equal Treatment Act             Relations Act (2004), Art.
specific sectors?             Art. 4                                                                                        (1994), Sec. 5 (1)(b)           7(1)




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                      54
Prohibit discrimi- Yes       Labor Code (1992) Art. Yes        Ley Federal para Preve- Yes      Code du Travail (2011),    Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Constitution of the Unit- Yes   Decree No.
nation on religious          8 Para. 3                         nir y Eliminar la Dis-           Art. 9 and Art. 478              (1994), Sec. 5 (1)               ed Republic of Tanzania         10/2012/QH13 Labor
grounds in re-               Protection Against Dis-           criminación (2003), Art.         Constitution du Roy-                                              (1977), Art. 22 (2)             Code (2012), Art. 5 Pa-
cruitment in the             crimination Act (2004),           9 Para. III                      aume du Maroc (2011),                                             Employment and Labour           ra. 1
public sector?               Art. 12                           Ley Federal del Trabajo          Art. 31                                                           Relations Act (2004),           Law on Public Employ-
                             Civil Servants Act                (1970), Arts. 3, 133                                                                               Arts. 7(1), 7(4)(g)             ees, (2010) Art. 21 Pa-
                             (1999), Art. 7 Para. 6                                                                                                                                               ras. 1, 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Decree No.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  22/2008QH12 on Ca-
                                                                                                                                                                                                  dres and Civil Servants
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (2008), Art. 38 Paras. 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
Prohibit discrimi- Yes       Labor Code (1992) Art. Yes        Ley Federal para Preve- Yes      Code du Travail (2011),    Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour    Yes    Decree No.
nation on religious          8 Para. 3                         nir y Eliminar la Dis-           Art. 9 and Art. 478              (1994), Sec. 5 (1)               Relations Act, (2004),          10/2012/QH13 Labor
grounds in re-               Protection Against Dis-           criminación (2003), Art.         Constitution du Roy-             The exception is Equal           Art. 7(4)(g)                    Code (2012), Art. 8 Pa-
cruitment in the             crimination Act (2004),           9 Para. III                      aume du Maroc (2011),            Treatment Act (1994),                                            ra. 1
private sector?              Art. 12 Para. 1                   Ley Federal del Trabajo          Art. 31                          Sec. 5 (3)
                                                               (1970), Arts. 3, 133
Prohibit an em-      Yes     Protection Against Dis- No                                 No                                 No                               No                             No
ployer from asking           crimination Act (2004),
about an individu-           Art. 12 Para. 1
al’s religion during
the recruitment
phase?
Prescribe equal      Yes     Protection Against Dis- Yes       Constitución Política de Yes     Code du Travail (2011),    Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Constitution of the Unit- Yes   Decree No.
remuneration for             crimination Act (2004),           los Estados Unidos               Art. 9 and Art. 478              (1994), Sec. 5 (1)(e), (h)       ed Republic of Tanzania         10/2012/QH13 Labor
work of equal val-           Art. 14 Para. 1                   Mexicanos (1917), Art.                                                                             (1977), Art. 23 (1)             Code (2012), Arts. 5
ue for individuals                                             123 Para. VII                                                                                      Employment and Labour           Para. 1 (a), 8 Para. 1, 90
belonging to reli-                                             Ley Federal del Trabajo                                                                            Relations Act, (2004),          Para. 3
gious minorities?                                              (1970), Art. 56                                                                                    Art. 7(10)                      Ordinance No. 21/2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (2004) on Belief and
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Religion, Art. 8 Para. 1
Prohibit discrimi- Yes       Criminal Code (1968), Yes         Ley Federal del Trabajo Yes      Code du Travail (2011),    Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour Yes       Decree No.
nation on religious          Art. 172 Para. 1                  (1970), Arts. 3, 133             Art. 9, Art. 36, Para. 5         (1994), Secs. 5 (1), 8           Relations Act, (2004),          10/2012/QH13 Labor
grounds in the               Protection Against Dis-                                                                                                              Arts. 7(4)(g), 37(3)(b)(iii)    Code (2012), Art. 8 Pa-
dismissal of em-             crimination Act (2004),                                                                                                                                              ra. 1
ployees?                     Arts. 20–21
Access to Remedy
Does the law allow an employee to bring a claim for employment discrimination on religious grounds?
In the public sec-   Yes     Protection Against Dis- Yes       Ley Federal del Trabajo Yes      Code du Travail (2011),    Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour    Yes    Law on Public Employ-
tor?                         crimination Act (2004),           (1970), Arts. 2, 3, 133          Arts. 9, 41                      (1994), Secs. 10, 12 (2)         Relations Act, (2004),          ees, Art. 30, Decree No.
                             Arts. 50, 71                      Ley Federal para Preve-                                                                            Arts. 7(4)(g), 37(3)            10/2012/QH13
                                                               nir la Discriminación                                                                                                              Labor Code (2012), Art.
                                                               (2003), Art. 43                                                                                                                    3 Para. 7, and 194 Para.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  6




               Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                             55
If there is a law,    Yes     Protection Against Dis- No         No provisions could be   Yes   Code du Travail (2011),   Yes   Equal Treatment Act        No    No provisions could be   No    No provisions could be
does it prohibit              crimination Act (2004),            located                        Art. 36, Para. 4                (1994), Sec. 8(a)                located                        located
retaliation by the            Arts. 5, additional pro-
employer for                  visions, Sec. 1 (3)
bringing a com-
plaint or participat-
ing in any manner
in an employment
discrimination pro-
ceeding?
In the private sec-   Yes     Protection Against Dis- Yes        Ley Federal del Trabajo No     Code du Travail (2011),   Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour    Yes   Decree No.
tor?                          crimination Act (2004),            (1970), Arts. 2, 3, 133        Arts. 9, 41                     (1994), Secs. 10, 12 (2)         Relations Act, (2004),         10/2012/QH13 Labor
                              Art. 50 (administrative            Ley Federal para Preve-                                                                         Arts. 7(4)(g), 37(3)           Code (2012), Art. 3 Pa-
                              protection)                        nir la Discriminación                                                                                                          ra. 7, and 194 Para. 6
                              Protection Against Dis-            (2003), Art. 43
                              crimination Act (2004),
                              Art. 71 (judicial protec-
                              tion)
If there is a law,    Yes     Protection Against Dis- No         No provisions could be   Yes   Code du Travail (2011),   Yes   Equal Treatment Act        No    No provisions could be   No    No provisions could be
does it prohibit              crimination Act (2004),            located                        Art. 36, Para. 4                (1994), Sec. 8(a)                located                        located
retaliation by the            Arts. 5, additional pro-
employer for                  visions, Sec. 1 (3)
bringing a com-
plaint or participat-
ing in any manner
in an employment
discrimination pro-
ceeding?
Does the law:
Shift the burden of Yes       Protection Against Dis- Yes        Ley Federal del Trabajo No                               Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour No       Decree No.
proof for antidis-            crimination Act (2004),            (1970), Art. 784                                               (1994), Sec. 10 (1)              Relations Act (2004), Art.     10/2012/QH13 Labor
crimination claims            Art. 9                                                                                                                             7(8)(a)                        Code (2012), Art. 192
from the employee                                                                                                                                                                               Para. 2(a)
to the employer?                                                                                                                                                                                Civil Proceeding Code
                                                                                                                                                                                                (2012), Art. 79 Para. 1
Allow class action Yes        Protection Against Dis- Yes        Ley Federal del Trabajo Yes    Code du Travail (2011),   Yes   Equal Treatment Act        No                             Yes   Civil Proceeding Code
lawsuits for em-              crimination Act (2004),            (1970), Art. 697               Art. 549                        (1994), Sec. 10 (2)                                             (2012), Art. 31 Para. 2
ployment discrimi-            Art. 71 Paras. 2, 3                                                                                                                                               (a)
nation on religious           Civil Procedure Code
grounds?                      (2007), Art. 379 Para. 1
EDUCATION                        Bulgaria                            Mexico                        Morocco                       Netherlands                         Tanzania                       Vietnam
Participation in Education
Does the law prohibit discrimination in school admission on religious grounds in:




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                         56
Primary education? Yes    National Education Act Yes   Constitución Política de Yes   Constitution du Roy-        Yes   Equal Treatment Act       Yes   Education Act (1978),     Yes   Decree No.
                          (1991), Art. 4 Para. 2       los Estados Unidos             aume du Maroc (2011),             (1994), Sec. 7 (1)(c)           Art. 56(2)                      38/2005/QH11 on Edu-
                                                       Mexicanos (1917), Art.         Art. 31            Dahir n        Primary Education Act           Law of the Child Act            cation Law (2005), Art.
                                                       3                              19-68 portant ratifica-           (1981), Art. 46 Para. 2         (2009), Art. 5(2), 8(2)         10
                                                       Ley General de Edu-            tion et publication de la
                                                       cación (1993), Art. 2          convention internatio-
                                                       Ley Federal para Preve-        nale sur l'élimination de
                                                       nir y Eliminar la Dis-         toutes les formes de
                                                       criminación (2003), Art.       discrimination raciale
                                                       9                              (1969), Art. 5
                                                                                      Dahir n 1-79-186
                                                                                      portant publication du
                                                                                      Pacte international
                                                                                      relatif aux droits
                                                                                      économiques, sociaux et
                                                                                      culturels et du Pacte
                                                                                      international relatif aux
                                                                                      droits civils et politiques
                                                                                      (1979), Art. 13
Secondary educa-   Yes    National Education Act Yes   Constitución Política de Yes   Constitution du Roy-        Yes   Equal Treatment Act       Yes   Education Act (1978),     Yes   Decree No.
tion?                     (1991), Art. 4 Para. 2       los Estados Unidos             aume du Maroc (2011),             (1994), Sec. 7 (1)(c)           Art. 56(2)                      38/2005/QH11 on Edu-
                                                       Mexicanos (1917), Art.         Art. 31           Dahir n         Secondary Education             Law of the Child Act            cation Law (2005), Art.
                                                       3                              19-68 portant ratifica-           Act (1963), Art. 42             (2009), Art. 5(2), 8(2)         10
                                                       Ley General de Edu-            tion et publication de la         Para. 2
                                                       cación (1993), Art. 2          convention internatio-
                                                       Ley Federal para Preve-        nale sur l'élimination de
                                                       nir y Eliminar la Dis-         toutes les formes de
                                                       criminación (2003), Art.       discrimination raciale(
                                                       9                              1969), Art. 5
                                                                                      Dahir n 1-79-186
                                                                                      portant publication du
                                                                                      Pacte international
                                                                                      relatif aux droits
                                                                                      économiques, sociaux et
                                                                                      culturels et du Pacte
                                                                                      international relatif aux
                                                                                      droits civils et politiques
                                                                                      (1979), Art. 13




             Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                    57
Tertiary education? Yes        Higher Education Act      Yes      Constitución Políticade Yes      Constitution du Roy-        Yes        Equal Treatment Act     Yes   Education Act (1978),   Yes   Decree No.
                               (1995), Art. 4                     los Estados Unidos               aume du Maroc (2011),                  (1994), Sec. 7 (1)(c)         Art. 56(2)                    38/2005/QH11 on Edu-
                                                                  Mexicanos (1917), Art.           Art. 31            Dahir n                                                                         cation Law (2005), Art.
                                                                  3                                19-68 portant ratifica-                                                                            10
                                                                  Ley General de Edu-              tion et publication de la
                                                                  cación (1993), Art. 2            convention internatio-
                                                                  Ley Federal para Preve-          nale sur l'élimination de
                                                                  nir y Eliminar la Dis-           toutes les formes de
                                                                  criminación (2003), Art.         discrimination raciale(
                                                                  9                                1969), Art. 5
                                                                                                   Dahir n 1-79-186
                                                                                                   portant publication du
                                                                                                   Pacte international
                                                                                                   relatif aux droits
                                                                                                   économiques, sociaux et
                                                                                                   culturels et du Pacte
                                                                                                   international relatif aux
                                                                                                   droits civils et politiques
                                                                                                   (1979), Art. 13
Does the law prescribe quotas for individuals belonging to religious minorities in:
Primary education? No                                    No                               No                                  No                                  No                            No
Secondary educa-     No                                  No                               No                                  No                                  No                            No
tion?
Tertiary education? No                                   No                               No                                  No                                  No                            No
Fighting Marginalization in Education
Does the law mandate the adoption of measures aimed at sensitizing the students to the principles of nondiscrimination and equality in:
Primary education? Yes         Protection Against Dis- Yes        Constitución Política de No                                 Yes         Primary Education Act   No                            No
                               crimination Act (2004),            los Estados Unidos                                                      (1981), Art. 46
                               Art. 35 Paras. 1, 3                Mexicanos (1917), Art.
                               National Education Act             3 Para. 4
                               (1991) Art. 15 Para. 2             Ley General de Edu-
                                                                  cación (1993), Arts. 7,
                                                                  8, 33


Secondary educa-     Yes       Protection Against Dis- Yes        Constitución Política de No                                 Yes         Secondary Education     No                            No
tion?                          crimination Act (2004),            los Estados Unidos                                                      Act (1963), Art. 42
                               Art. 35 Paras 1, 3.                Mexicanos (1917), Art.
                               National Education Act             3 Para. 4
                               (1991), Art. 15 Para. 2            Ley General de Edu-
                                                                  cación (1993), Arts. 7,
                                                                  8, 33


Does the law:




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                               58
Mandate the revi-     Yes       Protection Against Dis- Yes         Ley General de Edu-         No                            No                               No                             No
sion of national                crimination Act (2004),             cación (1993), Arts. 8,
textbooks in pri-               Art 35 Paras. 1, 3                  12 Para. III
mary and second-
ary education to
eliminate discrimi-
natory language?
Mandate the train- Yes          Protection Against Dis- Yes         Ley General de Edu-         No                            No                               No                             No
ing of school                   crimination Act (2004),             cación (1993), Arts. 8,
teachers in primary             Art 35 Paras. 1, 3                  12 Para. III
and secondary
education on anti-
discrimination of
religious minori-
ties?
Does the law allow individuals belonging to religious minorities to show signs of religious affiliation in:
Primary education? Yes          Constitution of the        Yes      Constitución Política de Yes         Constitution du Roy-  Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Constitution of the Unit- No
                                Republic of Bulgaria                los Estados Unidos                   aume du Maroc (2011),       Kingdom of the Neth-            ed Republic of Tanzania,
                                (1991), Art 37 Para. 1              Mexicanos (1917), Art.               Art. 3                      erlands (2008), Art. 23         Art. 19
                                Religious Denomina-                 24                                                               Para. 3
                                tions Act (2002), Arts.             Ley de Asociaciones
                                5, 6                                Religiosas y Culto Públi-
                                                                    co (1992), Arts. 1, 2
Secondary educa-      Yes       Constitution of the        Yes      Constitución Política de Yes         Constitution du Roy-  Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Constitution of the Unit- No
tion?                           Republic of Bulgaria                los Estados Unidos                   aume du Maroc (2011),       Kingdom of the Neth-            ed Republic of Tanzania,
                                (1991), Art. 37 Para. 1             Mexicanos (1917), Art.               Art. 3                      erlands (2008), Art. 23         Art. 19
                                Religious Denomina-                 24                                                               Para. 3
                                tions Act (2002), Arts.             Ley de Asociaciones
                                5, 6                                Religiosas y Culto Públi-
                                                                    co (1992), Arts. 1, 2
Tertiary education? Yes         Constitution of the        Yes      Constitución Política de Yes         Constitution du Roy-  Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Constitution of the Unit- Yes   Constitution of Vietnam
                                Republic of Bulgaria                los Estados Unidos                   aume du Maroc (2011),       Kingdom of the Neth-            ed Republic of Tanzania,        (2013), Art. 24
                                (1991), Art. 37 Para. 1             Mexicanos (1917), Art.               Art. 3                      erlands (2008), Art. 23         Art. 19
                                Religious Denomina-                 24                                                               Para. 3
                                tions Act (2002), Arts.             Ley de Asociaciones
                                5, 6                                Religiosas y Culto Públi-
                                                                    co (1992), Arts. 1, 2
PROPERTY                           Bulgaria                             Mexico                                Morocco                 Netherlands                        Tanzania                       Vietnam
Access to Land
Do laws and/or regulations relating to any of these transactions differ between religious minorities and the majority?
Obtain a title of     No                                   No                                   No                            No                               No                             No
land (e.g., for the
purposes of trans-
fer or sale)?
Lease land?           No                                   No                                   No                            No                               No                             No




               Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                               59
License land?         No                                 No                                   No                               No                              No              No
Obtain a mort-        No                                 No                                   No                               No                              No              No
gage?
Inherit land?         No                                 No                                   Yes      Loi n°70-03 portant     No                              No              No
                                                                                                       Code de la Famille
                                                                                                       (2004), Art. 2
Contractual Capacity, Ownership and Private Businesses
Do laws and/or regulations relating to any of these transactions differ between religious minorities and the majority?
Sign a contract?      No                                 No                                   No                               No                              No              No
Register a compa-     No                                 No                                   No                               No                              No              No
ny?
Transfer a private    No                                 No                                   No                               No                              No              No
business?
PUBLIC SERVICES                    Bulgaria                            Mexico                              Morocco                    Netherlands                   Tanzania            Vietnam
AND SOCIAL
PROTECTION
Public Services Provided by the Government
Does the law prohibit discrimination against individuals belonging to religious minorities in accessing:
Health care?          Yes      Protection Against Dis- Yes         Ley General de Salud     Yes        Constitution du Roy-    Yes   Equal Treatment Act       No              Yes   Decree No.
                               crimination Act (2004),             (1984), Art. 77 bis 36              aume du Maroc (2011),         (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–                         40/2009/QH12 Law on
                               Art. 37                             Paras. VII, XX                      Art. 31                       (c)                                             Medical Examination and
                               Health Act (2004), Art.             Ley del Seguro Social                                                                                             Treatment (2009), Art. 9
                               85                                  (1995), Arts. 214–217,                                                                                            Para. 1
                                                                   238
                                                                   Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                                   nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                                                                   criminación (2003), Art.
                                                                   9 Para. XX
Social housing?       Yes      Constitution of the     Yes         Ley General de Vivienda Yes         Constitution du Roy-    Yes   Equal Treatment Act       No              No
                               Republic of Bulgaria                (2006), Art. 3                      aume du Maroc (2011),         (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–
                               (1991) , Art. 6 Para. 2             Ley Federal para Preve-             Art. 31                       (c)
                               Protection Against Dis-             nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                               crimination Act (2004),             criminación (2003), Art.
                               Arts. 4 Para. 1, 37                 9 Para. XXI
                               Social Assistance Act
                               (1998), Art. 3
Electricity?          Yes      Constitution of the      Yes        Ley Federal para Preve- No                                  Yes   Equal Treatment Act       No              No
                               Republic of Bulgaria                nir y Eliminar la Dis-                                            (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–
                               (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2              criminación (2003), Art.                                          (c)
                               Protection Against Dis-             9 Para. XXII
                               crimination Act (2004),             Ley de la Industria Elec-
                               Arts. 4 Para. 1, 37 En-             trica (2014), Art. 50
                               ergy Act (2003), Art. 31




                  Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                            60
Water supply?         Yes      Constitution of the     Yes          Ley Federal para Pre-   Yes        Constitution du Roy-        Yes       Equal Treatment Act       No                               Yes   Decree No.
                               Republic of Bulgaria                venir y Eliminar la Dis-            aume du Maroc (2011),                 (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–                                          15/2012/L/CTN Law on
                               (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2              criminación (2003), Art.            Art. 31                               (c)                                                              Water Resources
                               Protection Against Dis-             9 Para. XXII                                                                                                                               (2012), Art. 3 Para. 5
                               crimination Act (2004),
                               Arts. 4 Para. 1, 37
Microcredits?         Yes      Constitution of the     Yes         Ley para la Transparen- Yes         Loi 18-97 relative au     Yes         Equal Treatment Act       No                               No
                               Republic of Bulgaria                cia y el Ordenamiento               micro-crédit (1999), Art.             (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(d)
                               (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2              de los Servicios Financi-           6
                               Protection Against Dis-             eros (2007), Arts. 4 bis
                               crimination Act (2004),             3 Para. III, 17
                               Arts. 4 Para. 1, 37
Subsidized health     Yes      Constitution of the     Yes         Ley Federal para Preve- Yes         Constitution du Roy-        Yes       Equal Treatment Act       No                               Yes   Decree No. 23/2008/L-
insurance?                     Republic of Bulgaria                nir y Eliminar la Dis-              aume du Maroc (2011),                 (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–                                          CTN Law on Health
                               (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2              criminación (2003), Art.            Art. 31                               (c)                                                              Insurance (2009), Art.
                               Protection Against Dis-             9 Para. VII                                                                                                                                11 Para. 4
                               crimination Act (2004),
                               Arts. 4 Para. 1, 37
Social pensions?      Yes      Constitution of the     Yes         Ley Federal para Preve- No                                      Yes       Equal Treatment Act       No                               No
                               Republic of Bulgaria                nir y Eliminar la Dis-                                                    (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–
                               (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2              criminación (2003), Art.                                                  (c)
                               Protection Against Dis-             9 Para. XX
                               crimination Act (2004),
                               Arts. 4 Para. 1, 37

Child benefits?       Yes      Constitution of the     No                                     No                                   Yes       Equal Treatment Act       No                               No
                               Republic of Bulgaria                                                                                          (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–
                               (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2                                                                                        (c)
                               Protection Against Dis-
                               crimination Act (2004),
                               Arts. 4 Para. 1, 37
                               Social Assistance Act
                               (1998), Art. 3
Public Services Provided by Civil Society
Does the law allow civil society organizations (CSOs) to provide social services specifically to individuals belonging to religious minorities including:
Vaccination?          Yes      Bulgarian Non-Profit    Yes         Ley Federal de Fomento Yes          Not explicit but should     Yes       Not explicit but should Yes    Not explicitly but should   Yes   Not explicit but should
                               Legal Entities Act                  a las Actividades real-             be covered by Dahir 1-                be covered by Consti-          be covered by Non-                be covered by Decree
                               (2000), Art. 38                     izadas por Organi-                  58-376 réglementant le                tution of the Kingdom          Governmental Organiza-            No. 12/2012/ND-CP on
                               Health Act (2004), Art.             zaciones de la Sociedad             droit d'association                   of The Netherlands             tions Act (2002), Art. 2          registration and man-
                               222.                                Civil (2004), Art. 5 Pa-            (1958), Art. 2                        (2008), Art. 8                                                   agement of operation of
                                                                   ras. I, V, XI                                                                                                                              nongovernmental organ-
                                                                                                                                                                                                              izations in Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (2012), Art. 4




                  Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                                     61
Water?                Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento Yes   Not explicit but should   Yes    Not explicit but should Yes    Not explicitly but should   Yes   Not explicit but should
                             Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades real-      be covered by Dahir 1-           be covered by Consti-          be covered by Non-                be covered by Decree
                             (2000), Art. 38              izadas por Organi-           58-376 réglementant le           tution of the Kingdom          Governmental Organiza-            No. 12/2012/ND-CP on
                                                          zaciones de la Sociedad      droit d'association              of The Netherlands             tions Act (2002), Art. 2          registration and man-
                                                          Civil (2004), Art. 5         (1958), Art. 2                   (2008), Art. 8                                                   agement of operation of
                                                          Paras. I, V, XI                                                                                                                nongovernmental organ-
                                                                                                                                                                                         izations in Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                                         (2012), Art. 4
Sanitation?           Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento Yes   Not explicit but should   Yes    Not explicit but should Yes    Not explicitly but should   Yes   Not explicit but should
                             Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades real-      be covered by Dahir 1-           be covered by Consti-          be covered by Non-                be covered by Decree
                             (2000), Art. 38              izadas por Organi-           58-376 réglementant le           tution of the Kingdom          Governmental Organiza-            No. 12/2012/ND-CP on
                                                          zaciones de la Sociedad      droit d'association              of The Netherlands             tions Act (2002), Art. 2          registration and man-
                                                          Civil (2004), Art. 5         (1958), Art. 2                   (2008), Art. 8                                                   agement of operation of
                                                          Paras. I, V, XI                                                                                                                nongovernmental organ-
                                                                                                                                                                                         izations in Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                                         (2012), Art. 4
Family planning?      Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento Yes   Not explicit but should   Yes    Not explicit but should Yes    Not explicitly but should   Yes   Not explicit but should
                             Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades real-      be covered by Dahir 1-           be covered by Consti-          be covered by Non-                be covered by Decree
                             (2000), Art. 38              izadas por Organi-           58-376 réglementant le           tution of the Kingdom          Governmental Organiza-            No. 12/2012/ND-CP on
                                                          zaciones de la Sociedad      droit d'association              of The Netherlands             tions Act (2002), Art. 2          registration and man-
                                                          Civil (2004), Art. 5         (1958), Art. 2                   (2008), Art. 8                                                   agement of operation of
                                                          Paras. I, V, XI                                                                                                                nongovernmental organ-
                                                                                                                                                                                         izations in Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                                         (2012), Art. 4
Does the law:
Impose funding        No                            No                          No                               No                              No                                No
limitations on
CSOs on the pro-
vision of such ser-
vices?
Taxation
Does the law:
Allow tax deduc-    Yes      Bulgarian Non-Profit Yes     Ley del Impuesto sobre Yes   Loi n. 24-86 instituant    Yes   Law on Giving Act,       Yes   Not explicitly but should   No
tions for donations          Legal Entities Act           la Renta (2013), Arts.       un impôt sur les sociétés        Geefwet (2012), Art. 8         be covered by the In-
to NGOs that                 (2000), Art. 4               79                           (1986), Art. 7 Para. 9 (b)                                      come Tax Act (2004),
promote the inter-           Corporate Income Tax                                                                                                      Art. 16(1)
ests of religious            Act (2006), Art. 31
minorities?
HATE CRIMES                     Bulgaria                        Mexico                    Morocco                       Netherlands                        Tanzania                         Vietnam
AND HATE
SPEECH
Hate Crimes Legislation
Does the law:




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                  62
Criminalize hate       Yes      Criminal Code (1968),    No      Codigo Penal Federal      Yes      Code Pénal (1962), Art.   Yes   Criminal Code (1881),   No    Yes   Criminal Code (1999),
speech?                         Art. 162 Para. 1                 (1931), Art. 149 Ter               308-5 referring only to         Art. 137c                           Art. 87 Para. 1(b)
                                                                 refers to the crime of             incitement of hate dur-
                                                                 "discrimination"                   ing sport events
Criminalize hate       Yes      Criminal Code (1968),    No                                No                                 No                            No    No
crimes?                         Arts. 162–165
If there is a law,  Yes         Criminal Code (1968),    N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
does it define hate             Arts. 162, 172
crime as a substan-
tive offense?
If there is a law,  Yes         Criminal Code (1968),    N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
does it define hate             Arts. 116, 131 Para. 1
crime as an aggra-              Sec. 12
vating circum-
stance?
If there is a law,     Yes      Criminal Code (1968),    N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
does it define reli-            Arts. 162, 131 Para 1.
gious identity as a             Sec. 12, 416–419
protected charac-
teristic?
If there is a law,     Yes      Criminal Code (1968),    N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
does it protect                 Art. 162 Para. 2, 163
property?
If there is a law,     No                                N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
does it extend to
victims by associa-
tion?
Awareness Raising and Training on Hate Crimes
Does the law:
Require govern-     Yes         Judiciary System Act     N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
ment agencies to                (2007), Arts. 377–384
collect data on
hate crimes com-
mitted on religious
grounds?
Does the law mandate trainings of the following professionals on recognizing and identifying hate crimes?
Paramedics?            No                                N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
Police officers?       No                                N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
Prosecutors?           No                                N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
Judges?                No                                N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A
Social workers?        No                                N/A                               N/A                                N/A                           N/A   N/A




                   Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                              63
Other?              No                                 N/A                                N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A
Services to Victims of Hate Crimes
Does the law mandate the provision of any of the following services to victims of hate crimes:
Legal assistance    Yes       Legal Aid Act (2005),    N/A                                N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A
(including asylum             Arts. 21, 22
applications)?                Asylum and Refugees
                              Act (2002), Art. 20
Shelter/housing?    No                                 N/A                                N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A

Forensic or medi-   Yes       Law on Support and     N/A                                  N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A
cal examinations?             Financial Compensation
                              to Crime Victims
                              (2006), Art. 8




               Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                       64
  LGBTI Survey

INSTITUTIONS                        Bulgaria                        Mexico                           Morocco                      Netherlands                         Tanzania                         Vietnam
The Constitution and National Legislation
Under the Constitution:
Is there a general        Yes   Constitution of the       Yes   Constitución Política de No                               Yes   Constitution of the King-   Yes   Constitution of the Unit-   Yes   Constitution of Vi-
nondiscrimination               Republic of Bulgaria            los Estados Unidos Mex-                                         dom of the Netherlands            ed Republic of Tanzania           etnam (2013) Art. 5
clause?                         (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2          icanos (1917), Art. 1                                           (2008), Art. 1                    (1977), Arts. 9(g),               Para. 2
                                                                                                                                                                  13(1)(2)
If yes, does it explicitly No                             Yes   Constitución Política de N/A                              No                                No                                No
mention sexual orien-                                           los Estados Unidos Mex-
tation as a protective                                          icanos (1917), Art. 1
status?
If yes, does it explicitly No                             No                               N/A                            No                                No                                No
mention gender iden-
tity as a protective
status?
Is there a provision    Yes     Constitution of the      Yes    Constitución Política de Yes      Constitution du Roy-    Yes   Constitution of the King-   Yes   Constitution of the Unit-   Yes   Constitution of Vi-
that guarantees equali-         Republic of Bulgaria            los Estados Unidos Mex-           aume du Maroc (2011),         dom of the Netherlands            ed Republic of Tanzania           etnam (2013) Art. 16
ty before the law?              (1991), Art. 6 Paras. 1,        icanos (1917), Art. 4             Art. 6                        (2008), Art. 1                    (1977), Arts. 12, 13(1)           Para. 1
                                2
If yes, does it explicitly No                             No                               No                             No                                No                                No
mention LGBTI indi-
viduals?

Under national legislation:

Is there a specific law Yes     Protection Against        Yes   Ley Federal para Preve-    No                             Yes   Equal Treatment Act         No                                No
on nondiscrimination?           Discrimination Act              nir y Eliiminar la Dis-                                         (1994)
                                (2004)                          criminación (2003)
If yes, does it provide   Yes   Protection Against        Yes   Ley Federal para Preve-    N//A                           Yes   Equal Treatment Act         N/A                               N/A
protection from dis-            Discrimination Act              nir y Eliminar la Dis-                                          (1994), Sec. 1(b)
crimination on sexual           (2004), Art. 4 Para. 1          criminación (2003), Art.
orientation grounds?                                            1
If yes, does it provide Yes     Protection Against        No                               N/A                            No                                N/A                               N/A
protection from dis-            Discrimination Act
crimination on gender           (2004), Art. 4 Para. 1,
identity grounds?               Additional Provisions,
                                Sec. 1, Subsection 17




                 Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                          65
Are there any other      Yes    Criminal Code (1968), No                                    No                                    Yes   Criminal Code (1881),       No                                 No
laws that protect               Art. 8 Para. 3                                                                                          Art. 137
LGBTI individuals               National Education Act
from discrimination?            (1991)
                                Higher Education Act
                                (1995)
                                Labor Code (1992)
                                Health Act (2004)
Political Rights
Is there a provision     Yes    Constitution of the       Yes    Constitución Política de Yes       Constitution du Roy-          Yes   Constitution of the King-   Yes   Constitution of the Unit-    Yes   Constitution of Vi-
that guarantees free-           Republic of Bulgaria             los Estados Unidos Mex-            aume du Maroc (2011),               dom of the Netherlands            ed Republic of Tanzania            etnam (2013), Art. 25
dom of opinion and              (1991), Art. 39 Para. 1          icanos (1917), Arts. 6, 7          Art. 25                             (2008), Art. 7                    (1977), Art. 18
expression?
Do laws and/or regulations relating to any of these categories differ between LGBTI individuals and the rest of the population?
Obtaining citizenship? No       Constitution of the       No     Constitución Política de No        Code de la nationalité  No          Constitution of the King-   No    Tanzania Citizenship Act     No    Nationality Law
                                Republic of Bulgaria             los Estados Unidos Mex-            moracaine(1958), Art. 9             dom of the Netherlands            (1995), Arts. 4–6                  (2008), Art. 2 Para. 2
                                (1991), Art. 25 Para. 1          icanos (1917), Art. 30                                                 (2008), Art. 1
                                                                 Para. A                                                                Netherlands Nationality
                                                                                                                                        Act (2010), Art. 3
Obtaining a passport? No        Bulgarian Personal    No         Constitución Politica de No        Décret n°2-08-310 in-    No         Constitution of the King- No      Tanzania Passports and       No    Decree No. 136/2007
                                Documents Act (1999),            los Estados Unidos Mex-            stituant le passeport               dom of the Netherlands            Travel Documents Act               ND-CP 17 on Viet-
                                Art. 4 Para. 1                   icanos (1917), Art. 4              biométrique (2008), Art.            (2008), Art. 1                    (2002), Art. 12                    namese Citizens' Exit
                                                                 Reglamento de                      1                                   No restriction or differ-                                            and Entry (2007), Art.
                                                                 Pasaportes y del Docu-                                                 ent treatment could be                                               8
                                                                 mento de Identidad y                                                   found on the Passport Act
                                                                 Viaje (2011), Art. 14
When applying for a      Yes    Regulations for Issuing   Yes    Secretaria de Relaciones Yes       Décret n°2-08-310 in-         No    Passport/identity card      Yes   Tanzania Passports and       Yes   Circular No.
passport, are there             of Bulgarian Personal            Exteriores, Formato de             stituant le passeport               application, item 1.7             Travel Documents Act               07/2013/TT-BCA
only two options,               Documents, Appendix              solicitud de pasaporte.            biométrique (2008),                                                   (2002), First Schedule             (2013) amending and
“male" or "female”?             2                                Reglamento de                      Formulaire de demande                                                                                    supplementing the
                                                                 Pasaportes y del Docu-             du Passeport Biométri-                                                                                   issuance, amendment,
                                                                 mento de Identidad y               que                                                                                                      and supplementation
                                                                 Viaje (2011), Art. 16                                                                                                                       of ordinary passports
                                                                                                                                                                                                             granted in the country,
                                                                                                                                                                                                             form X01
When applying for an     Yes    Regulations for Issuing   Yes    Ley General de Institu- Yes        Loi n°35-06 instituant la No        Passport/identity card      Yes   Registration and Identifi-   Yes   Circular 05; Decree
ID card, are there              of Bulgarian Personal            ciones y Procedimientos            carte nationale d'identité          application, item 1.7             cation of Persons Act              No. 05/1999/ND-CP 3
only two options,               Documents, Appendix              Electorales (2014), Art.           électronique (2007), Art.                                             (1986), Art. 9(b)(v)               on the People's Identi-
“male" or "female”?             2                                156                                3                                                                                                        ty Card (1999), Art. 2
Does the law:




                   Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                                 66
Require the assigned    Yes    Bulgarian Personal   Yes         Secretaria de Relaciones Yes       Formulaire de demande    No    Civil Code, Book 1          Yes   Passport Application       Yes   Decree 158/2005/ND-
gender on the pass-            Documents Act (1999)             Exteriores, Formato de             du Passeport Biométri-         (1970), Art. 1:28                 Form                             CP on Civil Status
port to match the                                               solicitud de pasaporte.            que                                                                                               Registration and Man-
expression of one’s                                             Reglamento de                                                                                                                        agement (2005), Art.
gender?                                                         Pasaportes y del Docu-                                                                                                               38 Para. 4
                                                                mento de Identidad y
                                                                Viaje (2011), Art. 16
Require gender-         N/A    No applicable provi-     N/A     No applicable provisions N/A       No applicable provisions N/A   No applicable provisions    N/A   No applicable provisions   No    Decree 158/2005/ND-
reassignment surgery           sions could be located           could be located                   could be located               could be located                  could be located                 CP 27 (December
for intersex children                                                                                                                                                                                2005) on Civil Status
in order to receive a                                                                                                                                                                                Registration and Man-
birth certificate?                                                                                                                                                                                   agement, Art. 38 Para.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
Allow an individual to Yes     Bulgarian Personal        Yes    Reglamento de                N/A   No applicable provisions Yes   Civil Code, Book 1          N/A   No applicable provisions   Yes   Law No.
obtain a new ID card           Documents Act (1999),            Pasaportes y del Docu-             could be located               (1970), Art. 1:28                 could be located                 60/2014/QH13 on
or passport after gen-         Art. 9 Para. 1 Regula-           mento de Identidad y                                                                                                                 Civil Status (2014),
der reassignment?              tions for Issuing of Bul-        Viaje (2011), Art. 16                                                                                                                Art. 3 Para. 2(c)
                               garian Personal
                               Documents, Art. 20
Are NGOs that promote the interests of LGBTI individuals:
Permitted under the     Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit     Yes     Constitución Política de N/A                                Yes   Constitution of the King-   N/A                              Yes   Decree No.
law?                           Legal Entities Act               los Estados Unidos Mex-                                           dom of the Netherlands                                             12/2012/ND-CP on
                               (2000), Art. 2 Para. 1           icanos (1917), Art. 9                                             (2008), Art. 8                                                     registration and man-
                               and Art. 2 Para. 2               Ley Federal de Fomento                                            Civil Code, Book 2                                                 agement of operation
                                                                a las Actividades realiza-                                        (1972), Art. 2:285                                                 of nongovernmental
                                                                das por Organizaciones                                                                                                               organizations in Vi-
                                                                de la Sociedad Civil                                                                                                                 etnam (2012), Art. 3
                                                                (2004), Art. 5 Sec. XIII                                                                                                             Para. 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Decree No. 30 on
                                                                                                                                                                                                     social and charity funds
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (2012), Art. 2
If yes, are the NGOs Yes       Bulgarian Non-Profit     Yes.    Ley Federal de Fomento N/A                                  Yes   Civil Code, Book 2          N/A                              Yes   Decree No.
subject to limitation          Legal Entities Act               a las Actividades realiza-                                        (1972), Art. 2:20                                                  12/2012/ND-CP on
by the state on the            (2000), Art. 3 (2)               das por Organizaciones                                                                                                               registration and man-
basis of national secu-                                         de la Sociedad Civil                                                                                                                 agement of operation
rity, public order, mo-                                         (2004), Art. 30                                                                                                                      of nongovernmental
rality, or other                                                                                                                                                                                     organizations in Vi-
grounds?                                                                                                                                                                                             etnam, (2012), Art. 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Decree No. 30 on
                                                                                                                                                                                                     social and charity funds
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (2012), Art. 7.1
Representation in the Three Branches of Government (Legislative, Executive, and Judiciary)
Does the law:
Mandate quotas for      No                              No                                   No                             No                                No                               No
LGBTI individuals in
parliament?




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                            67
Does the law prohibit LGBTI individuals from:
Holding ministerial    No                                No                            No                            No                                No                             No
posts?
Enforcement of Antidiscrimination Laws and Policies
Does the law:
Require the judiciary No                                 Yes   Ley Federal para Preve- N/A                           No                                N/A                            No
to receive training in                                         nir y Eliminar la Dis-
the application of ex-                                         criminación (2003), Art.
isting antidiscrimina-                                         20, Para. XL, 34, Para. IV
tion laws dealing with
sexual orientation
and/or gender identi-
ty?
Require the police to No                                 Yes   Ley Federal para Preve- N/A                           No                                N/A                            No
receive training in the                                        nir y Eliminar la Dis-
application of existing                                        criminación (2003), Art.
antidiscrimination                                             20 Para XL, 34, Para. IV
laws dealing with sex-                                         Ley General del Sistema
ual orientation and/or                                         Nacional de Seguridad
gender identity?                                               Pública (2009), Art. 40,
                                                               Secs. I, IV
Establish a specialized Yes    Ombudsman Act             Yes   Ley de la Comisión       Yes   Dahir n 1-11-19 portant Yes   Institute for Human        Yes   Constitution of the Unit- No
body tasked with re-           (2003),                         Nacional de los Derech-        création du Conseil na-       Rights Act, Sec.1                ed Republic of Tanzania
ceiving complaints for         Art. 2.                         os Humanos (1992), Art.        tional des droits de          Institute for Human              (1977), Art. 129(1)
violations of human                                            2: Comisión Nacional de        l'Homme (2011)                Rights (formerly Equal           Commission for Human
rights (Human Rights           Protection Against              los Derechos Humanos           Constitution du Roy-          Treatment Commission)            Rights and Good Govern-
Committee, Om-                 Discrimination Act              Ley Federal para Preve-        aume du Maroc (2011),                                          ance Act (2001), Art.
budsman, etc.)?                (2004), Art. 40.                nir y Eliminar la Dis-         Artt. 19, 161 and 164                                          6(1)(b)
                                                               criminación (2003), Art.
                                                               16: Consejo Nacional
                                                               para Prevenir la Dis-
                                                               criminación (not a gen-
                                                               eral human rights body,
                                                               but specialized in dis-
                                                               crimination)
If yes, does such body Yes     Ombudsman Act             Yes   Ley de la Comisión        No                          Yes    Institute for Human        No                             N/A
hear complaints of             (2003),                         Nacional de los Derech-                                      Rights Act (2011), Secs.
discrimination against         Art. 19. Para. 1                os Humanos (1992), Art.                                      3(a), 10 (1)
LGBTI individuals or                                           3
those perceived as             Protection Against              Ley Federal para Preve-
such?                          Discrimination Act              nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                               (2004), Art. 48 Para. 2         criminación (2003), Arts.
                                                               1 Para. III, 43




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                               68
Is there a budget allo- Yes      Ombudsman Act             Yes   Constitución Política de Yes     Dahir n 1-11-19 portant Yes     The Ministry of Justice has Yes   Commission for Human     N/A
cation for the opera-            (2003),                         los Estados Unidos Mex-          création du Conseil na-         the main responsibility for       Rights and Good Govern-
tion of such body?               Art. 7                          icanos (1917), Art. 102          tional des droits de            the Institute's budget. The       ance Act (2001), Art. 29
                                 Protection Against              Para. B                          l'Homme (2011), Art. 55         budget is regulated in the
                                 Discrimination Act              Ley de la Comisión                                               Annual Budgets Act and
                                 (2004), Art. 40 Para. 3         Nacional de los Derech-                                          not in the Netherlands
                                                                 os Humanos (1992),                                               Institute for Human
                                                                 Arts. 2, 75                                                      Rights Act.
                                                                 Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                                 nir y Eliminar la Disci-
                                                                 minación (2003), Art. 16
                                                                 (regarding CONAPRED,
                                                                 not the Ombudsman)
LABOR                               Bulgaria                         Mexico                          Morocco                        Netherlands                         Tanzania                      Vietnam
Equality in Accessing the Labor Force
Does the law:
Prohibit LGBTI indi-   No        Labor Code (1992),        No    Ley Federal para Preve-    No    Code du Travail (2011),   No    Constitution of the King-   No    Constitution of the Unit- No   Decree No.
viduals from obtaining           Art. 8 Para. 3                  nir y Eliminar la Dis-           Art. 9 and Art. 478             dom of the Netherlands            ed Republic of Tanzania        10/2012/QH13 Labor
employment in specif-            Protection Against              criminación (2003), Art.         Constitution du Roy-            (2008), Art. 19 Para. 3           (1977), Art. 22 (1)            Code (2012), Art. 5
ic sectors?                      Discrimination Act              9 Para. III                      aume du Maroc (2011),           Equal Treatment Act               Employment and Labour          Para. 1, Art. 8 Para. 1
                                 (2004), Art. 12                                                  Art. 31                         (1994), Sec. 5 (1)(b)             Relations Act, (2004), Art.
                                                                                                                                                                    7(1)
Prohibit discrimina-       Yes   Labor Code (1992),        Yes   Ley Federal para Preve-    Yes   Code du Travail (2011),   Yes   Equal Treatment Act         No                             Yes   Decree No.
tion in recruitment in           Art. 8 Para 3                   nir y Eliminar la Dis-           Art. 9 and Art. 478             (1994), Sec. 5 (1)                                               10/2012/QH13 Labor
the public sector?               Protection Against              criminación (2003), Art.         Constitution du Roy-                                                                             Code (2012), Arts. 5
                                 Discrimination Act              9 Para. III          Ley         aume du Maroc (2011),                                                                            Para. 1, 38 Paras 1, 4
                                 (2004), Art. 12 Para. 1         Federal del Trabajo              Art. 31
                                                                 (1970), Arts. 2, 3, 133
If yes, is sexual orien-   Yes   Labor Code (1992),       Yes    Ley Federal para Preve-    No                              Yes   Equal Treatment Act         N/A                            No
tation included?                 Art. 8 Para. 3                  nir y Eliminar la Dis-                                           (1994), Sec. 1 (1)(b)
                                 Protection Against              criminación (2003), Art.
                                 Discrimination Act              9 Para. III       Ley
                                 (2004), Art. 12 Para. 1,        Federal del Trabajo
                                 Art. 4 Para. 1                  (1970), Arts. 2, 3, 133
If yes, is gender identi- Yes    Protection Against       No                                No                              No                                N/A                            No
ty included?                     Discrimination Act
                                 (2004), Art. 12 Para. 1,
                                 Art. 4 Para. 1
Prohibit discrimina-       Yes   Labor Code (1992),        Yes   Ley Federal para Preve-    Yes   Code du Travail (2011), Yes     Equal Treatment Act         No                             Yes   Decree No.
tion in recruitment in           Art. 8 Para. 3                  nir y Eliminar la Dis-           Art. 9 and Art. 478             (1994), Sec. 5 (1)                                               10/2012/QH13 Labor
the private sector?              Protection Against              criminación (2003), Art.         Constitution du Roy-                                                                             Code (2012), Art. 8
                                 Discrimination Act              9 Para. III       Ley            aume du Maroc (2011),                                                                            Para. 1, Art. 5 Para. 1
                                 (2004), Art. 12 Para. 1         Federal del Trabajo              Art. 31
                                                                 (1970), Arts. 2, 3, 133




                 Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                                         69
If yes, is sexual orien-   Yes   Labor Code (1992),       Yes    Ley Federal para Preve-    No                             Yes    Equal Treatment Act          N/A   No
tation included?                 Art. 8 Para. 3                  nir y Eliminar la Dis-                                           (1994), Sec. 1 (1)(b)
                                 Protection Against              criminación (2003), Art.
                                 Discrimination Act              9 Para. III
                                 (2004), Art. 12 Para. 1,        Ley Federal del Trabajo
                                 Art. 4 Para. 1                  (1970), Arts. 2, 3, 133
If yes, is gender identi- Yes    Protection Against       No                                No                             No                                  N/A   No
ty included?                     Discrimination Act
                                 (2004), Art. 12 Para. 1,
                                 Art. 4 Para. 1
Prohibit an employer Yes         Protection Against        No                               No                             No                                  No    No
from asking about an             Discrimination Act
individual’s sexual              (2004), Art. 12 Para. 2
orientation or gender
identity during the
recruitment phase?
Prescribe equal remu- Yes        Protection Against        Yes   Constitución Política de No                               Yes    Equal Treatment Act          No    Yes   Decree No.
neration for work of             Discrimination Act              los Estados Unidos Mex-                                          (1994), Sec. 5 (1)(e), (h)               10/2012/QH13 Labor
equal value for LGBTI            (2004), Art. 14 Para. 1         icanos (1917), Art. 123                                                                                   Code (2012), Arts. 5
individuals?                                                     Para. VII                                                                                                 Para 1 (a), 8 Para. 1 ,
                                                                 Ley Federal del Trabajo                                                                                   90 Para. 3
                                                                 (1970), Art. 56
Prohibit the dismissal     Yes   Protection Against        Yes   Ley Federal del Trabajo    No                             Yes    Equal Treatment Act          No    No
of employees on sex-             Discrimination Act              (1970), Arts. 3, 133                                             (1994), Secs. 5(1), 8
ual orientation or               (2004), Art. 21
gender identity
grounds?
Access to Remedy
Does the law allow an employee to bring a claim for employment discrimination on sexual orientation or gender identity grounds:
In the public sector?      Yes   Protection Against        Yes   Ley Federal del Trabajo    N/A                            Yes    Equal Treatment Act          N/A   No
                                 Discrimination Act              (1970), Arts. 2, 3, 133                                          (1994), Secs. 10, 12 (2)
                                 (2004), Art. 50, 71.            Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                                 nir la Discriminación
                                                                 (2003), Art. 43
If yes, is the employee No       Protection Against        No    Ley Federal del Trabajo    N/A                            No     Equal Treatment Act          N/A   N/A
required to prove loss           Discrimination Act              (1970), Art. 784                                                 (1994), Sec. 10 (1)
or injury?                       (2004), Art. 9
If there is a law, does Yes      Protection Against        No    No provisions could be     N/A                            Yes    Equal Treatment Act          N/A   No    No provisions could
it prohibit retaliation          Discrimination Act              located                                                          (1994), Sec. 8(a)                        be located
by the employer for              (2004), Art. 5, addi-
bringing a complaint             tional provisions, Sec. 1
or participating in any          (3)
manner in an em-
ployment discrimina-
tion proceeding?




                 Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                 70
In the private sector?   Yes    Protection Against       Yes     Ley Federal del Trabajo     No              Yes   Equal Treatment Act        No                           No
                                Discrimination Act               (1970), Arts. 2, 3, 133                           (1994), Secs. 10, 12 (2)
                                (2004), Arts. 50, 71.            Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                                 nir la Discriminación
                                                                 (2003), Art. 43
If yes, is the employee No      Protection Against       No      Ley Federal del Trabajo     N/A             No    Equal Treatment Act        N/A                          N/A
required to prove loss          Discrimination Act               (1970), Art. 784                                  (1994), Sec. 10 (1)
or injury?                      (2004), Art. 9
If there is a law, does Yes     Protection Against        No     No provisions could be      N/A             Yes   Equal Treatment Act        N/A                          No    No provisions could
it prohibit retaliation         Discrimination Act               located                                           (1994), Sec. 8(a)                                             be located
by the employer for             (2004), Arts. 5, addi-
bringing a complaint            tional provisions, Sec. 1
or participating in any         (3)
manner in an em-
ployment discrimina-
tion proceeding?
Does the law:
Shift the burden of     Yes     Protection Against       Yes     Ley Federal del Trabajo     No              Yes   Equal Treatment Act        Yes   Employment and Labour No
proof for antidiscrimi-         Discriminatation Act             (1970), Art. 784                                  (1994), Sec. 10 (1)              Relations Act (2004), Art.
nation claims from the          (2004), Art. 9                                                                                                      7(8)(a)
employee to the em-
ployer?
Allow class action     Yes      Protection Against       Yes     Ley Federal del Trabajo     No              Yes   Equal Treatment Act        No                           No
lawsuits for employ-            Discrimination Act               (1970), Art. 697                                  (1994), Sec. 10 (2)
ment discrimination             (2004), Art. 71 Paras.
claims based on sexual          2, 3 Civil Procedure
orientation or gender           Code (2007), Art. 379
identity grounds?               Para. 1
EDUCATION                          Bulgaria                          Mexico                        Morocco           Netherlands                       Tanzania                     Vietnam
Participation in Education
Does the law prohibit discrimination in school admission on sexual orientation grounds in:
Primary education?       Yes    Protection Against       Yes     Constitución Política de N/A                Yes   Equal Treatment Act        N/A                          No
                                Discrimination Act               los Estados Unidos Mex-                           (1994), Sec. 7 (1)(c)
                                (2004), Arts. 4 Para. 1,         icanos (1917), Art. 3
                                29 Para 2.                       Ley General de Edu-
                                                                 cación (1993), Art. 2
                                                                 Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                                 nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                                                                 criminación (2003), Art.
                                                                 9




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                        71
Secondary education? Yes        Protection Against       Yes     Constitución Política de N/A                                 Yes         Equal Treatment Act          N/A   No
                                Discrimination Act               los Estados Unidos Mex-                                                  (1994), Sec. 7 (1)(c)
                                (2004), Arts. 4 Para. 1,         icanos (1917), Art. 3
                                29 Para. 2                       Ley General de Edu-
                                                                 cación (1993), Art. 2
                                                                 Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                                 nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                                                                 criminación (2003), Art.
                                                                 9
Tertiary education?     Yes     Protection Against        Yes    Constitución Política de N/A                                 Yes         Equal Treatment Act          N/A   No
                                Discrimination Act               los Estados Unidos Mex-                                                  (1994), Sec. 7 (1)(c)
                                (2004), Art. 4, Para. 1          icanos (1917), Art. 3
                                Higher Education Act,            Ley General de Edu-
                                Art. 4                           cación (1993), Art. 2
                                                                 Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                                 nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                                                                 criminación (2003), Art.
                                                                 9
Does the law:
Mandate the creation    No                                Yes    Anti Bullying policy im-   No                                Yes         Antibullying policy imple-   No    No
of an action plan to                                             plemented                                                                mented
combat bullying
against LGBT stu-
dents, or those per-
ceived as such?
Fighting Marginalization in Education
Does the law mandate the adoption of measures aimed at sensitizing the students to the principles of nondiscrimination and equality in:
Primary education?      Yes     Protection Against      Yes      Constitución Política de No                                  Yes         Primary Education Act        No    Yes   Decree No.
                                Discrimination Act               los Estados Unidos Mex-                                                  (1981), Art. 46                          38/2005/QH11 on
                                (2004), Art. 35 Paras.           icanos (1917), Art. 3                                                                                             Education Law (2005),
                                1, 3                             Para. 4                                                                                                           Arts. 5 Para. 1, 7 Para
                                National Education Act           Ley General de Edu-                                                                                               2.
                                (1991), Art. 15 Para. 2          cación (1993), Arts. 7, 8,
                                                                 33
Secondary education? Yes        Protection Against      Yes      Constitución Política de No                                  Yes         Secondary Education Act      No    Yes   Law No.
                                Discrimination Act               los Estados Unidos Mex-                                                  (1963), Art. 42                          38/2005/QH11 Educa-
                                (2004), Art. 35 Paras.           icanos (1917), Art. 3                                                                                             tion Law(2005), Arts.
                                1, 3                             Para. 4             Ley                                                                                           5 Para. 1, 7 Para 2.
                                National Education Act           General de Educación
                                (1991), Art. 15 Para. 2          (1993), Arts. 7, 8, 33
Does the law:




                Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                          72
Mandate the revision    Yes     Final Provisions of the Yes      Ley General de Edu-        No                                 No                 No              No
of national textbooks           Ordinance on Informa-            cación (1993), Arts. 8,
in primary and sec-             tive Notebooks, Text-            12 Para. III, 42
ondary education to             books, and Handbooks,
eliminate discrimina-           Art. 12, Para. 3 in rela-
tory language (e.g.,            tion to § 4
homophobic or tran-
sphobic language)?
Mandate the training No                                  Yes     Ley General de Edu-        No                                 No                 No              No
of school teachers in                                            cación (1993), Arts. 8,
primary and second-                                              12 Para. III, 42
ary education on anti-
discrimination of
LGBTI students, or
those perceived as
such?
Include courses on      No                               No                                 No                                 No                 No              No
sex education in an
LGBTI-inclusive man-
ner?
PROPERTY                            Bulgaria                          Mexico                            Morocco                     Netherlands        Tanzania        Vietnam
Access to Land
Do laws and/or regulations relating to any of these transactions differ between LGBTI individuals and the rest of the population?
Obtain a title of land No                                No                                 No                                 No                 No              No
(e.g., for the purposes
of transfer or sale)?
Lease land?             No                               No                                 No                                 No                 No              No
License land?           No                               No                                 No                                 No                 No              No
Obtain a mortgage?      No                               No                                 No                                 No                 No              No
Inherit land?           No                               No                                 No                                 No                 No              No
PUBLIC SERVICES                     Bulgaria                          Mexico                            Morocco                     Netherlands        Tanzania        Vietnam
AND SOCIAL
PROTECTION
Public Services Provided by the Government
Does the law prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation in accessing:




                 Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                         73
Health care?             Yes    Protection Against      Yes   Ley General de Salud        N/A   Yes   Equal Treatment Act          No   Yes   Decree No.
                                Discrimination Act            (1984), Art. 77 bis 36                  (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)              40/2009/QH12 Law on
                                (2004), Art. 37               Paras. VII, XX                                                                  Medical Examination
                                Health Act (2004), Art.       Ley del Seguro Social                                                           and Treatment (2009),
                                85                            (1995), Arts. 214–217,                                                          Art. 9 Para. 1
                                                              238
                                                              Ley Federal para Preve-
                                                              nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                                                              criminación (2003), Art.
                                                              9 Para. XX
Social housing?          Yes    Social Assistance Act   Yes   Ley General de Vivienda N/A       Yes   Equal Treatment Act          No   No
                                (1998), Art. 3                (2006), Art. 3                          (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)
                                Protection Against            Ley Federal para Preve-
                                Discrimination Act            nir y Eliminar la Dis-
                                (2004), Art. 37               criminación (2003), Art.
                                                              9 Para. XXI
Electricity?             Yes    Protection Against      Yes   Ley Federal para Preve-     No    Yes   Equal Treatment Act          No   Yes   Decree No.
                                Discrimination Act            nir y Eliminar la Dis-                  (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)              28/2004/QH11 Elec-
                                (2004), Art. 37               criminación (2003), Art.                                                        tricity Law (2004), Art.
                                Energy Act (2003), Art.       9 Para. XXII                                                                    4.2
                                31                            Ley de la Industria Elec-
                                                              trica (2014), Art. 50
Water supply?            Yes    Protection Against      Yes   Ley Federal para Preve-     N/A   Yes   Equal Treatment Act          No   Yes   Decree No.
                                Discrimination Act            nir y Eliminar la Dis-                  (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)              15/2012/L/CTN Law
                                (2004), Art. 37               criminación (2003), Art.                                                        on Water Resources
                                                              9 Para. XXII                                                                    (2012), Art. 3 Para. 5
Microcredits?            Yes    Protection Against      Yes   Ley para la Transparen-     N/A   Yes   Equal Treatment Act          No   No
                                Discrimination Act            cia y el Ordenamiento                   (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)
                                (2004), Art. 37               de los Servicios Financi-
                                                              eros (2007), Arts. 4 bis
                                                              3 Para. III, 17
Subsidized health in-    Yes    Protection Against      Yes   Ley Federal para Preve-     N/A   Yes   Equal Treatment Act          No   Yes   Decree No.
surance?                        Discrimination Act            nir y Eliminar la Dis-                  (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)              23/2008/L-CTN Law
                                (2004), Art. 37               criminación (2003), Art.                                                        on Health Insurance
                                                              9 Para. XX                                                                      (2009), Art. 11 Para. 4
Social pensions?         Yes    Protection Against      Yes   Ley Federal para Preve-     No    Yes   Equal Treatment Act          No   No
                                Discrimination Act            nir y Eliminar la Dis-                  (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)
                                (2004), Art. 37               criminación (2003), Art.
                                                              9 Para. VII




                   Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                  74
Child benefits?          Yes     Constitution of the      No                                  No                                 Yes   Equal Treatment Act          No   No
                                 Republic of Bulgaria                                                                                  (1994), Secs. 7 (1)(b)–(c)
                                 (1991), Art. 6 Para. 2
                                 Protection Against
                                 Discrimination Act
                                 (2004), Art. 4 Paras. 1,
                                 37
                                 Social Assistance Act
                                 (1998), Art. 3
Public Services Provided by Civil Society
Does the law allow civil society organizations (CSOs) to provide social services specifically to LGBTI individuals, including:
Vaccination?             Yes     Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes        Ley Federal de Fomento N/A                                    Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A    Yes   Not explicit but should
                                 Legal Entities Act                a las Actividades realiza-                                          covered by Constitution                 be covered by Decree
                                 (2000), Art. 38                   das por Organizaciones                                              of the Kingdom of The                   No. 12/2012/ND-CP
                                 Health Act (2004) Art.            de la Sociedad Civil                                                Netherlands (2008), Art.                on registration and
                                 222                               (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,                                            8                                       management of opera-
                                                                   V, XI                                                                                                       tion of nongovernmen-
                                                                                                                                                                               tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                                                               Vietnam (2012), Art. 4
Water?                   Yes     Bulgarian Non-Profit      Yes     Ley Federal de Fomento N/A                                    Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A    Yes   Not explicit but should
                                 Legal Entities Act                a las Actividades realiza-                                          covered by Constitution                 be covered by Decree
                                 (2000), Art. 38                   das por Organizaciones                                              of the Kingdom of The                   No. 12/2012/ND-CP
                                                                   de la Sociedad Civil                                                Netherlands (2008), Art.                on registration and
                                                                   (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,                                            8                                       management of opera-
                                                                   V, XI                                                                                                       tion of nongovernmen-
                                                                                                                                                                               tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                                                               Vietnam (2012), Art. 4
Sanitation?              Yes     Bulgarian Non-Profit      Yes     Ley Federal de Fomento N/A                                    Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A    Yes   Not explicit but should
                                 Legal Entities Act                a las Actividades realiza-                                          covered by Constitution                 be covered by Decree
                                 (2000), Art. 38                   das por Organizaciones                                              of the Kingdom of The                   No. 12/2012/ND-CP
                                                                   de la Sociedad Civil                                                Netherlands (2008), Art.                on registration and
                                                                   (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,                                            8                                       management of opera-
                                                                   V, XI                                                                                                       tion of nongovernmen-
                                                                                                                                                                               tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                                                               Vietnam (2012), Art. 4
Family planning?         Yes     Bulgarian Non-Profit      Yes     Ley Federal de Fomento N/A                                    Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A    Yes   Not explicit but should
                                 Legal Entities Act                a las Actividades realiza-                                          covered by Constitution                 be covered by Decree
                                 (2000), Art. 38                   das por Organizaciones                                              of the Kingdom of The                   No. 12/2012/ND-CP
                                                                   de la Sociedad Civil                                                Netherlands (2008), Art.                on registration and
                                                                   (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,                                            8                                       management of opera-
                                                                   V, XI                                                                                                       tion of nongovernmen-
                                                                                                                                                                               tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                                                               Vietnam (2012), Art. 4




                   Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                   75
Health services (psy-   Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should
chological)?                   Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades realiza-         covered by Constitution                be covered by Decree
                               (2000), Art. 38              das por Organizaciones             of the Kingdom of The                  No. 12/2012/ND-CP
                                                            de la Sociedad Civil               Netherlands (2008), Art.               on registration and
                                                            (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,           8                                      management of opera-
                                                            V, XI                                                                     tion of nongovernmen-
                                                                                                                                      tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                      Vietnam (2012), Art. 4
Health services (phys- Yes     Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should
iological)?                    Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades realiza-         covered by Constitution                be covered by Decree
                               (2000), Art. 38              das por Organizaciones             of the Kingdom of The                  No. 12/2012/ND-CP
                                                            de la Sociedad Civil               Netherlands (2008), Art.               on registration and
                                                            (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,           8                                      management of opera-
                                                            V, XI                                                                     tion of nongovernmen-
                                                                                                                                      tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                      Vietnam (2012), Art. 4
Sexual and reproduc-    Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should
tive health services?          Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades realiza-         covered by Constitution                be covered by Decree
                               (2000), Art. 38              das por Organizaciones             of the Kingdom of The                  No. 12/2012/ND-CP
                                                            de la Sociedad Civil               Netherlands (2008), Art.               on registration and
                                                            (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,           8                                      management of opera-
                                                            V, XI                                                                     tion of nongovernmen-
                                                                                                                                      tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                      Vietnam (2012), Art. 4
HIV preventative ser- Yes      Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should
vices (con-                    Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades realiza-         covered by Constitution                be covered by Decree
doms/lubricants/pre-           (2000), Art. 38              das por Organizaciones             of the Kingdom of The                  No. 12/2012/ND-CP
exposure prophylaxis,                                       de la Sociedad Civil               Netherlands (2008), Art.               on registration and
etc.) and information                                       (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,           8                                      management of opera-
on HIV and vulnerable                                       V, XI                                                                     tion of nongovernmen-
sexual practices?                                                                                                                     tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                      Vietnam (2012), Art. 4
Antiretroviral?         Yes    Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should
                               Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades realiza-         covered by Constitution                be covered by Decree
                               (2000), Art. 38              das por Organizaciones             of the Kingdom of The                  No. 12/2012/ND-CP
                                                            de la Sociedad Civil               Netherlands (2008), Art.               on registration and
                                                            (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,           8                                      management of opera-
                                                            V, XI                                                                     tion of nongovernmen-
                                                                                                                                      tal organizations in
                                                                                                                                      Vietnam (2012), Art. 4
Medications for gen- Yes       Bulgarian Non-Profit   Yes   Ley Federal de Fomento N/A   Yes   Not explicit but should be N/A   Yes   Decree 88/2008/ND-
der-reassignment sur-          Legal Entities Act           a las Actividades realiza-         covered by Constitution                CP on Sex Reassign-
gery?                          (2000), Art. 38              das por Organizaciones             of the Kingdom of The                  ment, Arts. 4 Para. 1,
                                                            de la Sociedad Civil               Netherlands (2008), Art.               7–14
                                                            (2004), Art. 5 Paras. I,           8
                                                            V, XI
Does the law:




                  Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                           76
Impose funding limita- No                               No                             N/A                          No                             N/A              No
tions on CSOs on the
provision of such ser-
vices?
HATE CRIMES AND                    Bulgaria                       Mexico                        Morocco                     Netherlands                  Tanzania            Vietnam
HATE SPEECH
Hate Crimes Legislation
Does the law:
Criminalize hate          Yes   Criminal Code (1968),   No    Codigo Penal Federal     Yes   Code Pénal (1962), Art. Yes   Criminal Code (1881),   No               Yes   Criminal Code (1999),
speech?                         Arts. 162 Para. 1             (1931), Art. 149 Ter           308-5 referring only to       Art. 137c                                      Art. 87 Para. 1(b)
                                                              refers to the crime of         incitement of hate dur-
                                                              "discrimination"               ing sport events
Criminalize hate          Yes   Criminal Code (1968),   No                             No                           No                             No               No
crimes?                         Artt. 162–165; Art.
                                172
If there is a law, does Yes     Criminal Code (1968),   N/A                            N/A                          N/A                            N/A              N/A
it define hate crime as         Artt. 162–165; Art.
a substantive offense?          172
If there is a law, does Yes     Criminal Code (1968),   N/A                            N/A                          N/A                            N/A              N/A
it define hate crime as         Art . 116 Para. 11
an aggravating circum-
stance?
If there is a law, does No                              N/A                            N/A                          N/A                            N/A              N/A
it define sexual orien-
tation as a protected
characteristic?
If there is a law, does   No                            N/A                            N/A                          N/A                            N/A              N/A
it define gender iden-
tity as a protected
characteristic?
If there is a law, does   Yes   Criminal Code (1968),   N/A                            N/A                          N/A                            N/A              N/A
it protect property?            Art. 163
If there is a law, does No                              N/A                            N/A                          N/A                            N/A              N/A
it extend to victims by
association?
Awareness Raising and Training on Hate Crimes
Does the law:




                 Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                                                                77
Require government       Yes    Judiciary System Act     N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
agencies to collect             (2007), Art. 80 Para. 1,
data on hate crimes             Art. 86 Para. 1, Art.
committed against               382 Para. 3
LGBTI individuals or
those perceived as
such?
Does the law mandate trainings of the following professionals on recognizing and identifying hate crimes?
Paramedics?              No                              N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
Police officers?         No                              N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
Prosecutors?             No                              N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
Judges?                  No                              N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
Social workers?          No                              N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
Other?                   No                              N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
Services to Victims of Hate Crimes
Does the law mandate the provision of any of the following services to victims of hate crimes?
Legal assistance (in-   Yes     Legal Aid Act (2005),    N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
cluding asylum applica-         Arts 21, 22
tions)?                         Asylum and Refugees
                                Act (2002), Art. 20
Shelter/Housing?         No                              N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
Forensic or medical      Yes    Law on Support and       N/A                                N/A             N/A   N/A   N/A
examinations?                   Financial Compensa-
                                tion to Crime Victims
                                (2006), Art. 8




                   Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                              78
References

Aghion, Philippe, Eve Caroli, and Cecilia García-Peñalosa. (1999) “Inequality and Economic Growth: The Perspective
         of the New Growth Theories.” Journal of Economic Literature 37 (4, December): 1615–60.
         https://dash.harvard.edu/bitstream/handle/1/12502063/Inequality%20and%20Economic%20Growth%20-
         %20The%20Perspective%20of%20the%20New%20Growth%20Theories.pdf?sequence=1.
Amnesty International. 2009. “No More Stolen Sisters: The Need for a Comprehensive Response to Discrimination and
         Violence against Indigenous Women in Canada.” Amnesty International, London.
         https://www.amnesty.ca/sites/amnesty/files/amr200122009en.pdf.
———. n.d. “Mass Incarceration in the USA.” Amnesty International website. http://www.amnestyusa.org/our-
         work/issues/military-police-and-arms/police-and-human-rights/mass-incarceration-in-the-usa.
Arts, Hiske, and Anita Nabha. 2001. “Education in the Netherlands: Segregation in a ‘Tolerant’ Society.” Humanity in
         Action. http://www.humanityinaction.org/knowledgebase/6-education-in-the-netherlands-segregation-in-a-
         tolerant-society.
Badgett, M. V. Lee. 2014. The Economic Cost of Stigma and the Exclusion of LGBT People: A Case Study of India. Wash-
         ington, DC: World Bank.
         http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/527261468035379692/pdf/940400WP0Box380usion0of0LGBT
         0People.pdf.
Badgett, M. V. Lee, Sheila Nezhad, Kees Waaldijk, and Yana can der Meulen Rodgers. 2014. “The Relationship be-
         tween LBGT Inclusion and Economic Development: An Analysis of Emerging Economies.” Williams Institute,
         University of California-Los Angeles School of Law.
Basu, Kaushik. 2001. “On the Goals of Development.” In Frontiers of Development Economics: The Future in Perspective,
         edited by G. M. Meier and J. E. Stiglitz. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2006. “Globalization, Poverty, and Inequality: What Is the Relationship? What Can Be Done?” World Devel-
         opment 34 (8): 1361–73.
         http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Poverty%20documents/Basu-2006.pdf.
———. 2013. “Shared Prosperity and the Mitigation of Poverty: In Practice and In Precept.” Policy Research Working
         Paper 6700, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Bénabou, Roland. 1996. “Inequality and Growth.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996, Volume 11, edited by Ben S.
         Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg. New York University Department of Economics and NBER. Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c11027.pdf.
Berg, Andrew G., and Jonathan D. Ostry. 2011. “Inequality and Unsustainable Growth: Two Sides of the Same Coin?”
         IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/08, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
         https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2011/sdn1108.pdf.
Bertola, Giuseppe, Reto Foellmi, and Josef Zweimüller. 2005. Income Distribution in Macroeconomic Models. Princeton,
         NJ: Princeton University Press. http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/fichiers/Bertolaetal2006.pdf.
Bishop Russell. 2010. “Discursive Positioning and Educational Reform.” In Critical Multiculturalism: Theory and Praxis,
         edited by Stephen May and Christine E. Sleeter, 61–71. New York: Routledge.
Bourguignon, François. 2004. “The Poverty-Growth-Inequality Triangle.” World Bank. Paper presented at the Indian
         Council for Research on International Economic Relations, New Delhi, February 4.
         http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPGI/Resources/342674-1206111890151/15185_ICRIER_paper-
         final.pdf.
Crehan, Phil, and Jennifer McCleary-Sills. 2015. Brief on Violence against Sexual and Gender Minority Women. Washing-
         ton, DC: World Bank.
Dabla-Norris, Era, Kalpana Kochhar, Nujin Suphaphiphat, Frantisek Ricka, and Evridiki Tsounta. 2015. “Causes and
         Consequences of Income Inequality: A Global Perspective.” Staff Discussion Note 15/13, International Mone-
         tary Fund, Washington, DC. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2015/sdn1513.pdf.
Dang, Hai-Anh H. 2010. “Growth in Vietnam Is Strong but Not Shared Equitably across Ethnic Groups.” Vietnam
         Country Brief 1, World Bank, Washington, DC.
         http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSOCIALDEVELOPMENT/Resources/244362-
         1265299949041/6766328-1285599693282/Vietnam_Indigenous_brief_1_9_10.pdf.




Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                       79
Deakin, Simon, Jonas Malmberg, and Prabirjit Sarkar. 2013. “Do Labour Laws Increase Equality at the Expense of
          Higher Unemployment? The Experience of Six OECD Countries, 1970–2010.” Working Paper 442, Centre
          for Business Research, University of Cambridge. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2345821.
Devereux, Stephen, and Rachel Sabates‐Wheeler, 2004. “Transformative Social Protection.” IDS Working Paper 232,
          Institute of Development Studies, Brighton, UK.
          http://www.unicef.org/socialpolicy/files/Transformative_Social_Protection.pdf.
Dworkin, Ronald. 1981a. “What is Equality? Part 1: Equality of Welfare.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 10 (3): 185–246.
———. 1981b. “What is Equality? Part 2: Equality of Resources.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 10 (4): 283–345.
Economist. 2015. “The Model Minority Is Losing Patience.” October 3.
          http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21669595-asian-americans-are-united-states-most-successful-
          minority-they-are-complaining-ever.
Ehrhart, Christophe. 2009. “The Effects of Inequality on Growth: A Survey of the Theoretical and Empirical Litera-
          ture.” ECINEQ WP 2009–107. https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/6713990.pdf.
European Commission. 2015. “Eurobarometer on Discrimination 2015.” Factsheet.
          http://ec.europa.eu/justice/fundamental-rights/files/factsheet_eurobarometer_fundamental_rights_2015.pdf.
———. 2016. “EU and Roma.” Last modified November 24. http://ec.europa.eu/justice/discrimination/roma/.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2015. The State of Food and Agriculture: Social Protec-
          tion and Agriculture—Breaking the Cycle of Rural Poverty. Rome: FAO.
Ferreira, Francisco H. G., Julian Messina, Jamele Rigolini, Luis-Felipe López-Calva, Maria Ana Lugo, and Renos Vakis.
          2013. Economic Mobility and the Rise of the Latin American Middle Class. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:
          10.1596/978-0-8213-9634-6.
          https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/11858/9780821396346.pdf.
Ferreira, Francisco H. G., and Vito Peragine. 2015. “Equality of Opportunity: Theory and Evidence.” Policy Research
          Working Paper 7217, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://www-
          wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/T_MNA/2015/03/20/090224b082c55852/1
          _0/Rendered/PDF/Equality0of0op00theory0and0evidence.pdf.
Fleurbaey, Marc, and Vito Peragine. 2013. “Ex Ante versus Ex Post Equality of Opportunity.” Economica 80
        (317): 118–30.
FRA (European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights). 2013. “Opinion of the European Union Agency for Funda-
          mental Rights on the Situation of Equality in the European Union 10 Years on from Initial Implementation of
          the Equality Directives.” Vienna. http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra-2013-opinion-eu-equality-
          directives_en.pdf.
———. 2014. “Roma Survey—Data in Focus, Poverty and Employment: The Situation of Roma in 11 EU Member
          States.” http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra-2014-roma-survey-employment_en.pdf.
Fredman, Sandra. 2012. “Anti-Discrimination Laws and Work in the Developing World: A Thematic Overview.” Back-
          ground paper for the World Development Report 2013, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Free and Equal Initiative. n.d. “LGBT Rights: Frequently Asked Questions.” United Nations Office of the High Com-
          missioner for Human Rights. https://www.unfe.org/system/unfe-7-UN_Fact_Sheets_v6_-_FAQ.pdf.
Garcia-Moreno, Vicente A., and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2011. “Indigenous Peoples and Poverty in Mexico.” Mexico
          Country Brief 7, World Bank, Washington, DC.
          http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSOCIALDEVELOPMENT/Resources/244362-
          1265299949041/6766328-1285599693282/Mexico_brief_0328.pdf.
Gatti, Roberta, Sandor Karacsony, Kosuke Anan, Celine Ferré, and Carmen de Paz Nieves. 2016. Being Fair, Faring Bet-
          ter: Promoting Equality of Opportunity for Marginalized Roma. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/23679/9781464805981.pdf?sequence=5&isAll
          owed=y.
Grant, Peter, ed. 2015. State of the World’s Minorities and Indigenous Peoples 2015: Events of 2014. London: Minority
          Rights Group International. http://minorityrights.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/MRG-state-of-the-worlds-
          minorities-2015-FULL-TEXT.pdf.
Hall, Gillette H., and Harry Anthony Patrinos, eds. 2012. Indigenous Peoples, Poverty, and Development. New York:
          Cambridge University Press.
Hamilton, Tracy Brown. 2015. “Solving the Problem of Amsterdam’s ‘Black’ and ‘White’ Schools: The Dutch City
          Known for Its Tolerance Is Having Trouble Promoting Racial Integration while Honoring Parent Choice.” At-



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                       80
         lantic, June 18. http://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2015/06/amsterdam-school-racial-
         segregation/396176/.
Hamm, Nia. 2014. “Wake Up: Economic Inequality among Minorities No Longer Just a Minority Problem.” Huffing-
         ton Post, April 4. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/nia-hamm/wake-up-economic-inequali_b_5086676.html.
Hanouz, Margareta Drzeniek. 2015. “Why Discrimination Is Bad for Business.” World Economic Forum, Cologny,
         Switzerland. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/03/why-discrimination-hurts-competitiveness/.
Herzer, Dierk, and Sebastian Vollmer. 2012. “Inequality and Growth: Evidence from Panel Cointegration.” Journal of
         Economic Inequality 10 (4): 489–503.
Holtmaat, Rikki. 2016. “Government Criticised for Lack of Progress in Addressing Labour Market Discrimination.”
         News report, European Network of Legal Experts in Gender Equality and Non-Discrimination, March 15.
         http://www.equalitylaw.eu/downloads/3756-netherlands-government-criticised-for-lack-of-progress-in-
         addressing-labour-market-discrimination-pdf-75-kb.
Human Rights Committee. 1989. General Comment No. 18: “Non-discrimination.” HRI/GEN/1/Rev.4.
Human Rights Commission of New Zealand. 2012. “A Fair Go for All? Addressing Structural Discrimination in Public
         Services.”
         http://nhri.ohchr.org/EN/Themes/IndigenousPeoples/DocumentsPage/Addressing%20Structural%20Discrimi
         nation%20-%20HRC%20New%20Zealand%20Structural%20(2012).pdf.
Human Rights Watch. 2013. “‘Treat Us Like Human Beings’: Discrimination against Sex Workers, Sexual and Gender
         Minorities, and People Who Use Drugs in Tanzania.” https://www.hrw.org/report/2013/06/18/treat-us-
         human-beings/discrimination-against-sex-workers-sexual-and-gender.
———. 2015. “Country Summary: South Africa.”
         https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/related_material/southafrica_3.pdf.
———. 2016. “Country Summary: South Africa.” https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/south_africa_pdf.pdf.
Hussain, Azhar, and Ahmad Salim, with Arif Naveed. 2011. Connecting the Dots: Education and Religious Discrimination
         in Pakistan—A Study of Public Schools and Madrassas. Washington, DC: U.S. Commission on International Re-
         ligious Freedom. http://www.uscirf.gov/sites/default/files/resources/Pakistan-ConnectingTheDots-
         Email(3).pdf.
ICJ (International Commission of Jurists). 2007. Yogyakarta Principles: Principles on the Application of International Hu-
         man Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. Geneva: ICJ.
         http://www.refworld.org/cgi-
         bin/texis/vtx/rwmain?page=category&category=REFERENCE&publisher=ICJRISTS&type=&coi=&docid=48
         244e602&skip=O.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2008. “Tanzania Mainland: Social Protection Expenditure and Performance
         Review and Social Budget.” http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---
         soc_sec/documents/publication/wcms_secsoc_7451.pdf.
———. 2011a. “Discrimination at Work.” World of Work 72: 6–15. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---
         dgreports/---dcomm/documents/publication/wcms_160434.pdf.
———. 2011b. “Equality at Work: The Continuing Challenge—Global Report under the Follow-Up to the ILO Dec-
         laration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work.” International Labour Office, Geneva.
         http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---
         declaration/documents/publication/wcms_166583.pdf.
———. 2015. “Employment Protection Legislation: Summary Indicators in the Area of Terminating Regular Contracts
         (Individual Dismissals).” http://www.ilo.org/travail/areasofwork/WCMS_357390/lang--en/.
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. 2015. “The Human Rights Situation in Mexico.”
         OEA/Ser.L/V/II.Doc.44/15. Washington, DC: IACHR.
Inter-Parliamentary Union and the United Nations Development Programme. 2010. “The Representation of Minorities
         and Indigenous Peoples in Parliament: A Global Overview” Inter-Parliamentary Union, Geneva, and United
         Nations Development Programme, New York.
IWGIA (International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs). 2015a. Report of the African Commission’s Working
         Group on Indigenous Populations/Communities: Research and Information Visit to the Republic of Tanzania,
         21 January–6 February 2013. Banjul, The Gambia: ACHPR, and Copenhagen, Denmark: IWGIA.
         http://www.iwgia.org/iwgia_files_publications_files/0719_TANZANIA-ENGELSK.pdf.
 ———. 2015b. “Tanzania.” In The Indigenous World 2015. Copenhagen: IWGIA, 394–403.
         http://www.iwgia.org/iwgia_files_publications_files/0716_THE_INDIGENOUS_WORLD_2015_eb.pdf.


Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                          81
———. 2016. “Tanzanian Pastoralists Threatened: Eviction, Human Rights Violations and Loss of Livelihoods.”
          IWGIA Report 23. Copenhagen: IWGIA.
          http://www.iwgia.org/iwgia_files_publications_files/0727_Report_23_Tanzania_for_eb.pdf.
Kim, Jim Yong. 2014. “Discrimination by Law Carries a High Price.” Washington Post, February 28.
          http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2014/02/28/world-bank-group-president-jim-yong-kim-
          discrimination-law-price.
Koehler, Dominik, and Nicholas Menzies. Forthcoming. Surveys, Big Data, and Experiments: Quantifying LGBTI Devel-
          opment Outcomes. What Does Experience Tell Us? Washington, DC: World Bank.
Lattimer, Mark, and Derek Verbakel. 2015. “People under Threat 2015.” In State of the World’s Minorities and Indige-
          nous Peoples 2015: Events of 2014, edited by Peter Grant, 250–57. London: Minority Rights Group Interna-
          tional. http://minorityrights.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/MRG-state-of-the-worlds-minorities-2015-
          FULL-TEXT.pdf.
Leadership Council of the United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network. 2015. “Indicators and a Moni-
          toring Framework for the Sustainable Development Goals: Launching a Data Revolution for the SDGs.”
          http://unsdsn.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/150612-FINAL-SDSN-Indicator-Report1.pdf.
Leitch. 2006. Prosperity for All in the Global Economy - World Class Skills: Final Report. Leitch Review of Skills. Norwich,
          UK: Crown. http://dera.ioe.ac.uk/6322/1/leitch_finalreport051206.pdf.
López-Calva, Luis Filipe, and Nora Claudia Lustig, eds. 2010. Declining Inequality in Latin America: A Decade of Pro-
          gress? Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7864/j.ctt6wpdkq.
Marrero, G., and J. Rodríguez. 2013. “Inequality of Opportunity and Growth.” Journal of Development Economics 104:
          107–22.
Mill, John Stuart. 1848. Principles of Political Economy. London: John W. Parker.
Minority Rights Group International. 2008. “The Right to Learn. Batwa Education in the Great Lakes Region of Afri-
          ca.” London: Minority Rights Group International.
          http://r2e.gn.apc.org/sites/r2e.gn.apc.org/files/MRG_Right%20to%20Learn%20Batwa.pdf.
Morlachetti, Alejandro. 2015. The Rights to Social Protection and Adequate Food: Human Rights–Based Frameworks for
          Social Protection in the Context of Realizing the Right to Food and the Need for Legal Underpinnings. Rome: Food
          and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5321e.pdf.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2008. “The Price of Prejudice: Labour Market
          Discrimination on the Grounds of Gender and Ethnicity.” In OECD Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD, 139–
          202. http://www.oecd.org/els/emp/43244511.pdf.
———. 2014. “Is Migration Good for the Economy?” Migration Policy Debates, May. https://www.oecd.org
          /migration/OECD%20Migration%20Policy%20Debates%20Numero%202.pdf.
OSCE (Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe). 2009. Hate Crime Laws: A Practical Guide. Warsaw:
          OSCE. http://osce.org/odihr/36426?download=true.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Andrew Berg, and Charalambos G. Tsangarides. 2014. “Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth.”
          International Monetary Fund Research Department Staff Discussion Note. Washington, DC: IMF.
          https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2014/sdn1402.pdf .
Oxfam. 2014. Even It Up: Time to End Extreme Poverty, Oxford, UK: Oxfam.
          https://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/cr-even-it-up-extreme-inequality-291014-
          en.pdf.
Oxfam International. 2015. “Richest 1% Will Own More Than All the Rest by 2016.” News release, January 19.
Palmieri, Sonia. 2010. Representation from the Top: Ethnic Minorities in the National Assembly of Vietnam. Geneva, Swit-
          zerland: Inter-Parliamentary Union, and New York: United Nations Development Programme.
Patrinos, Harry A. 2014. “Why Engage the Private Education Sector?” Education for Global Development (blog), July 16.
          http://blogs.worldbank.org/education/why-engage-private-education-sector.
Protsyk, Oleh. 2010. The Representation of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples in Parliament. Geneva, Switzerland: Inter-
          Parliamentary Union, and New York: United Nations Development Programme. http://www.ipu.org/splz-
          e/chiapas10/overview.pdf.
Ramos, Xavier, and Dirk Van de Gaer. 2012. “Empirical Approaches to Equality of Opportunity: Principles, Measures,
          and Evidence.” Discussion Paper 6672, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany.
Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge MA: Belknap Press.
Ricardo, David. 1817. On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. London: John Murray.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                            82
Ringnalda, Allard, and Renée Kool. 2012. “The Prosecution of Bias Crime in the Netherlands and the Problem of Net-
           Widening: Fundamental Limits to Criminal Liability.” Crime, Law and Social Change 58 (1): 53–74.
Roemer, John E. 2009. Equality of Opportunity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Roemer, John E., and Alain Trannoy. 2013. “Equality of Opportunity.” Discussion Paper 1921, Cowles Foundation for
           Research in Economics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 98–101.
           http://cowles.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/pub/d19/d1921.pdf.
Sapir, André. 2003. “An Agenda for a Growing Europe: Making the EU Economic System Deliver.” Report of an Inde-
           pendent High-Level Study Group established on the initiative of the President of the European Commission
           (The Sapir Report). http://cejm.univ-rennes.eu/digitalAssets/24/24407_sapirreport.pdf.
Sears, Brad, and Christy Mallory. 2011. “Documented Evidence of Employment Discrimination and Its Effects on
           LGBT People.” Williams Institute, University of California-Los Angeles Law School.
           http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Sears-Mallory-Discrimination-July-20111.pdf.
Sims, Jessica Mai. 2012. “ENAR Shadow Report 2012–2013: Racism and Related Discriminatory Practices in Employ-
           ment in the United Kingdom.” European Network Against Racism, Brussels. http://www.enar-
           eu.org/IMG/pdf/united_kingdom.pdf.
Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. London: W. Strahan and T. Cadell.
SOGI Task Force (Leadership group on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity). 2015. “LGBTI People Are (Likely)
           Over Represented in the Bottom 40%.” Governance for Development (blog), August 3.
           http://blogs.worldbank.org/governance/climatechange/impactevaluations/health/impactevaluations/developme
           nttalk/lgbti-people-are-likely-over-represented-bottom-40.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2012. The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided Society Endangers Our Future. New York: W. W.
           Norton.
———. 2013. “The Way Forward: Another World Is Possible.” In The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided Society
           Endangers Our Future, 332–63. New York: W. W. Norton.
UN Habitat. 2015. “Habitat III Issue Papers 20—Housing.” Issue paper completed May 31 for the United Nations
           Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development, Quito, October 2016.
UNCERD (United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination). 2010. “Consideration of Reports
           Submitted by States Parties under Article 9 of the Convention: Concluding Observations of the Committee on
           the Elimination of Racial Discrimination: Morocco.” CERD/C/MAR/CO/17-18, September 13.
           http://www.refworld.org/docid/4d2c5f112.html.
———. 2012. “Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 9 of the Convention: Concluding
           Observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination: Portugal.”
           CERD/C/PRT/CO/12-14, April 13. http://www.refworld.org/docid/5061a8142.html.
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2013. Inequality Matters: Report of the World
           Situation 2013. New York: United Nations.
           http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/documents/reports/InequalityMatters.pdf.
UNDP and USAID (United Nations Development Program and U.S. Agency for International Development). 2014.
           Being LGBT in Asia: Viet Nam Country Report. Bangkok: UNDP.
           https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1861/Being_LGBT_in_Asia_Viet_Nam_report_ENG.pdf
           .
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization). 2010. Reaching the Marginalized. Ox-
           ford: Oxford University Press. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001866/186606E.pdf.
———. 2014. “Progress in Getting All Children to School Stalls but Some Countries Show the Way Forward.” Policy
           Paper 14 /Fact Sheet 28, June 2014, p. 8. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002281/228184E.pdf.
UNICEF (United Nations International Children’s Fund). 2015. “World Education Forum Sets Roadmap for Global
           Education until 2030.” News release, May 19.
United Nations. 2016. “International Day on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.” News release, March 21.
United Nations Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Issues. 2014. “Indigenous Peoples’ Access to Decent Work
           and Social Protection.”
           http://www.un.org/en/ga/president/68/pdf/wcip/IASG%20Thematic%20paper_%20Employment%20and%2
           0Social%20Protection%20-%20rev1.pdf.
United Nations. 2004. “The Concept of Indigenous Peoples.” PFII/2004/WS.1/3. Background paper prepared by the
           Secretariat of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.



Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                      83
———. n.d. “Minorities under International Law.”
        http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Minorities/Pages/internationallaw.aspx.
UNOHCHR (United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights). 2010. Minority Rights: Interna-
        tional Standards and Guidance for Implementation. Geneva: UNOHCHR.
———. 2011. The United Nations Rule of Law Indicators. Geneva: UNOHCHR.
        http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/publications/un_rule_of_law_indicators.pdf.
———. 2012. Born Free and Equal. Geneva: UNOHCHR.
        http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/BornFreeAndEqualLowRes.pdf.
———. 2014. “Report of the Independent Expert on Minority Issues, Rita Izsák,” A/HRC/25/56. Geneva:
        UNOHCHR.
Vietnam Committee on Human Rights and International Federation for Human Rights. 2014. “Alternative Report on
        the Implementation of the UN International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights for Consider-
        ation of the Combined Second to Fourth Reports of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam: Violations of Econom-
        ic, Social and Cultural Rights in Vietnam,” p. 7, Geneva, September 25.
Wood, M., J. Hales, S. Purdon, T. Sejersen, and O. Hayllar. 2009. “A Test for Racial Discrimination in the Recruit-
        ment Practice in British Cities.” Research Report 607, Stationery Office, London.
World Bank. 2006. “World Development Report 2006: Equity and Development.”
        https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/5988/WDR%202006%20-
        %20English.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y.
———. 2009. “Country Social Analysis: Ethnicity and Development in Vietnam.” Report 49976. World Bank, Wash-
        ington, DC.
———. 2010a. “Economic Costs of Roma Exclusion.”
        http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTROMA/Resources/Economic_Costs_Roma_Exclusion_Note_Final.pdf
        .
———. 2010b. “Impact of Migration on Economic and Social Development: A Review of Evidence and Emerging Is-
        sues.” Background paper for the Civil Society Days of the Global Forum on Migration and Development 2010.
        http://siteresources.worldbank.org/TOPICS/Resources/214970-1288877981391/Migration&Development-
        Ratha-GFMD_2010a.pdf.
———. 2011. Global Monitoring Report 2011: Improving the Odds of Achieving the MDGs: Heterogeneity, Gaps and Chal-
        lenges. Report 61311. Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTGLOMONREP2011/Resources/7856131-
        1302708588094/GMR2011-CompleteReport.pdf.
———. 2012. 2012–2022 Social Protection and Labor Strategy: Resilience, Equity and Opportunity. Washington, DC:
        World Bank.
———. 2013a. Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSOCIALDEVELOPMENT/Resources/244362-
        1265299949041/6766328-1329943729735/8460924-
        1381272444276/InclusionMatters_AdvanceEdition.pdf.
———. 2013b. Women, Business, and the Law 2014: Removing Restrictions to Enhance Gender Equality. Washington,
        DC: World Bank.
———. 2013c. “The World Bank Group Goals: End Extreme Poverty and Promote Shared Prosperity.”
        https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/13192.
——. 2014. The State of Social Safety Nets 2014. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015a. Indigenous Latin America in the Twenty-First Century: The First Decade. Washington, DC: World Bank,
        59. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/145891467991974540/pdf/98544-REVISED-WP-P148348-
        Box394854B-PUBLIC-Indigenous-Latin-America.pdf.
———. 2015b. The State of Social Safety Nets 2015. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015c. “Systematic Country Diagnostic: Bulgaria’s Potential for Sustainable Growth and Shared Prosperity.”
        Report 99721. http://www-
        wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/10/05/090224b08312332b/1_0/Re
        ndered/PDF/Bulgaria0s0pot0c0country0diagnostic.pdf.
World Bank and Ministry of Planning and Investment of Vietnam. 2016. “Vietnam 2035: Toward Prosperity, Creativi-
        ty, Equity, and Democracy.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
        https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23724 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.


Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                                   84
World Bank and Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences. 2016. “Vietnam’s Household Registration System.”
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/158711468188364218/pdf/106381-PUB-P132640-ADD-ISBN-
        ON-BACK-COVER-PUBLIC.pdf.




Anti-Discrimination Law and Shared Prosperity                                                      85
