                                                    WPS7880


Policy Research Working Paper                      7880




                          Transit Migration
                       All Roads Lead to America

                                   Erhan Artuc
                                   Caglar Ozden




Development Research Group
Trade and International Integration Team
November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7880


  Abstract
 The paths of many migrants include multiple destina-                               percent. To explain these patterns, this paper constructs
 tions and transit routes, yet this pattern is almost never                         a dynamic model of global migration that allows transit
 reflected in empirical analyses. For example, 9 percent                            migration opportunities to impact the attractiveness of
 of recent immigrants to the United States arrived from                             locations. After estimating the structural parameters of
 a transit country as opposed to the country where they                             the model, the paper simulates various counterfactual sce-
 were born. Among those arriving from many high-                                    narios to highlight the spillovers of transit migration paths.
 income countries, the transit migration ratio exceeds 30




  This paper is a product of the Trade and International Integration Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at eartuc@worldbank.org and cozden@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Transit Migration: All Roads Lead to America∗
                                Erhan Artuc†and Caglar Ozden‡




JEL Codes: J61, F22, F16, J68
Keywords: International Migration, Transit Migration, Migration Policy


   ∗
      We thank two anonymous referees, Frederic Vermeulen, Michel Beine, Simone Bertoli, Michael Clemens,
Hein de Haas, David McKenzie, Jesus Fernandez-Huertas Moraga, Chris Parsons, Hillel Rapoport, Moritz Rit-
ter, Mathis Wagner and participants at the International Migration and Development Conference at Oxford
University for comments and feedback. We are grateful to Zovanga Kone for his excellent assistance in con-
structing the data ﬁles and catching many of our errors. We also thank Varanya Chaubey and Maggie Liu for
their editorial help. Research for this paper has been supported in part by the Knowledge for Change Program,
by the Multidonor Trust Fund for Trade and Development and by the Strategic Research Program of the World
Bank. All errors and omissions are the authors’ responsibility.
    †
      World Bank, Development Research Group
    ‡
      World Bank, Development Research Group
The migration decisions and paths of many international migrants include multiple destinations
and transit routes. Many people leave their birth countries and live in diﬀerent locations before
settling permanently in a foreign country or returning home. For example, around 9% of the
people who migrated to the United States during 2001-2012 were living in a country other than
their birthplace prior to their arrival. This pattern is even more common for migrants with
tertiary education: nearly 14% of such migrants did not come directly from their birth coun-
tries.1 High-income OECD countries are particularly important transit stops for immigrants.
Among the people who were living in Australia, Canada, or the United Kingdom just before
their arrival in the United States, over 30% were born in a diﬀerent country and would already
be classiﬁed as international migrants.

Despite their prevalence and potential economic signiﬁcance, transitory migration patterns
and the dynamic decision processes behind them are not explored in depth in the international
migration literature. The determinants of migration ﬂows or stocks are generally estimated
as functions of the bilateral mobility barriers between geographic locations and the diﬀerences
                                                                                          2
between the utility (or income) levels at alternative destinations and origins.               The standard
model that validates this approach assumes that migrants make a permanent decision at a
single point in time to move to a foreign country or to stay at home (see Hanson, 2010, for a
discussion).

Actual migration decisions are, however, more complex and dynamic in nature. Current and
potential migrants continuously update their information sets and review their decisions. They
might make (or delay) certain decisions or move to a speciﬁc location at diﬀerent points in
time. These decisions are based on current location-speciﬁc utility levels, migration costs, as
well as (expected) future opportunities that will become available only at a new location . For
example, the decision to move from Morocco to Spain might not be based only on the relatively
   1
     We should note that there are a handful of birth or last residence countries where the transit migration
ratio is lower among the tertiary educated.
   2
     These empirical approaches are usually based on the random utility maximization model of McFadden
(1978).


                                                     2
higher income levels or amenities. Spain’s proximity to more attractive labor markets in other
European countries, which are possibly less accessible via direct migration, is likely to enter
into the decision processes and utility calculations of Moroccan migrants.

The objective of this paper is to explore dynamic migration decisions and transit paths using
analytical modeling and empirical analysis. We ﬁrst construct a sequential multi-period model
of migration by drawing on recent papers on dynamic decision making processes in labor markets
(such as Kennan and Walker, 2011 and Artuc, Chaudhuri and McLaren, 2010). Agents are
identiﬁed by their current country of residence in addition to their birth countries. In each
period, they can move to a third country or remain in their current location. Their mobility
decisions depend on location-speciﬁc utility ﬂows as well as bilateral moving costs between
each pair of countries and a stochastic individual component for each choice. The decision to
move or to stay put is reconsidered in every period. The dynamic structure of the decision
process results in a continuation value for each potential destination. The main insight of the
model is that the continuation value includes an option value for each location in addition to
an instantaneous utility. This option value of a destination is based on the access it creates to
other higher value destinations.

Proper accounting of dynamic decision processes, such as reversing migration decisions or
moving to third countries in later periods, leads to better identiﬁcation of spillovers between
alternative destinations. Otherwise, we would end up with biased estimates when we try to
identify the determinants of migration patterns between pairs of birth and destination countries
or to assess the eﬀectiveness of migration policies. Bertoli, Brucker and Fernandez-Huertas
Moraga’s (2014) analysis, in the context of the European crisis, shows how biases can occur
in estimating the determinants of migration when sequential decision processes and resulting
spillovers are ignored.

Incorporating the option value of a location and viewing migration processes from this dynamic
lens can generate many additional insights. In standard static models, decisions to migrate to

                                               3
a location, say France, cannot be analyzed in isolation from alternative destinations available,
like Germany. As a consequence, changes in the relative attractiveness of Germany will also
aﬀect migration incentives and, therefore, ﬂows to France.3 Our dynamic model, however,
exposes another channel: the option value of available destinations for future mobility decisions.
The ease of movement between a pair of countries aﬀects migration from third countries. For
example, when Poland joins the European Union and gains visa-free access to the internal labor
market in the United Kingdom, more Belarusian migrants might decide to move to Poland as
they hope to eventually end up in the United Kingdom. Similarly, closing down bilateral
corridors might not fully eliminate migration from certain origin countries. As long as large
income gaps exist, people will try to ﬁnd a path to a speciﬁc destination via transit countries,
no matter how circuitous that route might be. In other words, the availability of transit routes
might signiﬁcantly reduce the eﬀectiveness of restrictive migration policies.

Using the estimated parameters of our dynamic migration model, we perform several simulation
exercises where we ‘close’ certain bilateral corridors to highlight the spillovers between alterna-
tive locations as discussed above. We chose the migration corridors based on their importance
for immigration to the United States, where detailed transit migration data are available. The
migration paths we consider are direct migration (i) from Canada to the United States, (ii)
from developing countries to Canada, and (iii) from developing countries to the United States.
Our fourth and ﬁnal simulation blocks all transit migration to the United States and only al-
lows direct migration from the migrants’ birth countries. In each of these scenarios, we analyze
how these policy experiments would aﬀect migration from diﬀerent countries to Canada, to the
United States, and to other transit countries, like the United Kingdom. As expected, there
are signiﬁcant spillovers. For example, when people cannot move to the United States directly
(Simulation 3), both permanent and transit migration to Canada increases. On the other hand,
when transit migration to the United States is banned (Simulation 4), then direct migration to
  3
   Such links between alternative destinations in static models need to be empirically addressed in gravity
models in international trade models (Anderson, 2011) and migration models (Bertoli and Fernandez-Huertas
Moraga, 2013).


                                                    4
Canada also drops since Canada’s option value diminishes signiﬁcantly.

While issues related to international transit migration receive relatively little attention in eco-
nomics, they have a more prominent place in other ﬁelds, such as demography and sociology,
with varying deﬁnitions and approaches. More speciﬁcally, the phrase ‘transit migration’ is
used to describe the migration patterns emerging in Europe following restrictions on legal mi-
gration and border controls that were introduced in the 1990s. As a result, many migrants
from Eastern Mediterranean and African countries moved to countries at the periphery of the
European Union, such as those in North Africa and Eastern Europe, while waiting for a chance
to move to the European Union countries (Collyer and de Haas, 2012; Collyer et al, 2012). The
paths of most recent refugees from Syria, Iraq and other source countries follow similar transit
routes, such as through Turkey, as they try to reach Western Europe. The phrase is also used
extensively to refer to low-skilled and mostly undocumented migrants from Central America
who travel through and temporarily live in Mexico before reaching the United States. In other
words, transit migration has a strong aﬃliation with irregular and undocumented migrants and
refugees as well as a strong sense of temporariness (see Duvell, 2012). Even among the few
papers in the economics literature (such as Djajic, 2013), this is the general perception.

We use the expression ‘transit migration’ to describe any migrant who lives in a foreign country
before moving to a second foreign country. Our data from the American Community Survey
indicate that transit migrants, deﬁned as those living in a country other than their birth country
‘one year’ prior to their move to the United States, are somewhat diﬀerent than those the
demography and sociology literatures focus on. First, transit migrants to the United States are
more likely to have tertiary education as opposed to primary or secondary education. Second,
most transit migrants are born in high-income European (and some African and East Asian)
countries as opposed to most Latin American migrants who come directly from their countries
of birth.

In terms of international migration, our paper is related to the large literature on the deter-

                                                5
minants of migration patterns such as Mayda (2010), Grogger and Hanson (2011), Beine et al
(2011) and Belot and Ederveen (2012). Several recent papers (such as Bertoli and Fernandez-
Huertas Moraga, 2013; Bertoli et al, 2013), were inﬂuenced by new developments in inter-
national trade literature on gravity models (discussed in Anderson, 2011). They aim to relax
certain assumptions used in the earlier models. In this regard, the paper closest to ours in terms
of insights and approach is Bertoli et al (2014) which analyzes the impact of the ﬁnancial crisis
on intra-European migration patterns. Using a model that incorporates expectations about
future economic conditions and the attractiveness of alternative destinations, they show how
the determinants of migration patterns change when dynamic considerations are incorporated.
While our empirical approach and questions are diﬀerent, our analytical models share many
insights.

Our paper is related to several other strands in the labor economics literature. First, there is
an extensive literature in labor economics on dynamic choice models, which explore various di-
mensions of mobility such as occupational mobility (Keane and Wolpin, 1997), internal mobility
(Kennan and Walker, 2011), and job search (McCall and McCall 1987). These papers usually
rely on rich individual panel data, and focus on endogeneity of the human capital accumulation
process . A more closely related paper is Artuc, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2010) on the sectoral
mobility of workers in domestic labor markets in the presence of international trade shocks.
They estimate moving cost frictions using a dynamic discrete choice model, highlighting the
importance of the option values of available choices.

The use of option values of locations as a concept in the migration literature is more sparse.
The ﬁrst paper, as far as we are aware, is Burda (1995) who models the timing of a single
migration decision. There is an option value to wait due to underlying volatility in the economic
environment. Locher (2001) explores the same concept in a two-period framework, using data
on ethnic German migration from CIS countries. The next important contribution is Bayer
and Juessen (2012) who model internal migration decisions in the United States and estimate
the structural parameters of a dynamic model. The option value again arises from underlying

                                                6
economic volatility.

Dynamic considerations are extensively analyzed in a series of recent papers on temporary
                                        orlach (2016) for a recent survey). As several
and return migration (see Dustmann and G¨
papers illustrate, return migration levels have always been quite high. Bandiera, Rasul and
Viarengo (2013) show out-migration rates from the United States were over 60% during the
age of mass migration at the turn of the 20th Century. Bijwaard, Schluterare and Wahba
(2014) use administrative data from the Netherlands and Bratsberg, Raaum and Sorlie (2007)
use register data from Norway and Sweden to explore more recent patterns. Several papers
on return and circular migration have used more formal and explicit dynamic models. Among
the ﬁrst examples, Kirdar (2012) develops a dynamic stochastic model to jointly explore return
migration and savings decisions of migrants and estimates it using panel data from Germany.
Among more recent and prominent examples are Thom (2015) and Lessem (2015) who use data
from the Mexican Migration Project on detailed migration histories of individuals. Among their
ﬁndings is the importance of border enforcement (similar to our simulations of blocked corridors)
                                                                                      orlach
to circular and return migration decisions. Using multiple data sources from Mexico, G¨
(2016) develops a comprehensive dynamic life cycle model to analyze the role of ﬁnancial
constraints on emigration, return migration and re-emigration decisions. In an another life-
                                 orlach (2015) explore human capital accumulation and
cycle model, Adda, Dustmann and G¨
migration duration decisions using data on Turkish migrants in Germany. All of these papers
rely on detailed panel data from a single origin or destination country (or a single corridor)
as the data requirements of such dynamic models are quite demanding. One of our main
contributions is to analyze a model of global migration patterns and ﬁnd empirical solutions to
address some of the data constraints.

The next section presents the dynamic structural model. Then, we discuss the data used in
the paper, followed by the estimation algorithm. We next present the estimation results and
the simulation exercises. We conclude with a discussion of future research paths and policy
analysis.

                                               7
1     Model
We present a dynamic model that allows repeated migration between alternative destinations
in each period. Thus, the attractiveness of a destination from a given origin is not solely based
on the income gap between them, but it is also a function of future migration opportunities
that become available at the new location. Unlike static models where migration decisions
are made at a single point in time without further migration possibilities, our model captures
economically important and ubiquitous sequential and transit migration patterns.

The agents in the model diﬀer according to their current location, birth country and skill
category. An agent’s country of birth is indexed by i, country of residence is indexed by j and
skill level is indexed by s. There are n countries in the model and i, j ∈ 1, 2, .., n. An agent
chooses a destination country based on his expectations. If i = j , the person continues to live
in his birth country and is not considered to be a migrant. If i = j, the agent is considered to
be a migrant. In every period, an agent living in j , can choose to migrate to any other country
k = j , regardless of whether he is already a migrant or not. Alternatively, he can choose to
stay in j .

An agent with skill level s living in j receives instantaneous (ﬂow) utility φs,j
                                                                              t at time t. This

utility depends on the current location and skill level, but it is independent of the agent’s birth
country. The next components of the utility function are composed of moving costs which
inﬂuence mobility decisions in almost every migration model. Moving costs are incurred if
an agent born in country i decides to move from country j to another country k = j . We
assume that the moving cost is equivalent to a one time reduction in the utility and is given
                 a,k
by C s,i,j,k +   t .   The ﬁrst component of this moving cost, C s,i,j,k , is ﬁxed (non-random) and
is a function of the agent’s birth country, current country, destination country and the skill-
level. This component does not vary among agents with the same characteristics. The second
                 a,k
component,       t ,   is random and varies by agent (indexed by a), by time and by destination
                                   a,k
country k . More speciﬁcally,      t     is assumed to be i.i.d. and drawn from a mean zero Gumbel

                                                     8
distribution with scale parameter 1. Furthermore, we assume that the ﬁxed cost component is
                                                                                    a,k
zero for stayers, i.e. C s,i,j,j = 0, ∀j ∈ 1, 2, .., n. However, the random cost    t     is incurred by
both movers and stayers.

Under the assumptions outlined above, the present discounted choice-speciﬁc utility of risk
neutral and rational agent a, from origin country i, living in country j is equal to


      Uts,i,j ( a      s,j           s,i,k
                t ) = φt + max βEt Vt+1 − C
                                            s,i,j,k
                                                    +        a,k
                                                             t         ,
                              k


        a
where   t   is a vector of random shocks, k represents the available choices of migration destina-
tions and β refers to the discount factor between t and t + 1. We take expectations of the above
expression with respect to agent speciﬁc shocks to get the Bellman equation which is expressed
as


(1)   Vts,i,j = φs,j             s,i,k
                 t + E max βEt Vt+1 − C
                                        s,i,j,k
                                                +           a,k
                                                            t      ,
                             k



where Vts,i,j = E Uts,i,j ( a
                            t ) is the expected value of location j for agent a from country i at time
                                                   a
t, conditional on idiosyncratic shock vector       t.


In this setting, as agents decide whether to stay in their current residence country j or to migrate
to another country k , they have to take the following into consideration as seen in expression
(1) above: (i) the instantaneous utility φs,j
                                          t   of staying in j , (ii) expected future continuation
payoﬀs of every potential destination k , represented by Vts,i,k
                                                           +1 and (iii) the moving cost from j to
                             a,k
k expressed as C s,i,j,k +   t .   Ex-ante identical agents may still make diﬀerent mobility decisions
because of the random component of their moving costs. These are equivalent to agent-speciﬁc
utility shocks that aﬀect attractiveness of diﬀerent destinations. Although agents are more
likely to migrate from countries with small φs,j
                                             t   to those with large φs,j
                                                                      t , the reverse is still

possible if the diﬀerences between random shocks are large enough. This is the mechanism
through which the model would generate simultaneous migration ﬂows from j to k and k to


                                                        9
j . However, the future utility at a given destination k is not fully known, thus agents form
expectations on these values and optimize accordingly. The instantaneous utility at a location,
φs,j
 t , is not a function of the agent’s birth country, but the expected value, Vt
                                                                               s,i,j
                                                                                     is a function
of both birth country i and current residence country j . This is due to the assumption that
the ﬁxed component of the moving cost C s,i,j,k , depends on the birth, current and destination
countries. This assumption is supported by the data which show the immigrants in a given
country j are more likely to move to another country k when compared to the natives of j .

The distributional assumption of the random shock, , allows us to solve the moving proba-
bilities analytically. An agent born in i, currently living in j has the following probability of
moving to k :

                     exp βEt Vts,i,k
                               +1 − C
                                      s,i,j,k

(2)   ps,i,j,k
       t         =                                 .
                                  s,i,l  s,i,j,l
                      l exp βEt Vt+1 − C




The probability of moving from j to k is a function of location speciﬁc values and moving costs.
This means we need to solve the Bellman equations to pin down the moving cost parameters
C s,i,j,k and location speciﬁc instantaneous utility parameters, φs,j
                                                                  t . This process will allow us

to calculate the direct and transit migration probabilities implied by the model as expressed in
(2). The Bellman equations need to be solved recursively for any given parameter set and we
will discuss the solution algorithm in detail in the next section.

The next step is to simplify the Bellman equation. The expected incremental utility of being
able to move from a given country j at time t can be written as:


      Ωs,i,j
       t     = E max βEt Vts,i,k
                           +1 − C
                                  s,i,j,k
                                          +             a,k
                                                        t     − βEt Vts,i,j
                                                                      +1 ,
                          k


which is the expected maximum future value minus the discounted value of the current choice.
This is the option value of location j and it is a key feature of our model and empirical analysis.


                                                       10
Similar to the moving probabilities, the “E max”expression above can be solved analytically,
thanks to the distributional assumptions on the random shock.4 This leads to the following
expression:


(3)    Ωs,i,j
        t     = − log(ps,i,j,j
                       t       ).


The Bellman equation can now be simply expressed using the option value term:5


(4)    Vts,i,j = φs,j       s,i,j s,i,j
                  t + βEt Vt+1 + Ωt     ,


This expression shows that the value of location j has three components: (i) the current
instantaneous utility φs,j
                       t , (ii) the discounted expected next period utility of staying in j , given

by βEt Vts,i,j
         +1 , and (iii) the option value of j (due to its access to other destination countries) as

denoted by Ωs,i,j
            t     .

The option value term in (3), as mentioned earlier, is the feature that separates our model
from the standard approaches where migration is a single static decision. In standard models,
migrants choose among the set of potential destinations and move from their birth country.
Migrants live in that destination for the remainder of time, essentially a single period, and
receive their payoﬀ. In our setting, the agents face the migration decision repeatedly, regard-
less of whether they are living in their birth countries or have already migrated. They make
their decisions based on the instantaneous payoﬀ, location speciﬁc moving costs and expected
continuation payoﬀs in those destination choices, as expressed in (4).

The option value associated with each potential destination in our model is similar to the
“option value”concept in the ﬁnance literature. Agents value their ability to move and this
   4
     Artuc, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2010) show the derivation of the option value equation in their online
appendix.
   5
     The expression for the option value is related to the inversion equation of Hotz and Miller (1993). Unlike
them, we do not invert empirical probabilities to estimate values. However, we simplify the Bellman equation
by taking advantage of the distributional assumption similar to Artuc Chaudhuri and McLaren (2010).


                                                      11
valuation is location speciﬁc. The option value of country j is going to be larger if it provides
easier access to other and possibly higher income countries. We argue and show that the option
value of such locations (such as Canada, the United Kingdom and Australia) is one of the main
motivations behind the observed transit and sequential migration patterns. Finally, we should
emphasize that the option value of a location Ωs,i,j
                                               t     = − log(ps,i,j,j
                                                              t       ) decreases as the probability
of moving decreases. If the agents were completely immobile and were stuck in j forever, say
due to complete border closures between j and other destinations, then the option value of j
would decline to zero.



1.1     Functional Form of the Moving Costs

The moving costs are one of the key determinants of the mobility patterns generated in the
model. We assume that the ﬁxed moving cost from country j to country k has two distinct
                                            s,j,k
components. The ﬁrst component, denoted by C1     , is the cost of moving from j to k . This
is assumed to be common for all agents whether they were born in j (locals) or were born
in another country i and had migrated in an earlier period to j (immigrants). The second
                       s,i,k
component, denoted by C2     , is the additional moving cost for immigrants born in i and are
currently living in j . We refer to this component as the cost of transit migration and do not
have a priori expectation on its value. The data, however, indicate immigrants are more likely
to move on to another country k from j when compared to locals, which implies this second
component is likely to be negative. We assume that the transit cost is a function of birth
country i and destination country k .6

The common cost component is given by

       s,j,k    1       1                      1                  1
(5)   C1     = αs, 0 + αs,1 log dist(j, k ) + αs,2 log gdp(j ) + αs,3 lang (j, k ).

   6
     Unfortunately we cannot use destination speciﬁc parameters in these expressions, since we use only the
transit migration data to the US. However, we can use bilateral and origin speciﬁc parameters.



                                                      12
and the additional transit component is equal to

           s,i,k    2       2                      2                 2
(6)       C2     = αs, 0 + αs,1 log dist(i, k ) + αs,2 log gdp(i) + αs,3 lang (i, k ),



where dist(j, k ) is the distance between countries j and k , lang (j, k ) is an indicator variable
that is equal to 1 if countries j and k share a common language and gdp(j ) is the GDP per
capita in country j . Total ﬁxed moving cost of moving from j to k for an agent born in i is,
thus, given by

                       s,j,k         s,i,k
(7)       C s,i,j,k = C1     + 1i=j C2     ,

       s,j,j       s,i,i
where C1     = 0, C2     = 0, and the indicator function 1i=j = 1, if i = j and 0 otherwise.
In other words, the ﬁxed moving cost is equal to zero for stayers independent of their birth
                         s,j,k
country; it is equal to C1     for people moving from their birth country to country k and it is
          s,j,k    s,i,k
equal to C1     + C2     for transit migrants - people born in country i, living in j and moving
to k .7



2         Data
Among the main constraints faced in estimating dynamic migration models is the availability
of detailed and comprehensive data. Most global bilateral migration data sets are based on
censuses and population registers of the destination countries where the migrants currently
reside. These data sources record only the country of birth or citizenship of migrants. Other
important variables, such as the year of arrival or migration status, are not included in most
surveys. Detailed migration histories tend to be available only in small and specialized surveys
    7
    In reality, both direct and transit cost components might be functions of the time a migrant spends at the
current location. Furthermore, the random component might show persistence over time. We abstract away
from these issues in our model and estimation since it is not feasible to identify duration of stay of migrants at
a given location.




                                                          13
which are not nationally representative.8 Without comprehensive global data that cover all
possible destinations, it is diﬃcult for empirical and analytical papers to explore beyond static
models.

The data in this paper come from two diﬀerent sources. The global bilateral skilled migration
database, as described in great detail in Artuc et al (2015), provides migrant stocks by gender
and education level (tertiary and non-tertiary) for 1990 and 2000 for each pair of countries in
the world. Part of the data comes from original statistical sources and comprises around 80% of
the migrant stock in the world. The rest are imputed using gravity based models. Artuc et al
(2015) describe the empirical methods behind the imputation based on a gravity model. Since
the imputed data might bias our results, we use only the raw data for 2000. The parallel data
for 2010 for OECD destinations come from the DIOC database which is described in Arslan
et al (2014). The DIOC 2010 database also has information on the time of arrival of migrants
by skill level and country of origin for all of the OECD destinations. This new disaggregation,
unavailable for earlier decades, allows us to construct the number of new arrivals by skill and
origin country for 2000-2010. We discuss in the next section how we use this new data in our
empirical analysis. Finally, we have collected additional bilateral migrant stock data by skill
level for around 50 non-OECD destinations in 2010. We use this data to complement the DIOC
data.

The second data source is the annual American Community Survey (ACS) of the United States
for 2001-2011. ACS provides detailed information on a large sample of the population, including
migrants who are deﬁned as people born outside the United States, regardless of their citizenship
or residency status. The survey asks the country of birth, the year of migration to the US and
where people were living a year earlier. Using these questions, we take the people who declared
that they had moved to the US within the previous year, record their country of birth, and
identify their country of residence prior to their move. This procedure allows us to identify
those who came directly from their birth countries and those who came from another country.
  8
                                                  orlach, 2016, for a detailed discussion of data shortcomings.
      See Carletto et al, 2015, and Dustmann and G¨


                                                       14
If a recent migrant was residing in a country other than their birth country, we consider them
to be transit migrants. No other data source, to our knowledge, has this level of detailed
and extensive information about immigrants and their migration paths. Despite this unique
information, we do not actually know when transit migrants moved to their country of last
residence. This information is not needed for our modeling purposes but would be quite useful
for future analysis.

We construct our database in the following manner. We only include people between the ages
of 18 and 65 at the time of the survey. Dropping the elderly (65+) reduces the sample by
around 4% while removing the children and young adults shrinks it by around 24%. The main
reason for removing young migrants is that they are likely to be moving with their parents and
are unlikely to be making the individual mobility decisions that form the basis of our model.
We include everybody in our sample who states that they arrived during the year of the survey
or during the previous year and were abroad in the year before they arrived.9 This leads to
slightly over 9 million people in the sample.

The ACS surveys have, on average, 175 diﬀerent countries and territories as possible answers
to the place of birth question. On the other hand, ‘country of residence 1 year ago’ question
has only 67 categories listed. Many smaller countries in a given region are aggregated into
regional categories, such as ‘Other South America’ or ‘Other West Asia’. To complicate the
   9
    There are two questions we use for this purpose. The ﬁrst question asks when the migrant moved to the
United States and the second asks the following: ‘Where did this person live 1 year ago?’ We should note
these two questions seem to create a certain level of confusion which possibly arises from when the survey is
conducted within that year. Suppose the survey is conducted in September 2006 and the migrant arrived in the
United States in March 2005. The answer to the ﬁrst question will be that the migrant moved to the United
States during 2005. In other words, this question is likely to capture more than 12 months of arrivals. That
is why, the total number of recent arrivals (current or previous year) obtained by summing up each individual
survey year is actually more than the number of people who arrived during 2001-11 based on the 2012 ACS
data. For the second question, some people will interpret ‘1 year ago’ as November 2005 and state where they
were living in the United States. Other respondents will interpret one year as the previous calendar year and
report the foreign country they were in before coming to the United States. As a result, around 40% of the
people who stated they migrated during that year or the previous year also reported a location in the United
States to this second question. We drop these observations from our sample. This adjustment brings our total
number of observations to 9.03 million, which is now 10% less than the number of people who arrived during
2001-11 according to the 2012 ACS data.


                                                     15
issue even further, many countries, such as Chile, Peru and Turkey, are individually identiﬁed
in some of the survey years but aggregated into the regional categories in others, making the
analysis close to impossible. To address these complications, we construct the smallest set of
countries and regional aggregates that are consistent over time, ending up with 40 geographic
units, including the United States. Among these, 25 are separate countries and 15 are regional
aggregates of the 150 other countries (or regions) that are listed in birthplace category. The
list of our 40 groups and the countries they include are presented in Table 1. This type of
aggregation of the world into 40 countries or groups potentially lowers our estimates and the
extent of transit migration in the data. For example, if a migrant who was born in Peru goes to
Argentina before moving to the United States, we will not be able to identify him as a transit
migrant since Peru and Argentina are part of the same category (Other South America) in our
data and estimation. For compatibility, we group the countries in the global bilateral migration
database and DIOC/DIOC-E along the same lines. Finally, in addition to their country of birth
and last residence, we split all migrants as tertiary or non-tertiary educated.

Figures 1 and 2 as well as Tables 2 and 3 provide information on the extent of transit migration
to the United States. Table 2 shows what percentage of migrants born in a given country was
residing in a diﬀerent country before migrating to the US. For example, 7% of Canadian born
migrants came to the US from a diﬀerent country. The same ratio is only 1% for Mexican
migrants, but over 20% for migrants born in many European countries like the United Kingdom,
Italy and the Russian Federation. The same information is presented visually in Figure 1 to
highlight regional diﬀerences and similarities. We see that transit migration is higher among
migrants born in Africa and the Middle East and lower in Latin America, as migrants from
the latter region have more direct access to the United States due to geographic proximity and
diaspora linkages.

Table 3 presents the percentage of migrants coming from a given location who were born some-
where else and Figure 2 displays the same information visually. The data indicate that transit
migration is quite high among the migrants who were living in higher income OECD countries.

                                               16
For example, 30% of migrants from Canada to the US were born in another country; for the
United Kingdom, that ratio is 37%. Despite the public perception, the data do not indicate
that migrants coming from Central American or Caribbean countries are generally transit mi-
grants. Of course, many Central American migrants might simply be traveling through Mexico
without living there for an extended period of time.

Our ﬁnal observation is that transit migration is more common among high-skilled migrants
as seen when we compare the second and third columns of Tables 2 and 3. In the aggregate,
close to 14% of high-skilled but only 6% of low-skilled migrants are transit migrants. These
diﬀerences indicate that higher skilled migrants are more mobile, not only in terms of leaving
their home countries for higher income countries (Artuc et al, 2015) but also in terms of moving
between multiple destinations.



3     Solution and Estimation Algorithm
We solve the model at steady state to calculate implied migration probabilities to be used in
the estimation algorithm (i.e we assume that V0s,i,j = Vts,i,j and φs,j  s,j
                                                                    0 = φt   for every t). At
steady state, we can express the present discounted expected utility as

                      1
(8)   V0s,i,j =          φs,j      s,i,j,j
                          0 − log p0       ,
                     1−β

where the moving probability from j to k of migrants from i is given by

                      exp βV0s,i,k − C s,i,j,k
(9)   ps,i,j,k
       0         =                                  .
                                s,i,l
                       l exp βV0      − C s,i,j,l

The model has the following parameters that need to be estimated (or calibrated) based on
the equations (5), (6), (8) and (9): (i) the moving cost parameters, α, (ii) the location speciﬁc
instantaneous utility parameters, φ, and (iii) the discount factor, β . We deﬁne the parameter


                                                        17
vector θ, which consists of all parameters of the model for skill group s, i.e. α’s, φ’s, and β .
Since there are eight moving cost parameters, n location utility parameters and β , our θ vector
has n + 8 + 1 elements.

Solving the equilibrium values involves ﬁnding a ﬁxed point. We ﬁrst consider the matrix V0s
consisting of all V0s,i,j s and deﬁne the function V0s = F (V0s ; θ), using equations (5), (6), (8)
and (9). Finding the ﬁxed point of function F , given the parameter vector θ, leads us to the
equilibrium values of V0s,i,j . We should note that V0s is an n × n dimension matrix which means
we have a large system of n2 equations with n2 unknowns.10 After solving for V0s,i,j s, we can
insert them in (9) to calculate the moving probabilities, ps,i,j,k
                                                           0       . This procedure allows us to
write these moving probabilities as a function of the parameter vector, denoted as ps,i,j,k (θ).
Then it becomes possible to calculate the log-likelihood contribution of an agent from origin i,
living in j , and moving to k as log ps,i,j,k (θ) for any given θ.


3.1        Likelihood Function:

In the American Community Survey (ACS) data, as discussed in the data section above, we
have detailed mobility and birthplace information for people who migrated to the United States.
Transit migrants are deﬁned as the people born in i and living in j before moving to the US.
We denote their number as M s,i,j,U .11 Next, using the stocks of migrants born in i and living
j in 2000 from the global bilateral migration database and DIOC (see Artuc et al, 2015, and
Arslan et al, 2014, for details) and M s,i,j,U matrix, we calculate the approximate number of
people who are staying in their current country or moving to destinations other than the US.
We denote this matrix as M s,i,j,S . In other words, we divide the migrants born in i living in j
(i = j ) into two groups: those who move to the US, given by M s,i,j,U , and those who moved
elsewhere or stayed in j , given by M s,i,j,S .

Using these data matrices, vectors and implied migration probabilities, the log-likelihood con-
  10
       Fortunately, the equations can be solved by iteration since F is a contraction mapping.
  11
       Note that the United States is the “only” destination for which we have transit migration data.


                                                        18
tribution of transit migrants can now be expressed as


(10) log L1 (θ) =              M s,i,j,U log ps,i,j,U (θ) + M s,i,j,S log         ps,i,j,k (θ) ,
                    i   j =i                                                k=U


where k = U means the destination k is any country other than USA.

Our next dataset, the 2010 DIOC provides data on the number of people who migrated within
the last 10 years to OECD destination countries. This allows us to calculate the number of
natives who moved from j to k within the last 10 years if k is an OECD country. We denote
this matrix M s,j,j,k . Next, we deﬁne M s,j,j,N as the number of people who move to non-OECD
destinations (labelled by N collectively) and M s,j,j,j as the number of people who stayed in
their birth country j and did not migrate to any country. Both of these are 40 × 1 vectors
for each skill group s. In summary, natives (who were born in j and living in j ) are divided
into the following groups: Staying at home, M s,j,j,j , moving to a speciﬁc OECD destination k ,
M s,j,j,k and moving to any non-OECD destination, M s,j,j,N .

The log-likelihood contribution of direct migrants is equal to
                                                                                                              

(11) log L2 (θ) =       M s,j,j,N log                 ps,j,j,k (θ) +                 M s,j,j,k log ps,j,j,k (θ) ,
                    j                    k∈
                                          / OECD,k=j                    k∈OECD,k=j


where k ∈
        / OECD, k = j means k is diﬀerent from birthplace and it is not an OECD country.
k ∈ OECD, k = j means destination k is diﬀerent from birthplace j and is an OECD country.
We merge all non-OECD destinations when we calculate the likelihood contribution since we
do not have individual ﬂow data for those. Finally the log-likelihood contribution of stayers is
equal to


(12) log L3 (θ) =       M s,j,j,j log ps,j,j,j (θ).
                    j


Based on log-likelihood contributions from equations (10), (11) and (12), the parameter vector

                                                       19
θ is given by


(13) θ = arg max [log L1 (θ) + log L2 (θ) + log L3 (θ)] .


We assume that β = 0.95, normalize the ﬁxed instantaneous utility of USA to φs,U = 8.0, and
estimate the remaining n − 1 + 8 parameters. In other words, we ﬁx the values of 2 elements
of θ and estimate the remaining 47 parameters.
The algorithm is quite demanding computationally, since it involves calculation of 40 × 40 × 40
probabilities. It is necessary to solve for all of them simultaneously since they are functions of
each other. Another computational challenge is to search over 47 parameters that maximizes
the log-likelihood function. The steps of the estimation algorithm are the following:

1. We guess a parameter vector θ
2. Solve the values, V0s,i,j , and migration probabilities, ps,i,j,k
                                                             0       using the current θ via the
following iteration:
    a. Start with an initial matrix V0s,i,j
    b. Calculate ps,i,j,k
                  0       by substituting V0s,i,j in equation (9)
    c. Solve for the new V0s,i,j using the current probabilities ps,i,j,k
                                                                  0       with equation (8)
    d. Compare V0s,i,j with its value from the previous iteration: If the sum of square diﬀerences
         is less than ε = 10−8 , the algorithm stops and moves on to step #3. Otherwise it
         updates V0s,i,j , goes back to step (b) and continues to iterate.
3. The algorithm evaluates log-likelihood function, log L1 + log L2 + log L3 using ps,i,j,k
                                                                                    0       , and
data matrices via equations (10), (11), (12) and (13).
4. Then, the optimization algorithm checks to see if there is room to improve the log-likelihood
function. If this is the case, it goes back to step #2. If the algorithm has converged, it stops.

The function in the inner loop is a contraction mapping, and generally requires less than 50
iterations to converge. The outer loop, however, usually requires more than 10,000 iterations.
We repeat this procedure for both skill groups and take the numerical derivatives around θ to

                                                 20
calculate the standard errors.




4     Empirical Results
We estimate parameters of the model separately for high-skilled and low-skilled individuals. As
discussed above, the vector θ for each skill group s has 49 elements - 40 value parameter for
each country/region, 8 moving cost parameters and β . As discussed above, we set φs,U = 8.0
for the US, β = 0.95 and estimate the remaining 47 parameters.

Table 4 presents the 8 moving cost parameters for high and low-skilled workers with the stan-
dard errors reported in parentheses. We ﬁnd that the intercepts of basic moving cost for direct
                                                               1
migration for both low- and high-skilled migrants, denoted as αs, 0 in equation (5), are positive
                                                                            2
and signiﬁcant at the 1% level. The additional cost intercepts, denoted as αs, 0 in equation (6),

for transit migrants are negative for both skill levels. This is consistent with the fact that im-
migrants from country i living in country j are much more likely to migrate to another country
k when compared to the natives of j . The magnitude of these transit migration coeﬃcients
are smaller than those of the basic cost coeﬃcients, indicating that the combined intercept for
transit migration is still positive.

The most important migration cost variable is likely to be distance. The additional distance
coeﬃcient for transit migrants is positive and signiﬁcant for low-skilled migrants, and insignif-
icant for high-skilled migrants. As expected, distance increases migration frictions for direct
migrants and the cost imposed by distance is signiﬁcantly higher for the lower skilled migrants.
This pattern has been identiﬁed repeatedly in the literature as the higher skilled can more easily
overcome physical and ﬁnancial costs that are proxied by distance (Hanson, 2010 and Beine,
Docquier and Ozden, 2011). This diﬀerence is also one of the reasons why migrants tend to be
positively selected in terms of education levels. On the other hand, the distance coeﬃcient for
the transit cost component is only signiﬁcant for the low-skilled migrants. This result indicates

                                               21
that the distance between birth country i and ﬁnal destination k seems to matter only for
the low-skilled once migrants are already in the transit country j . High-skilled migrants, in
contrast, are not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by this distance.

GDP per capita is another determinant of moving costs and the eﬀect operates through sev-
eral channels, such as ﬁnancial barriers. The coeﬃcient is negative and signiﬁcant for basic
migration for both types of migrants, with a higher (more negative) value for the low-skilled.
The implication is that direct migration from a poorer country is more costly, especially for
low-skilled migrants. The GDP per capita coeﬃcients in the transit cost component are both
positive, but signiﬁcant only for low-skilled migrants. This is similar to the pattern we observed
for the distance variable. Low-skilled people from poorer countries are more likely to be transit
migrants when compared to those from high income countries. Another possible explanation is
that a transit migration experience abroad might increase labor market returns in ﬁnal desti-
nation countries. This eﬀect will be stronger for those coming from lower income countries and
will be captured by a positive coeﬃcient of the GDP per capita component of transit migration
cost.12

Linguistic overlap decreases migration frictions and increases mobility as demonstrated in nu-
merous studies using gravity models (Beine, Bertoli and Fernandez-Huertas Moraga, 2016).
Common language decreases basic migration costs for both skill levels, as demonstrated by
the statistically signiﬁcant negative coeﬃcients, with a larger eﬀect on the high-skilled. The
interesting result is that linguistic similarity continues to be important for transit migration
costs, and still more so for high-skilled migrants. For example, an Australian migrant in France
faces a lower cost of migrating to the United States than a German migrant in France, and the
cost is even lower if he is high-skilled.

Our ﬁnal set of results presents the instantaneous utility parameters, φs,j
                                                                        0   for each coun-
try/region j and skill level s in our model. Note that we set φs,U = 8.0 for the United States
  12
       We thank an anonymous referee for this interpretation.


                                                       22
and estimate the parameters for the other 39 locations. Figure 3 presents the results for both
skills levels, with results for the high-skilled on the left panel and the parameter values ranked
in declining order in each panel.13 We should emphasize that these parameters are estimated
separately for each skill level and the right comparisons are within, not across, skill levels. First,
we observe, as expected, a high degree of correlation with the income levels in these locations.
High-income OECD countries, such as Canada, Australia and European countries, have higher
values while poorer African, South East Asian, Caribbean and Central American countries
are placed towards the bottom of the rankings. Second, the values for the high-skilled (left
panel) show more variation, especially towards the bottom. This pattern indicates high-skilled
migrants enjoy much larger instantaneous utility gains when they move, especially from low
income to high income countries. Third, several developing countries, such as India and China,
have large utility values for the low-skilled. This pattern is consistent with the low emigra-
tion rates of these countries and might result from the non-pecuniary beneﬁts these locations
provide to natives or from country-speciﬁc mobility costs that the utility parameters capture.



5     Simulations
This section presents the results of a range of policy simulations that use the estimated co-
eﬃcients of moving costs and location speciﬁc values. Our main goal is to identify the main
spillovers between direct and transit migration options and how various simulated policies, such
as complete blockage of certain migration corridors, impact bilateral and global migration pat-
terns. In all of these simulations, we consider all origin countries/regions and two representative
transit countries: Canada and the United Kingdom.

Each simulation involves solving the equilibrium outcomes for all 40 countries/regions, but we
selected only a sample of representative countries for presentation purposes. The simulation
algorithm is similar to the one used in the estimation. This time, however, Vts,i,j = Vts,i,j
                                                                                        +1 , so
  13
     All of these instantaneous utility parameter estimates are signiﬁcant at the 99% level with t-statistics
between 14 and 70.


                                                     23
we use equations (2), (3) and (4), rather than (8) and (9). The simulations use the original
population and migrant distributions from the data as the initial state variable. The population
distribution includes agents’ birthplace, current location, and skill level, making it a 40 × 40
matrix for each skill level.

The number of type s individuals who were born in country i living in country j at time t
is denoted as Ls,i,j
               t     . For the simulation, we change the parameter vector of the model to θ .
Then, we solve the optimization problem using the new parameters, θ , and calculate the new
migration probabilities, ps,i,k,j
                          t       (θ ), for each agent type. Next, we ﬁnd the new migrant stocks,
Ls,i,j
 t+1 using the new probabilities and ﬂow equation which is given by the following:



(14) Ls,i,j
      t+1 =          ps,i,k,j
                      t       (θ )Ls,i,j
                                   t     .
                 k


We repeat this exercise for each simulation scenario as described in the following sections.14

Figure 4 helps to visualize the simulation scenarios where the United States is the ﬁnal desti-
nation. For simplicity, we present three countries in the ﬁgure — Canada, the UK and other
countries — even though the simulations are solved for all countries separately. People can
migrate directly to the United States or via other countries. As we mentioned earlier, Canada
and the United Kingdom are presented as the two possible transit countries in the ﬁgure and
the discussion, but the model is solved for all potential transit routes.



5.1     Simulation 1: Moving cost from Canada to the US increases

In our ﬁrst set of simulations, we artiﬁcially increase the moving cost from Canada to the
United States to a level such that migration levels decrease by more than 99%. Technically,
  14
     We should note that the simulation exercises are of partial equilibirum nature, as we assume that country-
speciﬁc wages and other measures of attractiveness are ﬁxed. However, it is possible that changes in migration
ﬂows due to policy restrictions will impact wages, further aﬀecting migration ﬂows across the world. Unfor-
tunately, it would be impossible to fully endogenize these country parameters, without estimating production
functions of all countries and regions.


                                                      24
100% prohibitive costs do not exist since the i.i.d. shocks have an inﬁnite support. This is
presented as the removal of the arrow between Canada and the United States in Figure 4
and implies that both current migrants and native citizens in Canada are no longer able to
migrate to the United States. This change would force them to reconsider all of their migration
decisions.

The results of the simulation are presented in Table 5. The main ﬁnding of this simulation
is that migration from other countries to Canada signiﬁcantly decreases as seen in columns
1 and 3, even though there are no changes to migration costs or beneﬁts regarding Canada.
Recall that migration to Canada is attractive for two reasons. First, the instantaneous utility
parameter for Canada is high compared to many other countries (the φ term in the value
function expression (4)). Second, moving from Canada to the United States is relatively easy
which generates a high option value associated with being in Canada (the Ω term in the value
function). Therefore when it becomes almost impossible to move from Canada to the US, the
option value of migration to Canada decreases for almost all migrants. The ﬁnal eﬀect is a
signiﬁcant decline in the overall migration levels from other countries to Canada. Note that
migration does not drop to zero, because it is still possible to move from Canada to other
countries and Canada still has a relatively high per-period payoﬀ.

In terms of speciﬁc outcomes, the number of immigrants moving to Canada decreases between
3% to 18% for people from other countries. The impact is especially high for Latin American
and Caribbean migrants. If we were to compare the impact on low- and high-skilled migrants,
we see that it is marginally stronger for the low-skilled regardless of the country of birth. The
gap is also high for Latin American migrants, where the impact on the low-skilled is almost
twice as much.

Another potential eﬀect is the impact on other critical transit countries such as the United
Kingdom. We see in columns 2 and 4 that there is almost no impact on migration from most
countries to the United Kingdom when the Canada-USA border is closed. However, there is

                                               25
some increase in high-skilled migration from several countries, such as Jamaica (1.8%) and
Other Caribbean countries (1.6%) as the United Kingdom becomes more attractive. Finally,
we observe increased migration from Canada to the United Kingdom (1.9% for the low-skilled
and 2.8% for the high-skilled) since the Canadians themselves are also unable to move to the
United States.


5.2    Simulation 2: Moving cost to Canada increases

Our second simulation involves increasing the moving costs to Canada from all developing (only
non-OECD) countries to prohibitively high levels. This is presented as the removal of arrow #2
in Figure 4. In other words, people are no longer able to move from India or China to Canada
whether they would like to settle there permanently or use it as a transit stop on their way to
other countries such as the United States. This policy change is similar to the spillover eﬀects
of bilateral visa policies implemented by destination countries on other potential destinations,
as explored by Bertoli and Fernandez-Huertas Moraga (2015).

Table 6 presents results only for high-skilled migrants since the impact on low-skilled migrants
are negligible, with the exception of the obvious decline of 100% in direct migration to Canada.
This is probably due to the fact that low-skilled transit migration via Canada is already rel-
atively small and has minimal impact on other transit paths. For high-skilled migrants, the
number of transit migrants moving from Canada to the United States decreases signiﬁcantly, as
seen in column 2, but not by the full 100%. This is due to the fact there are some migrants, say
from Mexico, who were already in Canada before the border closed and they continue to move
to the United States over time. We also observe that there is a decline in transit migration
from OECD countries (such as France) to the United States via Canada, even though migra-
tion from France to Canada is not blocked. This arises from the fact that transit migration of
French-born migrants from developing countries to Canada is also blocked, resulting in a small
decline in the overall migration of the French-born.



                                              26
There is a small, and in some cases considerable impact on all other paths of migration,
especially direct migration to the United States and transit migration via the United Kingdom.
For example, direct migration to the United States (ﬁrst column) increases for Asian and
Caribbean countries, up to 3% for Jamaica, 6% for other Caribbean Countries, and slightly
over 1% for Republic of Korea, the Philippines, Western and Eastern Africa. Similarly, there
is some increase in transit migration from the United Kingdom to the United States (third
column) indicating some degree of replacement. For example, there is an increase of around 2%
in transit migration from Jamaica and 4% from other Caribbean countries as well as around
1% from African regions. These are again due to global spillovers from changes in bilateral
corridors.


5.3    Simulation 3: Moving Cost to the United States Increases

Our next simulation increases the direct moving cost to the United States to a prohibitive
level for direct migrants from developing (non-OECD) origin countries. This is equivalent to
the removal of arrow #3 in Figure 4 and the results are presented in Table 7. We again
only present the results for high-skilled migrants since the patterns are qualitatively the same
but quantitatively smaller in the case of low-skilled migrants. Since transit migration forces
are stronger for high-skilled individuals, they are more responsive to changes in moving costs
and the United States is more attractive for the high-skilled migrants from most developing
countries.

Interestingly enough, closing the borders for migrants from developing countries is among
the main proposals put forward by some of the leading candidates in the 2016 US election.
Our results indicate that the impact of this policy simulation is actually quite large. First,
we should highlight that the United States is already the largest destination for high-skilled
migrants from most origin countries. For example, more than 70% of high-skilled workers who
left the Philippines already live in the United States.



                                               27
When direct migration to the United States becomes impossible, Canada and the United King-
dom become very attractive destinations. Both of these countries are high-income economies
with similar income opportunities for migrants so there is a direct spillover in this scenario.
These eﬀects are presented in the second and fourth columns for Canada and the United King-
dom, respectively, as many high-skilled migrants move to these close substitutes. For example,
as reported in columns 2 and 4, migration to Canada and the United Kingdom increases by
between 25 and 45% for many Central American and Caribbean countries and by a staggering
165% for the Other Caribbean region that includes Haiti and other smaller island countries.
The increase is between 5 and 15% for the African regions and between 3 and 15% for many
non-OECD Asian countries. Although we do not report it, we observe positive but smaller
changes in migration ﬂows to other high-income OECD countries.

Canada and the United Kingdom also provide a pathway to the United States. As a result,
transit (or the option value of) migration to these countries increases when direct migration
to the United States is no longer possible and migrants try to ﬁnd alternative routes. This
motivation is clearly seen in column 1 where we observe a signiﬁcant increase in transit migration
to the US via Canada for a range of birth countries. For example, there is a 15-30% increase in
transit migration from Latin American and Caribbean countries (and again a staggering 95%
from Other Caribbean countries), between 3 and 10% from many Asian countries and around
5-10% from the African regions.


5.4    Simulation 4: Block all transit migration to the United States

The ﬁnal simulation is a slightly unconventional scenario to highlight the importance of transit
migration. Suppose, the United States government declares that you can only move to the
United States from your birth country and all other transit migration routes are banned. In
other words, if you are an Egyptian living in France, you would either have to stay in France
or go back home to be able to move to the United States (even if you have French citizenship).



                                               28
In terms of our model, we simply remove the option value of moving to France from Egypt.15

The implications of eliminating transit migration for total migration to these countries are quite
striking as presented in Table 8. We observe that the level of migration to transit countries
declines signiﬁcantly even though these are still as attractive for permanent settlement. For
example, as reported in column 1, the migration of high-skilled workers to key transit countries
like Canada, the United Kingdom and Australia from high-income countries (such as Germany,
Italy and France) declines by 4.6%, 1.8% and 3.2% receptively. Similarly, migration from
low-income countries to these three destinations declines by larger amounts: 7.0%, 2.4% and
4.5% respectively. There are similar signiﬁcant declines in migration to other OECD transit
countries. This result is one of the clearest and direct evidence of the signiﬁcance of transit
migration and importance of many OECD destinations as transit countries, especially those
with lower moving costs to the US.

The decline in low-skilled migration is slightly smaller but still relatively high. For example,
low-skilled migration from high-income countries (column 3) to Canada is down by 3.1%. The
decline in low-skilled migration from low-income countries (column 4) is also larger, 11.6% for
Canada and 2.0% for the United Kingdom.

Finally, we observe bigger declines in percentage terms in migration levels to many of the
smaller developing countries, especially for the high-skilled migrants from other lower-income
countries. This is simply an artifact of the data. Since the original migration levels to these
countries are already so small, any decline translates to a relatively large percentage change.

  15
    This is why we cannot represent this simulation in Figure 4. While the previous simulations correspond
to closure of single corridors, this simulation blocks certain types of people while keeping all corridors open for
direct migration.




                                                        29
6    Conclusion
Most empirical analyses of migration decisions and patterns are based on static models. A
potential migrant is assumed to make a single decision between alternative destinations and his
current place of residence based on location-speciﬁc utility diﬀerences and bilateral mobility
costs. Once migration takes place, the payoﬀ and costs are realized and, most importantly,
there are no additional movements. The data indicate that this simplistic view is quite oﬀ the
mark. Many migrants’ paths involve multiple countries and are likely to be the outcomes of
complicated dynamic decision processes. Historical evidence and current data provide ample
evidence that many migrants live in a series of countries for diﬀerent lengths of time, experience
repeated migration episodes, or have circular migration paths.

There is a relatively new and exciting strand of the literature that is based on innovative
dynamic models. They rely on detailed survey data on individual migration histories from
single origin or destination countries to estimate the determinants of return or circular migration
behavior. Unfortunately, the absence of detailed individual data at the global level prevents
us from shedding light on some of the other processes. Our contribution is to construct a
novel dynamic model of global migration with the goal of incorporating and explaining transit
migration patterns, using the available data. In our model, agents decide to stay in their current
location or move to another one every period, taking instantaneous utility payoﬀs and bilateral
mobility barriers into account. This dynamic structure leads to an option value associated
with each location, making it attractive as it provides easier access to other locations in future
periods. This attractiveness is exactly the basis of the transit migration behavior we observe.

Our empirical analysis relies on transit migration data from the American Community Survey,
which asks migrants their place of birth and where they were living the year before they came
to the United States. This data indicate that transit migration—people coming to the United
States from places other than their birth countries—is actually high, especially among high-
skilled migrants coming from other high-income OECD countries. We combine the American

                                                30
data with global bilateral migration data and adopt estimation methods to address the data
challenges. We ﬁnally simulate certain scenarios that highlight the dynamic interactions and
spillovers between diﬀerent migration paths. For example, blocking certain paths might decrease
or increase migration ﬂows in other corridors as the option values of the impacted locations
change. In other words, governments need to incorporate the externalities created by their
policy actions, especially on their neighbors, via direct and transit migration channels.




                                               31
References
                                                        orlach (2015). “The Dynamics
 [1] Adda, Jerome, Christian Dustmann and Joseph-Simon G¨
    of Return Migration, Human Capital Accumulation, and Wage Assimilation, ” mimeo,
    University College London.

 [2] Anderson, James, (2011). “The Gravity Model,” The Annual Review of Economics, vol.
    3(1).

 [3] Arslan, Cansin, Jean-Christophe Dumont, Zovanga Kone, Yasser Moullan, Christopher
    Parsons, Caglar Ozden and Theodora Xenogiani, (2014). “A New Proﬁle of Migrants in
    the Aftermath of the Recent Economic Crisis,” OECD Social, Employment and Migra-
    tion Working Papers, No. 160, OECD.

 [4] Artuc, Erhan, Frederic Docquier, Caglar Ozden, and Christopher Parsons, (2015). “A
    Global Assessment of Human Capital Mobility: The Role of Non-OECD Destinations,”
    World Development, Elsevier, vol. 65, p. 6-26.

 [5] Artuc, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri and John McLaren (2010). “Trade Shocks and Labor
    Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach,” American Economic Review, vol. 100,
    p.1008-1045.

 [6] Bandiera, O., I. Rasul, and M. Viarengo (2013). “The Making of Modern America:
    Migratory Flows in the Age of Mass Migration,” Journal of Development Economics,
    vol.102, p.23-47.

 [7] Bayer, Christian and Falko Juessen. (2012). “On the Dynamics of Interstate Migration:
    Migration Costs and Self-Selection,” Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 15(3), pages
    377-401.




                                          32
                                                andez-Huertas Moraga (2016). “A Practi-
 [8] Beine Michel, Simone Bertoli and Jesus Fern´
    tioners’ Guide to Gravity Models of International Migration,” World Economy. vol. 39,
    p.596-612.

 [9] Beine, Michel, Frederic Docquier, and Caglar Ozden (2011). “Diasporas,” Journal of
    Development Economics, vol.95, p.30-41.

[10] Belot, M., and S. Ederveen (2012). “Cultural Barriers in Migration Between OECD
    Countries,” Journal of Population Economics, vol.25, p.1077-1105.

[11] Bertoli, Simone, Herbert Brucker and Jesus Fernandez-Huertas Moraga, (2014). “The
    European Crisis and Migration to Germany: Expectations and the Diversion of Migra-
    tion Flows,” Working Papers 2013-03, FEDEA.

[12] Bertoli, Simone, and Jesus Fernandez-Huertas Moraga, (2013). “Multilateral Resistance
    to Migration,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 102, p. 79-100.

[13] Bertoli, Simone, and Jesus Fernandez-Huertas Moraga, (2015). “The Size of the Cliﬀ at
    the Border,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, vol.51, p.1-16.

[14] Bertoli, Simone, Jesus Fernandez-Huertas Moraga and Francesca Ortega (2013). “Cross-
    ing the Border: Self-Selection, Earnings and Individual Migration Decisions,” Journal
    of Development Economics, vol.101, p.75-91.

[15] Bijwaard, G., C. Schluter and J. Wahba (2014). “The Impact of Labor Market Dynamics
    on the Return-Migration of Immigrants,”The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.96,
    p.483494.

[16] Burda, Michael, (1995), “Migration and the Option Value of Waiting,” Economic and
    Social Review vol. 27 p. 1-19.

[17] Collyer, M., F. Duvell and H. de Haas (2012). “Critical approaches to transit migration,”
    Population Space Place, vol. 18, p.407-414.

                                            33
[18] Collyer, M. and Hein de Haas, (2012). “Developing dynamic categorisations of transit
    migration,” Population, Space Place, vol.18, p.468-481.

[19] Djajic, Slobodan (2014). “Transit Migration” Mimeo: The Graduate Institute, Geneva.

                                           orlach (2015). “The Economics of Temporary
[20] Dustmann, Christian and Joseph-Simon G¨
    Migrations, ” Journal of Economic Literature, vol.54, pp 98-136.

[21] Duvell, F. (2012). “Transit migration: A blurred and politicised concept,” Population,
    Space Place, vol.18, p.415–427.

[22] Gibson, John and David McKenzie (2011). “The Microeconomic Determinants of Emi-
    gration and Return Migration of the Best and Brightest: Evidence from the Paciﬁc, ”
    Journal of Development Economics vol.95. p. 18-29.

      orlach, Joseph-Simon (2016). “Borrowing Constraints, Migrant Selection, and the Dy-
[23] G¨
    namics of Return and Repeat Migration, ” mimeo, University College London.

[24] Grogger, Jeﬀrey and Gordon Hanson (2011). “Income Maximization and the Selection
    and Sorting of International Migrants, ” Journal of Development Economics, vol.95. p.
    42-57.

[25] Hanson, Gordon, (2010). “International Migration and the Developing World, ” in Hand-
    book of Development Economics, ed. by Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, vol. 5,,
    p.4363-4414.

[26] Hotz, Joseph and Robert Miller (1993). “Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Es-
    timation of Dynamic Models,” The Review of Economic Studies, vol.60, p.497-529.

[27] Kennan, John and James R. Walker (2011). “The Eﬀect of Expected Income on Indi-
    vidual Migration Decisions,” Econometrica vol. 79, p.211-251.

[28] Lessem, Rebecca (2013). “Mexico-U.S. Immigration: Eﬀects Wages and Border Enforce-
    ment,” Mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.

                                           34
[29] Locher, Lilo (2001). “Testing for the Option Value of Migration,” IZA DP no. 405.

[30] Mayda, Anna Maria (2010). “International Migration: A Panel Data Analysis of the
    Determinants of Bilateral Flows,” Journal of Population Economics, vol.23, p.1249-1274.

[31] McFadden, Daniel, (1978). “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location,” in Spatial
    Interaction Theory and Planning Models, ed. by A. Karlqvist, L. Lundqvist, F. Snickars,
    and J. Weibull, North-Holland.

[32] Pessino, C. (1991). “Sequential migration theory and evidence from Peru,” Journal of
    Development Economics, vol.36, p.55-87.

[33] Santos Silva, J.M.C., and S. Tenreyro (2006). “The log of Gravity,” Review of Economics
    and Statistics, vol. 88, p. 641–658.

[34] Thom, Kevin (2015). “Repeated Circular Migration: Theory and Evidence from Undoc-
    umented Migrants,” Mimeo, New York University.




                                           35
                 Figure 1: Ratio of Transit Migrants in the United States by Birthplace




0
1
5
10
20

No data



          Figure 2: Ratio of Transit Migrants in the United States by Last Country of Residence




0
1
5
10
20
30

No data




                                                                                                  IBRD 42585 | OCTOBER 2016
                                Figure 3: Instantaneous Utility Parameter Estimates


                         High-Skill                                                     Low-Skill

                    Canada                                                            Italy
        Southern Europe                                                           Canada
         United Kingdom                                               Southern Europe
     Russian Federation                                                            France
        Northern Europe                                                United Kingdom
                  Australia                                                          India
                     France                                                         China
         Western Europe                                                Western Europe
                        Italy                                                   Australia
                   Ukraine                                                     Germany
                      Japan                                           Northern Europe
                 Colombia                                                     West Asia
                 Germany                                               Northern Africa
                    Mexico                                         Russian Federation
Israel, West Bank, Gaza                                                        Colombia
                West Asia                                              Southern Africa
           South America                                                            Brazil
                   Oceania                                                          Japan
         Northern Africa                                                Western Africa
                      China                                             South East Asia
          South East Asia                                                South America
                      Korea                                      Central & South Asia
   Central & South Asia                                                             Korea
                    Poland                                                           Cuba
          Eastern Europe                                                         Ukraine
                      Brazil                                  Israel, West Bank, Gaza
                       Cuba                                                       Poland
         Southern Africa                                                  Eastern Africa
                       India                                            Eastern Europe
    Dominican Republic                                                           Oceania
               Guatemala                                          Dominican Republic
         Central America                                               Central America
                   Jamaica                                                    Caribbean
               El Salvador                                                   Philippines
          Western Africa                                                     Guatemala
               Philippines                                                        Mexico
            Eastern Africa                                                      Vietnam
                  Vietnam                                                        Jamaica
                Caribbean                                                    El Salvador

                                0.0   2.0   4.0   6.0   8.0                                   0.0   2.0   4.0   6.0   8.0
Figure 4: Migration Scenarios
                                      Table 1: Country Groupings
Group                Country list
Canada               Canada
Mexico               Mexico
El Salvador          El Salvador
Guatemala            Guatemala
Other Central        Belize; Costa Rica; Honduras; Nicaragua; Panama
Cuba                 Cuba
Dominican Republic   Dominican Republic
Jamaica              Jamaica
                     Antigua and Barbuda; Bahamas; The; Barbados; Dominica; Grenada; Haiti; Saint
Other Caribbean
                     Kitts and Nevis; Saint Lucia; Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Trinidad and Tobago
Brazil               Brazil
Colombia             Colombia
                     Argentina; Bolivia; Chile; Ecuador; Guyana; Paraguay; Peru; Suriname; Uruguay;
Other South America
                     Venezuela, RB
Northern Europe      Denmark; Finland; Iceland; Ireland; Norway; Sweden
United Kingdom       United Kingdom
France               France; Liechtenstein, Luxembourg; Monaco
Other Western        Austria; Belgium; Netherlands; Switzerland
Italy                Italy
Southern Europe      Andorra; Greece; Holy See (Vatican City); Malta; Portugal; San Marino; Spain
Germany              Germany
Poland               Poland
                     Albania; Belarus; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Bulgaria; Croatia; Czech Republic;
Other Eastern Europe Estonia; Hungary; Latvia; Lithuania; Macedonia, FYR; Moldova; Romania; Serbia;
                     Montenegro; Slovak Republic; Slovenia
Russian Federation Russian Federation
Ukraine              Ukraine
China                China; Hong Kong SAR, China; Macao SAR, China; Mongolia; Taiwan, China
Japan                Japan
Korea                Korea, Dem. People's Rep.; Korea, Rep.
Philippines          Philippines
Vietnam              Vietnam
Other South East     Brunei Darussalam; Myanmar; Cambodia; Timor-Leste; Indonesia; Laos; Malaysia;
Asia                 Singapore; Thailand
India                India
Israel, West Bank,   Israel/Palestine; West Bank and Gaza
                     Armenia; Azerbaijan; Bahrain; Cyprus; Georgia; Iraq; Jordan; Kuwait; Lebanon;
Other West Asia
                     Oman; Qatar; Saudi Arabia; Syrian Arab Republic; Turkey; United Arab Emirates;
Other Central &      Afghanistan; Bangladesh; Bhutan; Iran, Islamic Rep.; Kazakhstan; Kyrgyzstan;
South Asia           Maldives; Nepal; Pakistan; Sri Lanka; Tajikistan; Turkmenistan; Uzbekistan
Northern Africa      Algeria; Egypt, Arab Rep.; Libya; Morocco; Sudan; Tunisia
                     Benin; Burkina Faso; Cabo Verde; Cote d'Ivoire; Gambia; The; Ghana; Guinea;
Western Africa
                     Guinea-Bissau; Liberia; Mali; Mauritania; Niger; Nigeria; Senegal; Sierra Leone;
                     Burundi; Comoros; Djibouti; Eritrea; Ethiopia; Kenya; Madagascar; Malawi;
Eastern Africa
                     Mauritius; Mozambique; Rwanda; Seychelles; Somalia; Tanzania; Uganda; Zambia;
                     Angola, Botswana; Cameroon; Central African Republic; Chad; Congo; Dem. Rep. of
Southern Africa      the; Congo; Rep. of the; Equatorial Guinea; Gabon; Lesotho; Namibia; Sao Tome
                     and Principe; South Africa; Swaziland
Australia            Australia
                     Fiji, Kiribati; Marshall Islands; Micronesia, Federation States; Nauru; New Zealand;
Oceania
                     Palau; Papua New Guinea; Solomon Islands; Tonga; Tuvalu; Vanuatu
USA                  United States
                       Table 2: Ratio of Transit Migrants By Birthplace
Birthplace                         High-Skilled (%)      Low-Skilled (%)   Total (%)
TOTAL                                     14                    6              9
Canada                                     8                    6              7
Mexico                                     4                    1              1
El Salvador                               32                    4              7
Guatemala                                  9                    5              5
Other Central America                     10                    5              6
Cuba                                      19                    5              8
Dominican Republic                         7                    8              8
Jamaica                                   15                    6              7
Other Caribbean                           18                    7              9
Brazil                                     7                    6              6
Colombia                                  15                    7             10
Other South America                       16                    7             10
Northern Europe                           19                   11             15
United Kingdom                            22                   20             21
France                                    16                   18             17
Other Western Europe                      24                   13             20
Italy                                     24                   16             20
Southern Europe                           24                   30             27
Germany                                   16                   12             14
Poland                                    14                    8             10
Other Eastern Europe                      19                   13             15
Russian Federation                        33                   15             25
Ukraine                                   15                   14             15
China                                     19                   11             15
Japan                                      5                    6              5
Korea                                      9                   10              9
Philippines                               13                   10             11
Vietnam                                   27                   12             14
Other South East Asia                     17                    9             12
India                                      8                   11              8
Israel, West Bank, Gaza                    5                   12              9
Other West Asia                           11                    8              9
Other Central & South Asia                24                   20             21
Northern Africa                           20                   22             21
Western Africa                            26                   15             18
Eastern Africa                            25                   10             13
Southern Africa                           32                   20             24
Australia                                 17                   11             15
Oceania                                   26                   26             26
             Table 3: Ratio of Transit Migrants By Last Country of Residence
Birthplace                      High-Skilled (%)    Low-Skilled (%)        Total (%)
TOTAL                                 14                   6                    9
Canada                                35                  24                   30
Mexico                                 6                   1                    1
El Salvador                           15                   2                    3
Guatemala                             11                   1                    2
Other Central America                 13                   5                    6
Cuba                                   0                   2                    2
Dominican Republic                     8                   2                    3
Jamaica                                6                   2                    3
Other Caribbean                       23                   6                    9
Brazil                                16                   4                    8
Colombia                               5                   5                    5
Other South America                   10                   6                    7
Northern Europe                       21                  13                   17
United Kingdom                        42                  30                   37
France                                24                  29                   25
Other Western Europe                  39                  37                   38
Italy                                 32                  27                   30
Southern Europe                       36                  44                   39
Germany                               27                  24                   26
Poland                                 4                   3                    3
Other Eastern Europe                  15                   5                    9
Russian Federation                     9                  27                   20
Ukraine                               15                   6                   11
China                                  5                   8                    7
Japan                                 12                  11                   12
Korea                                  2                   4                    3
Philippines                            2                   3                    2
Vietnam                               11                   2                    3
Other South East Asia                 22                   8                   14
India                                  2                  11                    4
Israel, West Bank, Gaza               33                  27                   30
Other West Asia                       21                  15                   18
Other Central & South Asia            26                  15                   20
Northern Africa                        9                   6                    7
Western Africa                         5                   6                    6
Eastern Africa                         8                   7                    7
Southern Africa                       20                  21                   21
Australia                             37                  39                   38
Oceania                               28                  22                   24
                                Table 4: Parameter Estimates
Frictions (Moving Costs)
                                 Intercept      Distance       GDP/Capita    Language
                                    11.310*         4.144*       -0.464*      -0.832*
                    Basic
                                     (0.805)        (0.113)        (0.084)    (0.062)
  Low Skill
                  Additional        -4.745*        1.542*          0.223*     -0.598*
                   Transit           (0.277)        (0.123)        (0.026)    (0.070)
                                    11.174*        2.310*         -0.347*     -1.066*
                    Basic
                                     (0.907)        (0.120)        (0.094)    (0.064)
  High Skill
                  Additional        -1.039*         0.176          0.042      -0.951*
                   Transit           (0.374)        (0.138)        (0.036)    (0.070)


Standard errors are in parantheses. (*) Significant at 99 percent level.
          Table 5: Migration Patterns when Canada-USA Corridor is Blocked
                                   High skill (% Change)      Low skill (% Change)
          Birth Country           Directly to                Directly to
                                   Canada       to US via UK              to US via UK
                                                              Canada
Canada                                0.0           2.8          0.0           1.9
Mexico                               -8.1           0.1        -14.6           0.2
El Salvador                          -8.2           0.6        -15.7           0.4
Guatemala                            -8.3           0.3        -16.4           0.2
Other Central America                -8.2           0.3        -16.3          0.1
Cuba                                 -8.3           0.1        -17.2           0.0
Dominican Republic                   -8.2           0.1        -16.2           0.1
Jamaica                              -8.1           1.8        -16.2           1.3
Other Caribbean                      -8.1           1.6        -18.7          0.6
Brazil                               -3.3           0.0         -6.5           0.0
Colombia                             -8.1           0.1        -14.5           0.0
Other South America                  -7.6           0.2         -9.3           0.0
Northern Europe                      -7.5           0.1         -8.8           0.0
United Kingdom                       -7.6           0.0         -9.0           0.0
France                               -3.2           0.0         -5.1           0.0
Other Western Europe                 -3.2           0.1         -5.1           0.0
Italy                                -3.2           0.1         -5.0           0.2
Southern Europe                      -7.6           0.2         -8.9           0.1
Germany                              -3.2           0.0         -5.4           0.0
Poland                               -3.3           0.1         -6.4           0.0
Other Eastern Europe                 -3.3           0.1         -6.5           0.0
Russian Federation                   -3.3           0.0         -6.0           0.0
Ukraine                              -3.4           0.0         -6.7           0.0
China                                -7.7           0.2         -9.2           0.0
Japan                                -3.1           0.0         -4.1           0.0
Korea                                -7.3           0.1         -7.4           0.0
Philippines                          -7.5           0.3         -8.3           0.0
Vietnam                              -3.3           0.1         -5.6           0.0
Other South East Asia                -7.5           0.1         -7.2           0.0
India                                -7.8           0.1         -9.3           0.0
Israel, West Bank, Gaza              -7.3           0.1         -7.5           0.0
Other West Asia                      -7.8           0.1         -9.8          -0.1
Other Central & South Asia           -7.8           0.2         -9.9          -0.1
Northern Africa                      -7.8           0.2         -9.6          -0.1
Western Africa                       -8.1           0.1        -12.8          -0.2
Eastern Africa                       -8.1           0.3        -11.5          -0.1
Southern Africa                      -7.4           0.2         -7.5           0.0
Australia                            -7.0           0.3         -5.1           0.0
Oceania                              -7.1           0.2         -5.8           0.0
      Table 6: Migration Patterns when Mig. to Canada from Developing Countries is Blocked
                                                   High Skill Migration (% Change)
           Birth Country
                                    Directly to USA      to US via Canada          to US via UK
Canada                                    0.0                      0.0                 0.1
Mexico                                    0.3                    -96.5                 0.2
El Salvador                               1.0                    -95.2                 0.7
Guatemala                                 0.6                    -97.0                 0.4
Other Central America                     2.0                    -96.2                 1.3
Cuba                                      0.7                    -94.0                 0.5
Dominican Republic                        0.7                    -95.1                 0.5
Jamaica                                   3.1                    -91.2                 1.9
Other Caribbean                           6.4                    -94.4                 3.9
Brazil                                    0.3                    -98.3                 0.2
Colombia                                  0.2                    -95.4                 0.2
Other South America                       0.5                    -94.5                 0.4
Northern Europe                           0.0                     -1.9                 0.0
United Kingdom                            0.0                    -10.3                 0.0
France                                    0.0                     -4.4                 0.1
Other Western Europe                      0.0                     -3.6                 0.1
Italy                                     0.0                     -3.4                 0.0
Southern Europe                           0.0                     -5.7                 0.1
Germany                                   0.0                     -2.6                 0.0
Poland                                    0.4                    -91.7                 0.2
Other Eastern Europe                      0.3                    -90.3                 0.2
Russian Federation                        0.1                    -97.9                 0.2
Ukraine                                   0.1                    -98.2                 0.2
China                                     0.4                    -96.9                 0.3
Japan                                     0.0                     -0.6                 0.0
Korea                                     0.0                     -0.7                 0.0
Philippines                               1.3                    -95.8                 0.9
Vietnam                                   1.1                    -95.0                 0.8
Other South East Asia                     0.3                    -87.2                 0.3
India                                     0.5                    -98.0                 0.4
Israel, West Bank, Gaza                   0.5                    -93.7                 0.5
Other West Asia                           0.4                    -89.9                 0.3
Other Central & South Asia                0.4                    -94.2                 0.4
Northern Africa                           0.4                    -80.7                 0.5
Western Africa                            1.1                    -91.7                 0.8
Eastern Africa                            1.3                    -87.7                 0.9
Southern Africa                           0.6                    -81.5                 0.6
Australia                                 0.0                     -5.0                 0.1
Oceania                                   0.0                     -1.4                 0.1
        Table 7: Migration Patterns when Mig. to USA from Developing Countries is Blocked
                                                      High Skill (% Change)
         Birth Country            to US via       Directly to
                                                   Canada          to US via UK  Directly to UK
                                   Canada
Canada                                0.0             0.0               3.5            0.0
Mexico                                6.6             9.4               6.6            9.4
El Salvador                          29.2            43.9              28.0           43.9
Guatemala                            16.1            22.0              15.9           22.0
Other Central America                17.9            25.8              17.6           25.8
Cuba                                 19.3            25.9              18.6           25.9
Dominican Republic                   21.6            29.8              21.0          29.8
Jamaica                              30.5            46.8              28.3           46.7
Other Caribbean                      94.6           165.4              87.6          165.3
Brazil                                2.8             3.9               2.8            3.9
Colombia                              6.3             6.8               6.0            6.8
Other South America                   4.9             5.5               4.5            5.5
Northern Europe                       1.5            0.0                0.6            0.0
United Kingdom                        3.7             0.0               0.0            0.0
France                                0.6             0.0               0.4            0.0
Other Western Europe                  0.4            0.0                0.2           0.0
Italy                                 0.4             0.0               0.2            0.0
Southern Europe                       1.4             0.0               0.8            0.0
Germany                               0.2             0.0               0.2            0.0
Poland                                2.7             4.0               2.8            4.0
Other Eastern Europe                  2.4             3.3               2.4            3.3
Russian Federation                    2.4             0.8               2.3            0.8
Ukraine                               1.7             1.2               1.7            1.2
China                                 3.1             4.2               3.2            4.1
Japan                                 0.1             0.0               0.1            0.0
Korea                                 0.4             0.1               0.3            0.1
Philippines                           9.6            14.0               9.7           14.0
Vietnam                               8.8            13.2               8.9           13.2
Other South East Asia                 2.6             2.7               2.8            2.7
India                                 4.3             5.6               4.4            5.6
Israel, West Bank, Gaza               5.1             5.7               5.2            5.7
Other West Asia                       3.7             4.4               3.8            4.4
Other Central & South Asia            4.2             4.5               4.5           4.5
Northern Africa                       4.9             4.7               5.4            4.6
Western Africa                        8.5            12.7               8.9           12.7
Eastern Africa                       10.7            15.7              11.2           15.7
Southern Africa                       6.4             7.2               7.2            7.2
Australia                             0.9             0.0               1.5            0.0
Oceania                               0.4             0.1               0.7            0.0
            Table 8: Migration Patterns when ALL Transit Migration to USA is Blocked
                                   High Skill (% Change)              Low Skill (% Change)

                                Migration to     Migration to      Migration to      Migration to
       Birth Country         Specified Country Specified Country Specified Country Specified Country
                             from High Income from Low Income from High Income from Low Income
                                 Countries        Countries         Countries         Countries
Canada                              -4.6              -7.0              -3.1             -11.6
Mexico                              -7.7             -12.0              -7.6             -26.7
El Salvador                        -22.6             -32.1              -7.4             -27.3
Guatemala                          -14.7             -22.2              -6.6             -24.5
Other Central America              -18.7             -24.0              -6.0             -17.7
Cuba                               -16.4             -24.5              -4.8             -20.9
Dominican Republic                 -18.1             -26.2              -5.7             -23.0
Jamaica                            -26.1             -32.1              -8.4             -27.8
Other Caribbean                    -40.4             -48.1              -6.5             -20.0
Brazil                              -3.9              -5.7              -1.0              -1.5
Colombia                            -5.9              -9.2              -2.3              -7.5
Other South America                 -5.8              -7.7              -2.5              -4.6
Northern Europe                     -4.4              -5.9              -1.6              -2.4
United Kingdom                      -3.2              -4.5              -1.2              -2.0
France                              -1.6              -2.6              -0.4              -0.8
Other Western Europe                -1.9              -2.9              -0.5              -0.9
Italy                               -2.0              -2.7              -0.3              -0.4
Southern Europe                     -2.5              -3.7              -0.9              -1.5
Germany                             -2.4              -3.5              -0.5              -0.9
Poland                              -3.6              -5.1              -1.0              -1.6
Other Eastern Europe                -2.9              -4.4              -0.9              -1.3
Russian Federation                  -0.8              -1.0              -0.6              -0.8
Ukraine                             -1.1              -1.6              -0.9              -1.2
China                               -4.8              -6.0              -0.2              -0.3
Japan                               -1.8              -2.0              -0.8              -0.9
Korea                               -5.7              -9.6              -1.0              -1.4
Philippines                        -11.9             -14.5              -1.3              -1.4
Vietnam                             -9.6             -13.5              -0.7              -1.0
Other South East Asia               -3.2              -4.0              -0.3              -0.5
India                               -6.0              -7.4              -0.2              -0.2
Israel, West Bank, Gaza             -5.5              -7.2              -1.4              -1.9
Other West Asia                     -4.4              -5.7              -0.8              -1.0
Other Central & South Asia          -5.0              -6.2              -0.7              -0.8
Northern Africa                     -4.6              -6.4              -0.6              -1.0
Western Africa                     -10.4             -13.5              -0.9              -1.3
Eastern Africa                     -11.7             -15.0              -0.7              -1.0
Southern Africa                     -6.9              -9.1              -0.8              -1.2
Australia                           -1.8              -2.4              -0.2              -0.3
Oceania                             -4.8              -6.4              -1.4              -2.4
