                                                          WPS7897


Policy Research Working Paper                            7897




                        Pro-Growth Equity
              A Policy Framework for the Twin Goals

                               Luis F. López-Calva
                             Carlos Rodríguez-Castelán




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7897


  Abstract
  Growth is an important channel for poverty reduction.                              on an asset-based approach, and offers insights on how a
  Policies to make growth more “inclusive” have perme-                               more equitable distribution of assets and opportunities for
  ated the development debate and “pro-poor growth” has                              their productive use can feed back into higher growth in
  been the subject of a wide range of papers in the literature,                      the long term. Using this framework, the paper links the
  including issues related to measurement, modeling, and                             World Bank’s twin goals to specific policy channels that
  policy. However, the analytical and particularly empirical                         have direct impacts on the income generation capacity of
  literature to support the idea that equity-enhancing pol-                          households, with a particular focus on households at the
  icies have a positive effect on growth is more scarce and                          bottom of the income distribution. The four key policy
  limited, especially on the potential policy links. This paper                      channels include (i) implementing equitable, efficient and
  proposes a simple conceptual framework to identify the                             sustainable fiscal policy and macroeconomic management,
  main elements that contribute to the income generation                             (ii) strengthening fair and transparent institutions capable
  of households, building on the notion that growth can                              of delivering quality basic services, (iii) enabling well-func-
  be seen partly as the aggregate outcome of the income                              tioning markets, and (iv) establishing adequate risk
  generation capacity of households. The framework relies                            management instruments at the macro and household levels.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to
  provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  lflopezcalva@worldbank.org and crodriguezc@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
                                            Pro-Growth Equity:
                           A Policy Framework for the Twin Goals1


                     Luis F. López-Calva†                          Carlos Rodríguez-Castelán‡




Keywords: Poverty, growth, inequality, assets, fiscal policy, markets, institutions, risk.




1 The authors have benefitted from discussions with many colleagues during the preparation of different tasks related to
SCD preparation, operationalization of twin goals, and regional reports on shared prosperity in LAC and ECA. In
particular, we would like to thank Montserrat Avila, Javier Baez, Kim Bolch, Maria Eugenia Genoni, Oscar Barriga-
Cabanillas, Ana Revenga, Louise Cord, Carolina Sanchez-Paramo, Maurizio Bussolo, Kaushik Basu, Hans Timmer and
Samantha Lach for providing very helpful comments and suggestions to earlier versions of this paper. Research assistance
by Montserrat Avila and Ali Sharman is gratefully acknowledged. The findings, interpretations and conclusions in this
paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the view of the World Bank Group, its Executive
Directors, or the countries they represent.
† World Bank. E-mail: lflopezcalva@worldbank.org
‡ World Bank. E-mail: crodriguezc@worldbank.org
       1. Introduction


In 2013 the World Bank adopted two overarching strategic goals, namely: (1) to end extreme poverty

at the global level by 2030, and, (2) to promote shared prosperity in every country. The latter refers to

a sustainable increase in the well-being of the poorer segments of society, roughly defined as the lowest

40 percent of the income distribution.2 A central question to be answered in this context is: What are

the constraints to progress? This question has typically been answered from a top-down perspective,

by looking at how growth can be an important channel for poverty reduction (“pro-poor growth”).

However, this paper takes a bottom-up perspective, building on the idea that policies that focus on

the income generation capacity of households at the bottom of the income distribution can feed back

into higher growth potential in the long run (“pro-growth equity”).


The purpose of this paper is to propose a simple conceptual framework that identifies the main

elements that contribute to the income generation of households which can be intuitively related to

poverty reduction and shared prosperity. This framework utilizes an asset-based approach and

presents the realization of household market income as a function of four main components3: (i) the

capacity of households to generate income based on the assets they own; (ii) the private transfers they

receive that are independent of household income-earning assets; (iii) the set of prices of the basket

of goods and services that the household consumes; and, (iv) the realization of exogenous shocks that

generates variability of incomes.


This approach is particularly useful for linking equity-enhancing policies to growth. By looking at the

impact of different policies on the income generation capacity of households, this paper links changes

                                                            
2 Although the shared prosperity indicator focuses attention on the poorest segments of a country’s population, it does

not completely ignore the rest of the segments. Those above the bottom 40 percent will fall back into the bottom of the
distribution if growth occurs only there (Basu, 2013).
3 This approach is an extension of a framework that has been previously discussed in the literature (see Attanasio and

Székely, 1999; Carter and Barrett, 2006, Bussolo and Lopez-Calva, 2014; Carter and Janzen, 2015).

                                                                                                                     2
 
in the welfare of households (particularly of those at the bottom) with their ability to contribute to

aggregate growth (following Basu 2006). This paper focuses specifically on four key policy areas in

this regard, also defined in previous studies (Bussolo and Lopez-Calva, 2014; Cord, Genoni and

Rodriguez-Castelan, 2015): (i) Equitable, efficient and sustainable fiscal policy and macroeconomic

stability (direct and indirect taxes and transfers, inflation targets); (ii) Fair and transparent institutions

capable of delivering quality basic services (more and better supply of public goods, protection of

property rights); (iii) Well-functioning markets (improved connectivity to markets, competition

policy), and; (iv) Adequate risk management at the macro and household levels (safety nets, macro

prudency).


The next section of the paper provides a brief discussion on the relationship between equity and

growth. Section 3 presents a description of the asset-based conceptual framework. Section 4 explains

its connection to poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Section 5 offers a simple model to connect

the four policy areas to the twin goals through the asset-based approach. Section 6 presents

conclusions.


    2. From equity to growth: What does the literature tell us?


What does the literature say about the relationship between equity and growth? Economic growth

plays a key role in contributing to poverty reduction. Policy discussions to make growth more

“inclusive” have permeated the development debate. The so-called “pro-poor growth” has been the

subject of a wide range of papers in the economic development literature, including measurement,

modeling and policy implications (see Foster, 2014, for a recent review of the concept). There are, for

example, widely accepted empirical regularities about the growth elasticity of poverty in cross-country

analysis (Dollar and Kraay, 2002; Dollar, Kleineberg and Kraay, 2013) and debates about how it varies

as economies grow richer (Allwine, et al., 2013). However, the analytical and empirical literature to

                                                                                                            3
 
support the idea that policies oriented to reduce inequality have a positive effect on growth (“pro-

growth equity”) is more scarce and limited.


Pro-growth equity


Conceptually, income inequality should have a strong contemporaneous correlation with growth, as

growth and inequality are jointly determined (Chenery, et al, 1974; Ferreira, 2010). As Chenery, et al.

(1974) show 40 years ago, overall growth can be decomposed as the weighted sum of the income

growth of different groups in society, where the weights are determined by those groups’ initial share

in total income.


                       Figure 1. Growth and equity are jointly determined




Studies looking into the inequality-growth relationship have found ambiguous results (Marrero and

Rodriguez, 2013). In a recent study, Ferreira et al. (2014) use two new data sets, consisting of 118

household surveys and 134 Demographic and Health Surveys, to show that inequality is negative for

                                                                                                     4
 
economic growth, though the specific component of inequality of opportunity –that inequality that

correlates with circumstances at birth—does not show a robust effect by itself. One of the main

contributions of that paper is the attempt to distinguish between income inequality and indicators of

equity –in this case, inequality of opportunity. Along the same lines, Marrero and Rodriguez (2013),

using the PSID database for the U.S. in 1970, 1980 and 1990, find a robust support for a negative

relationship between inequality of opportunity and growth, and a positive relationship between

inequality of effort and growth. Thus, the indicator of inequality used in the empirical work –based

on different notions of what is the inequality that “matters”—may lead to different results. On the

other hand, equity indicators –such as access to basic services and access to markets—may have a

more delayed effect on growth, as they affect the long-term productivity of the poor or previously

excluded groups.


Revisiting equity-efficiency trade-offs


As discussed in Kanbur (2013), there is no shortage of theoretical models showing why equity is

associated with growth.4 If the economy is “distorted enough” –producing within its full productive

capacity, lifting constraints to productivity might actually improve both efficiency and equity. Political

economy considerations might also lead to a situation where redistribution enhances efficiency (Levy

and Walton, 2005).




                                                            
4 There are diverging views on the link between economic growth and equity. Aghion et al. (1999) present three arguments

that support the view that wealth inequality should be growth-enhancing. The first argument is Kaldor's hypothesis that
the marginal propensity to save of the rich is higher than that of the poor. Stiglitz (1969) and later Bourguignon (1981)
formalized this argument and demonstrated that more unequal economies will grow faster. The second argument has to
do with investment indivisibilities. In the absence of a well-functioning market for shares, wealth needs to be sufficiently
concentrated in order for economic agents to be able to cover large sunk costs and thereby engage in entrepreneurial
activities. The third argument is based on incentive considerations. In an economy where all agents have the same
preferences, greater taxation reduces the return to savings and thus lowers the incentives to accumulate capital and hence
the rate of growth (see for instance, Basu 2006).

                                                                                                                          5
 
Most of these theoretical models rely on some form of market failure, which interacts with an unequal

distribution of income to produce a negative effect on growth. Kanbur (2010) discusses, for example,

how a threshold level of investment may be required for human capital investment. He argues that in

the presence of imperfections in the credit market, the amount that can be invested is determined by

one’s own wealth. Those with low wealth will not invest in their own human capital, and “…thus, if

human capital investment by the wealthy is diminishing at the margin, a redistribution of wealth will

increase overall investment in human capital and, where this mechanism is tacked on to an endogenous

growth model, the steady-state growth rate as well”. These dynamics are consistent with traditional

models on inequality and growth, like those discussed in Banerjee and Newman (1994) and Galor and

Zeira (1993), which suggest that in the presence of failures in credit markets there are interventions

that may enable people who are currently marginalized to improve their access to credit. These

interventions could unlock the inherent economic potential by means of higher productivity, thus

spurring growth.


Fiscal redistribution is another channel through which promoting equity could lead to higher growth

in the presence of market failures. Following a simple model in Aguion et al. (1999), which assumes

imperfect capital markets, it can be shown that redistribution to the poorly endowed, that is, to those

individuals who exhibit the highest marginal returns to investment, will be growth-enhancing. The

model can be extended to other kinds of market failures, and interacted with an unequal distribution

of income, to reach a similar conclusion: more equitable fiscal policy could increase aggregate output

and enhance growth. The well-functioning of markets thus becomes crucial for unleashing the

productive potential of the less well-off. As a recent review by Duflo (2011) discusses:


        “In a world of perfect markets, the distribution of resources in an economy would not affect

        investment and growth, and the ability to benefit from growth would only depend on one’s


                                                                                                     6
 
         intrinsic talents. However, if financial, land, and human capital markets do not function very

         well, the identity of who holds resources in an economy matters for how they are used. The

         poor can stay poor even if the economy as a whole grows. And growth can be slowed down

         because resources are not used in the most efficient way possible. Our understanding of why

         growth suddenly catches on in a poor country, and even more of what type of growth is

         inherently “pro-poor” or not is very limited. A long term strategy to balance growth with

         equity is thus to put in place policies that maximizes the chance that the poor are able to fully

         participate in markets, so that when growth starts, they can benefit from it.”


There could be also a political economy channel through which inequality induces inefficiency.

Alessina and Rodrik (1994), as well as Persson and Tabellini (1994) were among the first to establish

that inequality affects taxation through the political process where voters decide the tax rate of the

economy. In particular, Alessina and Rodrik (1994) present a voting model in which more inequality

induces more inefficient policies (e.g. a higher level of distortionary tax).


    3. An asset-based approach to market income


Indeed, strategies that break traditional equity-efficiency trade-offs are needed. The framework

presented here suggests that such trade-offs can be overcome by enhancing the productive capacity

of the poor via policies that promote a diversification of their asset-base and a more intensive use of

those assets, in a market environment in which returns are not systematically distorted.


The proposed framework is based on Attanasio and Székely (1999) and Bussolo and Lopez-Calva

(2014). It defines a household’s market income potential as a function of four main components: (i)

the capacity of households to generate income based on the assets they own; (ii) the transfers they receive

that are independent of household income-earning assets; (iii) the set of prices of the basket of goods


                                                                                                         7
 
and services that the household consumes; and, (iv) the realization of external shocks that generates

variability of incomes. Figure 2 illustrates the interaction between these components.


                             Figure 2. Assets approach to market income




                                                                                         




                                                                                                       




The capacity of households to generate income based on the assets they own is the foundational component of the

framework. This component can be further disaggregated into three sub-components: the stock of

income-earning assets owned by each household member, the intensity rate at which these assets are


                                                                                                             8
 
utilized by each individual to produce income, and the returns to these assets. Income-earning assets may

include human capital, such as education and years of experience in the labor market; financial and

physical assets like ownership of machinery, or bonds and stocks; social capital such as the set of

norms and social networks that facilitate collective action; and natural capital, which can refer to land,

soil, forest and water. Examples of the intensity of use of assets include labor market participation,

utilization of machinery and exploitation of land through agricultural production. The returns to

household assets consist of the nominal price of factors of production such as wages, interest rates, rents

from property rentals, prices of land and time devoted to collective action.


The household market income, generated from the use of productive assets and its corresponding

reward in the market, is complemented by transfers received by households, which may include

domestic and international remittances, and in-kind transfers from other households, or public

transfers. The market income of households is also directly affected by a set of prices of the goods and

services they consume. Finally, the stock, utilization and returns to households’ productive assets, as

well as consumer prices and private transfers can be directly affected by the realization of external

shocks, such as health shocks, natural disasters, loss of employment, financial crisis, civil conflict, such

that the realization of market income may be different from the potential market income.


The following sections present a way to model the constraints that prevent the poor and those at the

bottom of the income distribution from contributing more actively to economic growth through these

different channels.




Asset-based income generation




                                                                                                          9
 
We start by using the asset-based approach to illustrate the individual decisions of households which,

every day, engage in managing their resources. The basic model does not include transfers, which will

be introduced in the policy section.5 We follow Carter and Janzen (2015) to set up the basic problem.

Each household is initially endowed with a productive asset                     . In our very general framework, this

initial asset level can represent a wide set of possibilities such as education or land. Households

generate income by using their productive asset as an input to produce a single consumption good.

Each period the household allocates income between consumption and investment in the productive

asset, thus:


                                                                     			 1


For simplicity, we assume that the productive asset does not depreciate, thus assets relate to

investment through:


                                                                     	 2


The household’s basic problem is then:



                                                               max     		 3



Subject to the constraints:


                                                                             	 4 	


                                                                     	 	 5




                                                            
5
     Adding private transfers does not alter the main elements of the analysis.

                                                                                                                  10
 
                                                      0	 6


The first constraint shows that the level of productive asset in the next period depends on the

consumption decisions a household makes today. In this sense, by renouncing present consumption

the household is able to save and invest those savings in more productive asset for the next period.

For example, by improving his education level or improving the infrastructure of the land owned. The

recursive formulation of the problem is as follows:


                                    max                          ′              		 7


With the Euler equation given by:


                                                             ′   1 		 8


This reflects the fact that the household will consume until it is indifferent between allocating a unit

of the good to current consumption or investing it in productive asset and thus enjoy higher

consumption in the future.


Now that we have set up the basic dynamic model of optimal household growth based on

accumulation of productive assets, next we briefly show the dynamics of accumulation with different

technologies, with competitive equilibrium and with uncertainty.


Intensity of use of assets


What leads to the possibility of poverty traps is the –realistic— assumption of two different

technologies through which the productive asset may be used. These technologies, which can be

thought of as traditional versus modern, or low quality versus high quality, have low and high

productivity, and are respectively denoted by          and           . Moreover, in order to be able to use


                                                                                                        11
 
the high productivity technology, individuals require a minimum level of asset	 , which is associated

with a fixed cost . On the other hand, the low productivity technology has zero cost. The analysis

assumes throughout that if a household is able to access the high productivity technology, its capacity

to generate income is enough to reach above-poverty-threshold consumption levels. The opposite

occurs if the household is using the low productivity technology. Given that this is a general

framework, the specific threshold    is contingent to the type of activity and asset each household is

using. For example, it is equivalent to have access to low quality education, with returns that prevent

the household from earning wages above poverty standards. It could also mean lacking the land titles

that would allow the household to engage in long term farming projects.


The introduction of two technologies effectively creates a non-convexity that allows for two equilibria;

either below or above the poverty line. More importantly, and as will be discussed later, the access to

the high productivity technology is not guaranteed since there can be other constraints (such as market

failures or institutional constraints) that limit the possibility of accessing the more productive

technology and therefore generating sufficient income to move above the poverty line.


Finally, consider the existence of credit constraints. In the extreme –for households with no access to

credit whatsoever-- this implies that the consumption level and the saving capacity are restricted to be

no greater than the current income generation capacity, given the current level of assets.


The introduction of these two technologies modifies the basic problem in (3)-(6) by adding the

following constraint:


                                        max               ,         		 9




                                                                                                     12
 
Thus, the Bellman and Euler equations remain similar, but will now depend upon the type of

technology used.


    As shown by Carter and Janzen (2015), there is a critical value of assets, called	           , such that if a

household’s initial level of assets is below          but above	    , the accumulation dynamics determine

that the household will accumulate assets over time to reach            and therefore be able to access the

more productive technology.


Figure 3 illustrates how this process of accumulation takes place. In particular, a household has two
                                                                              ∗         ∗
technologies available and an optimal level of asset accumulation of              and       for the low and high

productive technology respectively. As mentioned before, being above the threshold                   determines

if the household is willing to accumulate assets up to        where it will be able to use the high productive

                                              ∗
technology and accumulate capital up to           .




                                                                                                              13
 
                              Figure 3. Dynamics of capital accumulation




    Source: Adapted from Carter and Barret (2006)




Returns to assets


In order to introduce prices, we now follow a competitive equilibrium approach. We assume that

households own the factor of production and the firms in the economy. Each period they trade their

productive asset to firms, and buy the good produced by firms. This amount of good is then allocated

between consumption and investment in the productive asset.

                                                                                                 14
 
Let     denote the price of a unit of productive asset in period t, expressed in units of goods, so that

it represents the real wage. Given the prices           , the problem faced by the representative firm

every period is:


                                       max Π                    			 10


Subject to


                                                         		 11


And the representative household solves:



                                         max                 		 12



Subject to:


                                                         Π 	,       0,1, …			 13


Where        is the asset supplied to firms. In equilibrium Π      0, also every period households will

supply all productive assets to firms, since this causes no additional disutility for them, hence

    . The household’s problem can be rewritten as:



                                         max                 		 14



Subject to:


                                               1         ,        0,1, …			 15


                                               ,        0			 16

                                                                                                          15
 
The first order conditions are given by:


                                                         0			 17


                                                 1          		 18


Where     is the multiplier of the budget constraint.


Thus the competitive equilibrium consists of quantities and prices      ,      ,        . In general, it

is possible to show that the competitive equilibrium allocations are Pareto optimal, since the

household’s problem is the same as the planner’s problem. Later we will see that in the presence of

distorting taxes this may not be the case.


External shocks


There are multiple external risks, including macroeconomic crisis, natural disasters, weather-related

events, health-related shocks, crime and violence, that individuals and societies as a whole face over

time which can have pernicious consequences for the income generation capacity of households

(World Bank, 2013b). Risks turned into shocks could potentially lead to asset loss, disinvestment,

unemployment, malnutrition, and child labor, when people lack means to effectively manage and

cope with risks. The realization of a household’s market income may then vary due to such external

shocks.


Uncertainty can be added to the basic model in several ways. For instance, by directly affecting the

stock of productive asset at, or the technology f at . We follow the second specification. Building

upon the definition of market income given in (1), the first constraint can be modified to include the

presence of a random i.i.d. shock    . As mentioned above, shocks could be aggregate such as

weather shocks, financial crisis, or idiosyncratic; through machinery destruction, health shocks, etc.


                                                                                                       16
 
In fact, previous studies (see for example, Barro, 2009; Becker, 1968; Carter et al., 2007; Dercon and

Christiaensen, 2011) have found that uninsured risks are often found to have permanent effects on

the welfare of households, further aggravating poverty traps as low-income people (those poor

and/or in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution) are often more vulnerable to the

negative consequences of shocks. This is also true since wealthier households are expected to have

better access to risk-coping strategies than poorer households.


When risk is introduced, the problem can be rewritten as:



                                                             			 19



Subject to:


                                         1                            	 20 	


                                                       	 	 21


                                             ,       0	 22


The recursive form of the problem is:


               ,             max         	   1                         ′              , ′ 	 23


The first order condition is given by:


                         1                       ,                         ,   ,   	 24


Thus, the optimal asset accumulation is given by the stochastic difference equation ′            ,   . In

particular, when      0 we get the same result as in the basic problem in (3)-(6). As can be seen, now

                                                                                                      17
 
consumption is contingent on the expected value of assets, and therefore depends on the probability

of a shock realization. Specifically, the incentives for renouncing consumption today are reduced

because households are uncertain about the possibility of profiting in the future from their sacrifices

today.


      4. Implications for the twin goals: Linking the framework to poverty reduction and

         shared prosperity


There are several advantages to selecting a simple framework. In addition to its relevance for

unpacking the components which influence the income generation capacity of households, the

framework allows us to analyze how this capacity differs across socioeconomic and demographic

groups (e.g. bottom 40 percent and top 60 percent, or poor and non-poor, indigenous and non-

indigenous, urban and rural).


As mentioned earlier, a shared characteristic of the World Bank’s twin goals is that they both focus

on the welfare of those at the bottom of the income distribution. The first goal to end extreme poverty at

the global level by 2030 is about moving the vast majority of those individuals currently living below the

$1.25/day line, out of extreme poverty. The second goal to promote shared prosperity in every country is

related to a sustainable increase in the well-being of the poorer segments of society, defined as the

lowest 40 percent in the income distribution.


The poverty headcount ratio


To identify those who are poor, the World Bank uses the family of poverty measures defined by Foster

et al. (1984), which satisfy both the monotonicity and transfer axioms proposed by Sen (1976), and

the decomposability property. In general, the Foster-Greer-Thorbecke (FGT) Index (also known as

the      measure) has the property of subgroup decomposability and can represent several commonly

                                                                                                       18
 
used poverty metrics that take into account the intensity and severity of poverty. The FGT estimates

the weighted sum of the poverty gap ratios of a group of observations under an arbitrary poverty line,

and includes a parameter       that measures the sensitivity of the income distribution within those

observations. Based on the final market income aggregate defined in (1) and (4), the poverty rate can

be defined as:


                                   1
                                             ∙          			 25



where N is equal to the total number of individuals in the economy. z is an scalar-valued poverty line.

    is the final market income of individual i.   is an indicator value taking the value of one if

and zero otherwise.     is a parameter reflecting the weight placed in the severity of poverty.


In particular, when        0, this index becomes the poverty headcount ratio. This metric represents

the number of households under the poverty line but fails to capture the extent to which each

household income falls below the poverty line. When,          1 this index becomes the income-gap ratio

for the mean poor income. This ratio measures the total shortfall of the poor households with respect

to the poverty line. However, the income-gap ratio is not sensitive to the distribution of income among

the poor. When 	        2, the FGT Index becomes the squared income-gap ratio. This index computes

the severity of poverty more accurately, since it represents the squared income-gap ratio for the mean

poor income. In this form, the index incorporates information on both poverty and income inequality

among the poor households. Higher order classes of poverty indices can be derived as              becomes

larger. Finally, as   → ∞ the FGT family of poverty measures tends to a Rawlsian social welfare

function, i.e. the index depends only on the welfare of the poorest household in the population.


Shared Prosperity

                                                                                                       19
 
The goal of promoting shared prosperity derives from the concept of “quintile income” (Basu, 2010),

which is defined as the income per capita of the bottom quintile (20 percent) of the population. It

draws from the Rawlsian principles of focusing on the welfare of the less well-off. As mentioned

above, beyond the single-period calculation of poverty headcount rates, in cases when there is access

to information for two different time periods, we can calculate the shared prosperity indicator. From

Basu (2000), the share of income of the bottom 40 percent can be simply written as:


                                                       ⋯
                                                              				 26 	
                                                       ⋯



Where      is the income generated by a household given the productive technology it has at hand, and

         denotes the share of total income corresponding to the bottom 40 percent of the final market

income distribution for the income profile ; with M equal to the total population and r is the largest

integer such that        0.4.


Let   be the mean per-capita market income, so the mean income of the bottom 40 percent is



                                                           ∙ 				 27
                                             0.4


Thus, the shared prosperity indicator can be expressed by the percentage change in      between time

t and time t+1


                                               ,
                                                           1			 28
                                                   ,



Non-decreasing functions of household market income




                                                                                                   20
 
Individuals --no matter how poor they might be—may have options that would allow them to improve

their economic situation, but sometimes they find limitations on the best use of whatever assets they

have. These external constraints make it harder for them to reach their full economic potential and

therefore overcome poverty. The role of policy is to help alleviate these constraints.


It is important to identify policy variables that directly affect the income generating function of

households defined in (1) and (4). The poverty headcount ratio defined in (25) is a non-increasing

function of market income and shared prosperity defined in (28) is a non-decreasing function of

market income. Then, policy variables that (i) increase the accumulation of assets, (ii) increase the use

of assets, (iii) increase the returns to assets, (iv) decrease the consumer prices paid by households, (v)

increase the monetary value of private transfers, and, (vi) decrease the probability of risks faced by

households, are expected to have a direct impact on poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The

next section defines and discusses the policy areas that directly impact the World Bank’s goals.


    5. Policies for poverty reduction and shared prosperity


The asset–based model presented above assumes that all agents are rational; however, there is no

equality of opportunities given the heterogeneous initial level of assets	    and, at the same time, they

face some market failures, limiting their ability to take full advantage of their assets. In the absence of

these factors that affect the income generation capacity of households, including lack of access to

specific markets or assets --inequality of opportunities, when initial asset holdings is a circumstance

individuals cannot control-- exposure to uninsurable risks and market failures, we would expect that

all individuals will be able to accumulate the most productive assets.


Based on the discussion of interventions that correct inequality of opportunity, risks and market

imperfections—widely used in microeconomic theory—the asset-based approach adopted here is


                                                                                                        21
 
linked to four fundamental policy areas that have a direct impact on the income generation capacity

of all households in an economy (with particular focus on those households that are poor and/or in

the bottom 40 percent in the income distribution). These policies, which have also been defined in

previous studies (World Bank, 2013a and 2014), can be organized in four broad groups: (1) Equitable,

efficient and sustainable fiscal policy and macroeconomic stability; (2) Fair and transparent institutions

capable of delivering quality basic services; (3) Well-functioning markets, and; (4) Adequate risk

management at the macro and household levels (Figure 4).


          Figure 4. Policy Areas that affect households’ income generation capacity




These policies can influence the realization of the total income of households by means of directly

affecting their private income generation capacity through asset accumulation, asset use, or returns to

assets; by increasing the size of transfers, public or private, while mitigating the negative effects of

external shocks. In particular, the policies presented in Figure 4 directly affect the decisions of

                                                                                                       22
 
economic agents with respect to asset accumulation and more (or less) intensive use of assets. Also,

these policies directly and indirectly affect returns to factors of production, the consumer price index

and non-labor incomes comprised by private and public transfers. Finally, these interventions can

mitigate the effects of external shocks.


It is clear that there is no single policy that solves all the restrictions on the use of resources. On the

contrary, there are a multiplicity of policies that depend on the specific constraint, the type of assets

involved and the initial condition of the households. The policies that we present are only examples

that are used to illustrate the policy channels that are playing a role in the reduction of poverty by

allowing households to make a better use of their resources. Next, we present a simple model to link

these four policy areas to the income-generation function of households, and to poverty eradication

and the promotion of shared prosperity. 


Equitable and sustainable fiscal policy


Equitable and sustainable fiscal policy affects the full income generation capacity through direct

taxation. It also affects the decisions of individuals with respect to the intensity of use of their assets

by affecting returns—also through direct taxes and public transfers. Indirect taxes such as the value-

added tax (VAT) can have a direct effect on consumer prices and thus affect the relative returns of

households. Similarly, parameters of monetary policy related to macroeconomic stability, such as

inflation targets linked to interest rates, directly affect the relative prices of the economy and thus the

income generation capacity of all households. Prudent fiscal and monetary policies that are conductive

to sustainable and acceptable trends of fiscal deficits and inflation are also very important to mitigate

potential external shocks such as fiscal and financial crisis.




                                                                                                        23
 
Following the model presented above, and abstracting from the presence of risk, Carter and Barret

(2006) proved by numerical methods that the initial level of capital an individual has and its relation

with the critical thresholds    and             determines if a household is able to access the low or high

productive technology.


In this particular case, we want to focus on the role of fiscal policy in improving the welfare of

households. We consider a simple modification of the basic problem, by adding a flat-rate tax and

associated government spending programs. Let ∈ 0,1 be the flat-rate tax on income derived from

the use of the productive asset. The tax revenues are then returned as a lump-sum transfer to some

households. In this case, the household’s budget constraint is:


                                        1                          	              (29)


Where:


                                                          0,
                                                           ,


Such that households with              will accumulate assets and access the high technology productivity.

Additionally we require that for all t :


              ∑                ∑      			                                                 (30)


Where the sum is across households, i. The problem in recursive form is:


                          max               1                          ′        ′ 		      (31)


With the Euler Equation given by:



                                                                                                        24
 
                                    1               1	                                 (32)


In this case, the government’s sole activity is to transfer income from the rich (skilled/using high

productive technology) to the poor (unskilled/using low productive technology). Additionally, we

assume that in this particular case, the tax     is not large enough as to make the high productive

technology unappealing. As can be seen clearly now, the presence of the tax affects the perceived

future benefit from accumulation of capital. In this manner, the presence of will affect the relative

position of the critical thresholds     and     shifting them to the right.


It can be proven that if the number of people using the high productive technology reaches a certain

threshold, there is redistribution such that it is possible to subsidize the accumulation of assets of

individuals below          favoring that they are able to access the more productive technology. Thus,

equitable fiscal policy that redistributes income to households trapped in a long-term low-productivity

path of production can have long-term positive effects on welfare.


Fair and transparent institutions


Fair and transparent institutions capable of delivering quality basic services could directly affect the

decision of individuals to accumulate assets. Strong institutional capacity linked to the delivery of good

quality services, such as education and health, can enhance the ability of poorer households to improve

the accumulation of net assets. In addition, more and better health services as well as employment

systems are fundamental for mitigating risks for households, such as health related shocks and loss of

employment. Moreover, institutions that promote the protection of property rights can improve the

investment climate in the economy, increasing the availability of well-paid employment opportunities

and thus affecting the returns to the factors of production. Strong regulatory entities are also important




                                                                                                       25
 
to oversee private behaviors in markets and thus minimize the risks of potential financial and sectoral

macroeconomic crisis.


To illustrate the role of the government in improving access to quality services, we can consider an

example following the previous model. Recall the fixed cost to access the high productive technology

given by	 . This may represent the access to quality education. In this sense, households will want to

accumulate human capital, but only if the cost of it is not too high. Similarly as in the fiscal policy

model, the government would collect taxes but direct them towards lowering the cost of the

productive technology,     , instead of giving direct transfers, thus making quality education more

accessible for low-income households.


Given that the objective of the government is poverty eradication, and assuming that the government

decision is to provide an in-kind transfer in the form of better quality of education instead of a direct

cash transfer, an optimal taxation can be found such that the cost of education can be subsidized for

people with an initial endowment below         , effectively allowing them to become more productive.


Well-functioning markets


Well-functioning markets directly related to improved connectivity and competition are central for

reducing barriers to a more efficient utilization of households’ productive assets, and can be

conductive to improving the relative returns to assets. Enhanced transport infrastructure that allows

disadvantaged groups to connect to markets, for instance, is an example of an opportunity to directly

increase the utilization of assets, which can create additional income. Furthermore, a robust

competition policy that reduces entry barriers for new firms to certain markets directly affects the

relative prices of all households by reducing consumer prices.




                                                                                                      26
 
One example of how well-functioning markets work is access to credit in a competitive credit market.

The presence of the credit market will reduce the threshold        , which determines that a household

finds it optimal to accumulate capital. However, credit requirements such as collaterals or high interest

rates can leave a large part of the population with low initial levels of assets unable to access the high

productivity technology.


Since the objective of the government is to eradicate extreme poverty, its role is to promote the

existence of a competitive credit market with information systems that foster good credit behavior by

reducing moral hazard. In this sense, competition in the credit market increases access to credit by

lowering interest rates and fostering the development of bank branches that are closer to consumers

that traditionally have not had easy access to the formal banking system. Moreover, when the credit

history is centralized, the reduction of moral hazard can further expand access.


It is important to highlight that this policy does not suit the circumstances of the population whose

level of assets is too low. But it can allow for an important part of the population to access higher

levels of assets without direct government assistance.


Risk management


Finally, risk management can reduce the exposure to and impact of shocks for all the households in

an economy but particularly for those poor and vulnerable, who usually have a higher probability of

risk ‘realization’, forcing them to engage in negative coping mechanisms. In this way, public safety

nets, such as public cash transfer schemes that are flexible so that they can be scaled up during crisis

and scaled down during recovery, are important instruments that can support households affected by

external shocks by providing temporary income support. Another relevant policy that can both

mitigate risk and increase the intensity of use of assets is the insurance of crops that offers a payout


                                                                                                       27
 
to the affected household in case a predicted drought (or flood) is realized but also increases the

utilization of land for agricultural activities.


The introduction of risk makes it such that even households whose initial asset level would allow them

to access the high productivity technology are no longer guaranteed to end up in that circumstance.

In this case, risk creates an additional category of households, in addition to those that are persistently

poor because they are not able to overcome poverty over time. This new category of households,

households that are poor but able to accumulate and leave poverty over time, are however, vulnerable

to shocks that might destroy enough capital to change their accumulation dynamics, leaving them

poor indefinitely.


Based on the model on insurance by Janzen and Carter (2015), we modify the household’s problem

under uncertainty in what follows. We first assume that the shock can be decomposed into two

separate parts; a covariant shock and an idiosyncratic one such that:                ,   . We assume that

the covariant shock       is observable. Thus, the insurance payout     introduced in this part will only

cover the covariant part of the shock such that:


                                                   max     , 0 			 33


Where         0 represents the level of the deductible. Thus, the household will now choose the level of

insurance, , given its premium, . The household’s problem becomes:



                                        max                  			 34
                                          ,




Subject to:


                                               1                             		 35

                                                                                                        28
 
More interestingly, even when insurance is available for these vulnerable households, if they are to the

right of the threshold       but not very far away from it, the household’s optimal decision is not to

insure against potential losses. This happens as a consequence of the fact that they face a very difficult

decision. If they decide to buy insurance, the premium could be large enough that it puts them to the

left of     , making certain that they will remain below the poverty line. On the other hand, if they

decide not to buy insurance, there is a positive probability that an actual shock happens and drives

them to the left of       and into poverty. At the same time, as has been discussed in the literature, it

is often the case that by endogenous reasons, individuals that start with low levels of capital are actually

the ones that face higher probabilities of facing risks.


In order to achieve the goal of eliminating poverty, the government should implement a system that

is able to cover risks, especially for those households that are vulnerable. As was discussed by Janzen

et al (2013), a safety net scheme that provides transfers to the poor and also insures the risks of the

vulnerable has lower fiscal costs in the long term as it is more efficient in reducing the long-term

poverty rates.


    6. Conclusions


Policies to make growth more “inclusive” have permeated the development debate and “pro-poor

growth” has been the subject of a wide range of papers in the literature, including issues related to

measurement, modeling, and policy. However, the analytical and –particularly— empirical literature

to support the idea that equity-enhancing policies have a positive effect on growth is more scarce and

limited, particularly in terms of potential policy links. This paper proposes a simple conceptual

framework using an asset-based approach that helps to explain the capital accumulation dynamics of

households and how it is affected by the role of government and markets. This framework is useful



                                                                                                         29
 
for unpacking the components of household market income generation capacity and is also useful to

analyze how that capacity differs across socioeconomic and demographic groups. It provides an

intuitive framework to argue that equity-enhancing policies have a positive effect on the capacity of

those at the bottom to contribute to growth.


More importantly, this asset-based approach represents a bridge between the World Bank’s goals and

specific policies that could have direct impacts on the income generation capacity of households.

Using this framework and presenting a simple model (building on Janzen et al. (2013), this note links

the World Bank’s goals of poverty reduction and fostering the income growth of the bottom 40% of

the income distribution to four fundamental policy areas that directly affect the generation of income.




                                                                                                    30
 
References

1. Aguion, Philippe, Eve Caroli, and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa (1999). “Inequality and Economic
   Growth: The perspective of New Growth Theories.” Journal of Economic Literature vol. 37,
   No.4: 1615-1660.

2. Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik. 1994. “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 109: 465-489.

3. Allwine, M., J. Rigolini and Luis-Felipe Lopez-Calva. 2013. “The Unfairness of (Poverty) Targets.”
   World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6361. Washington, DC.

4. Attanasio, Orazio P., and Miguel Székely. 1999. “An Asset-Based Approach to the Analysis of
   Poverty in Latin America.” Working Paper R-376, Inter-American Development Bank,
   Washington, DC.

5. Banerjee, A. V. and Newman, A. F. 1993."Occupational Choice and the Process of Development."
   Journal of Political Economy 101(2): 274-98.

6. Barro, Robert J. 2007. “On the Welfare Costs of Consumption Uncertainty.” Mimeo. Harvard
   University, Cambridge, MA.

7. Basu, Kaushik. 2000. “On the Goals of Development,” in Meier, G. M. and J. E. Stiglitz, eds.,
   Frontiers of Development Economics, World Bank: Washington, D.C.

8. Basu, Kaushik. 2006. “Globalization, Poverty, and Inequality: What is the Relationship? What Can
   Be Done?.” World Development, 34 (8): 1361-1373.

9. Basu, Kaushik. 2013. “Shared Prosperity and the Mitigation of Poverty. In Practice and Precept.”
   World Bank Policy Research Working Papers No. 6700. Washington, DC.

10. Becker, Gary S. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Political
    Economy, 76: 169-217.

11. Bourguignon, Francois. 1981. "Pareto-Superiority of Unegalitarian Equilibria in Stiglitz’ Model of
    Wealth Distribution with Convex Savings Function," Econometrica 49:6, pp. 1469-75.

12. Bussolo, Maurizio, and Luis F. Lopez-Calva. 2014. Shared Prosperity: Paving the Way in Europe
    and Central Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank.

13. Carter, Michael R., and Christopher B. Barrett. 2006. “The Economics of Poverty Traps and
    Persistent Poverty: An Asset-Based Approach.” Journal of Development Studies, 42 (2): 178–99.




                                                                                                   31
 
14. Carter, Michael, Peter Little, Tewodaj Mogues and W. Negatu. 2007. “Poverty Traps and the
    Long-term Consequences of Natural Disasters in Ethiopia and Honduras.” World Development,
    35(5): 835-856.

15. Carter, Michael R., and Sarah A. Janzen. 2015. “Social Protection in the Face of Climate Change:
    Targeting Principles and Financing Mechanisms.” Policy Research Working Paper 7476, World
    Bank, Washington, DC.

16. Chenery, et al (1974); Growth and Redistribution, The World Bank.

17. Cord, Louise, María Eugenia Genoni, and Carlos Rodríguez-Castelán, eds. 2015. Shared Prosperity
    and Poverty Eradication in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC: World Bank.

18. Dercon, Stefan, and Luc Christiaensen. 2011. “Consumption Risk, Technology Adoption and
    Poverty Traps: Evidence from Ethiopia.” Journal of Development Economics, 96(2): 159-173.

19. Dollar, David and Aart Kraay. 2002. “Growth is Good for the Poor.” Journal of Economic
    Growth, 7(3):195-225.

20. Dollar, David, T. Kleineberg and Aart Kraay. 2013. “Growth is Still Good for the Poor.” LIS
    Working Paper Series 596.

21. Duflo, Esther. 2011.“Balancing Growth with Equity: The View from Development”, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium 2011 volume.

22. Ferreira, Francisco H. G. & Lakner, Christoph & Lugo, Maria Ana & Ozler, Berk, 2014.
    "Inequality of opportunity and economic growth : a cross-country analysis," Policy Research
    Working Paper Series 6915, The World Bank.

23. Foster, James, J., Greer and Eric Thorbecke. 1984. “A Class of Decomposable Poverty Measures.”
    Econometrica, 52(3): 761-766.

24. Foster, J. (2014), “A Framework for Measuring Inclusive Growth”, George Washington
    University, mimeo.

25. Galor, Oded, and Joseph Zeira. 1993. “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics.” The Review
    of Economic Studies, 60(1): 35-52.

26. Sarah A. Janzen, Michael R. Carter and Munenobu Ikegami. (2015) Valuing Asset Insurance and
    Chronic Poverty. Working paper

27. Kanbur, Ravi and Michael Spence, 2010 (eds). “Equity and Growth in a Globalizing World.” The
    World Bank.



                                                                                                 32
 
28. Marrero, G. and J. Rodriguez (2013); “Inequality of Opportunity and Growth”, Journal of
    development Economics, Vol. 104, 107-122.

29. Persson, Torsten. and Guido Tabellini. 1994. "Is Inequality harmful for Growth? Theory and
    Evidence,” American Economic Review, 84: 3: 600-621.

30. Ravalllion, Martin. 2012. “Poor, or Just Feeling Poor? On Using Subjective Data in Measuring
    Poverty.” World Bank Policy Research Working Papers No. 5968. Washington, DC.

31. Rosenbaltt, David and Tamara J. McGavock. 2013. “A Note on the Simple Algebra of the Shared
    Prosperity Indicator.” World Bank Policy Research Working Papers No. 6645. Washington, DC.

32. Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1969. "The Distribution of Income and Wealth Among Individuals," Econo-
    metrica, 37:3, pp. 382-97.

33. World Bank. 2013a. “Shifting Gears to Accelerate Shared Prosperity in Latin America and the
    Caribbean.” Washington, DC: LCSPP Poverty and Labor Brief, No. 5.

34. World Bank. 2013b. World Development Report 2014: Risk and Opportunity—Managing Risk
    for Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

35. World Bank. 2014. “Social Gains in the Balance: A Fiscal Policy Challenge in Latin America and
    the Caribbean”. Washington, DC: LCSPP Poverty and Labor Brief, No. 6.




                                                                                               33
 
