                                                      WPS8065


Policy Research Working Paper                        8065




           Crossovers: Female Entrepreneurs
               Who Enter Male Sectors
                        Evidence from Ethiopia

                                 Salman Alibhai
                                 Niklas Buehren
                              Sreelakshmi Papineni
                                 Rachael Pierotti




Africa Region
Gender Cross Cutting Solution Area
Finance and Markets Global Practice Group
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8065


  Abstract
  Occupational sector selection is an important determinant                          higher profits and having more employees. The descrip-
  of returns for female entrepreneurs. If sectors that are tradi-                    tive results show that crossovers do not necessarily have
  tionally male owned could provide an opportunity to earn                           more education or greater skills than noncrossovers. Rather,
  higher returns, then what factors could encourage women                            women’s relationships and networks, especially those pro-
  to cross over into these sectors or prevent them from doing                        vided through male relatives, and being opportunity-driven
  so? To examine this question, this paper uses data from                            entrepreneurs appear to influence the likelihood of enter-
  Ethiopia to compare the firm performance and characteris-                          ing a more-profitable, male-dominated sector. The study
  tics of women in male-dominated sectors (crossovers) with                          explores the implications and challenges of encouraging
  women who are in female-concentrated sectors (noncross-                            female entrepreneurs to enter male-dominated sectors, in
  overs). The findings show that female-owned enterprises                            an effort to provide new insight into how the earning gap
  in male-dominated sectors perform better on average than                           between male and female entrepreneurs can be closed.
  those in female-concentrated sectors, with firms achieving




  This paper is a jont product of the Africa Region, the Gender Cross Cutting Solution Area, and the Finance and Markets
  Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a
  contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the
  Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at spapineni@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
Crossovers: Female Entrepreneurs Who Enter Male Sectors
                Evidence from Ethiopia

   By Salman Alibhai, Niklas Buehren, Sreelakshmi Papineni, and
                        Rachael Pierotti∗




Keywords: Gender, Entrepreneurship, Firms, Sector Choice and Ethiopia.

JEL codes: J16 L25 L26 O12

   ∗ This paper is a product of the World Bank Africa Gender Innovation Lab (AFRGIL). Alibhai
(email: aalibhai@worldbank.org); Buehren (email: nbuehren@worldbank.org); Papineni (email: spap-
ineni@worldbank.org); Pierotti (email: rpierotti@worldbank.org). This study builds on the research
framework of “Breaking the Metal Ceiling: Female entrepreneurs who succeed in male-dominated sectors
in Uganda” (2011), and we thank the authors Francisco Campos, Markus Goldstein, Laura McGorman,
Ana Maria Munoz Boudet, and Obert Pimhidza for their support during the conceptualization stage
and for the survey instrument that was used to collect much of the data used in this paper. This study
was integrated into the Women Entrepreneurship Development Project (WEDP), an ongoing lending
operation of the Finance & Markets Global Practice, and we thank the Team Leader Francesco Strobbe
for his support. We thank Seblewangel Ayalew Woreta for superb ﬁeld assistance. We are grateful to the
World Bank Group’s Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality and the Government of Canada for ﬁnancial
support.
                                                  1
2


                                        I.   Introduction

Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest rate of female entrepreneurship in the world,
with more women starting businesses in Africa than anywhere else (World Bank,
2012). Although women now make up approximately half of the entrepreneurs
in Sub-Saharan Africa, there is still a large gender gap in business performance
(see for example, Klapper and Parker 2011 or Bardasi et al. 2011 for a review of
the literature). The latest data from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys (2015)
indicates that male-owned businesses in Ethiopia are 2.7 times larger than female-
owned enterprises in terms of number of employees and have average monthly sales
that are 4 times higher.1
  The existing evidence that explains the gender gap in business performance
highlights a number of potential factors, including capital and time constraints.
Campos and Gassier (2015) emphasize that the systematically diﬀerent choices
that men and women make, which are in turn driven by gender-speciﬁc con-
straints, can explain gender diﬀerences in business performance. One key diﬀer-
ence they highlight is the sectors in which men and women choose to operate their
enterprise. The sector of operation has been identiﬁed as an important determi-
nant of returns for female entrepreneurs in many developing countries. De Mel,
McKenzie, and Woodruﬀ (2008) ﬁnd that women are more likely to be present
in sectors characterized by low returns, and Singh, Reynolds, and Muhammad
(2001) ﬁnd a high concentration of female-owned ﬁrms in low-income informal
sectors. These ﬁndings raise the question of whether there are certain sectors
that women could choose where potential returns are higher. If so, are there any
deﬁning characteristics of the women who are more likely to be operating in these
sectors that could help direct programming and targeting?
  In this paper, we use enterprise data collected from Ethiopia to explore what
could be driving sector selection in the context of growth-oriented female en-
trepreneurs. Speciﬁcally, we study female-owned enterprises that operate in sec-
tors dominated by men and show that, on average, they are able to make higher
returns than female-owned enterprises operating in female-concentrated sectors.
Our ﬁndings are consistent with the results of Campos and colleagues (2011) in
Uganda, who found that women-owned ﬁrms in male-dominated sectors, on av-
erage, were more proﬁtable than ﬁrms in female-concentrated sectors. In this
paper, we use data from Ethiopia to corroborate the results obtained in Uganda
by testing the hypothesis of higher returns for women in male-dominated sec-
tors and then seek to uncover factors correlated with crossing over into these
higher-return male-dominated sectors.
  Comparing the average outcomes of crossovers and noncrossovers suggests that
entering and operating in a male-dominated sector leads to higher proﬁts, indi-
cating that encouraging female entrepreneurs to enter sectors that are dominated
   1 A “female-owned” business was deﬁned as one in which the top manager was a woman. In the
2015 Ethiopian enterprise survey, 9 percent of the 848 businesses indicated that their top manager was
a woman.
                                           CROSSOVERS                                                  3


by men could be an avenue for programming. Nevertheless, it is important to
evaluate the higher-proﬁt potential in the male-dominated sectors along with an
appreciation of the heterogeneity of the female entrepreneurs and the business
challenges that come with operating in sectors dominated by men. We supple-
ment the analysis in Ethiopia by asking whether crossing over is enough. We
analyze this by examining whether there are any deﬁning characteristics of the
top proﬁt earners who have crossed over into male-dominated sectors.
  In Ethiopia, it is not surprising that women entrepreneurs tend to be less
successful than men because women typically start from a more-diﬃcult situ-
ation—without easy access to ﬁnance, land, training, education, or eﬀective busi-
ness networks (Triodos Facet 2011). Female entrepreneurs face higher barriers
than men when accessing ﬁnance, especially in providing collateral for loans, be-
cause most assets that lenders accept are registered to men, and there are cultural
barriers to women using collateral. The share of women in Ethiopia without ed-
ucation is almost twice that of men, which in turn limits female entrepreneurs’
ability to expand their businesses (Ethiopia DHS 2011). A better understand-
ing of the characteristics of women who have successfully circumvented some of
the challenges and entered higher-return male-dominated sectors will help us to
suggest policy interventions that could address the constraints women face in
an eﬀort to encourage the productivity of women-owned businesses and closing
the gender gap. The World Bank report “Unleashing the Potential of Ethiopian
Women” postulates that reducing gender inequalities in education and the la-
bor market might increase annual gross domestic product growth in Ethiopia by
approximately 1.9 percentage points.2
  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes our
main data source. Section III describes how we deﬁned which sectors can be
considered male dominated. Section IV presents the empirical results where we
compare the business performance and challenges of crossover ﬁrms with those
of noncrossover ﬁrms and then explore a number of correlates associated with
crossing over to male-dominated sectors. Section V provides the conclusion.

                                             II.    Data

  In this paper, we use data collected at baseline for the Women’s Entrepreneur-
ship Development Project’s (WEDP) impact evaluation. WEDP3 is the World
Bank’s International Development Association–funded program that oﬀers loans
and entrepreneurship training to growth-oriented female entrepreneurs4 in Ethiopia.
   2 Unleashing   the Potential of Ethiopian Women, World Bank 2008.
   3 Launched   in 2012, WEDP aims to increase the earnings and employment of micro and small en-
terprises fully or partly owned by female entrepreneurs in six selected cities. The WEDP objective is
achieved by tailoring ﬁnancial instruments to the needs of the participants and ensuring availability of
ﬁnance and developing the entrepreneurial and technical skills of the target group. Women interested
in participating in WEDP and fulﬁlling the criteria for project beneﬁciaries (not full time in school and
being growth oriented) receive a WEDP membership card that entitles them to access WEDP services.
    4 The WEDP targets a speciﬁc group—(growth-oriented female entrepreneurs—deﬁned as female en-
trepreneurs with the ambition and potential to expand their micro-enterprises, innovate, and generate
4


The baseline data collection was conducted in October and November 2014 in six
Ethiopian cities: Addis Ababa, Adama, Bahir Dar, Dire Dawa, Hawassa, and
Mekelle.
  Baseline survey data were collected from a sample of 2,369 female entrepreneurs
who had registered for WEDP at the time of the survey, and an additional survey
module was administered to a subset of 800 female entrepreneurs that included
more questions about sector choice. The sampling for the additional survey mod-
ule was stratiﬁed according to sector of business reported in the WEDP registra-
tion database, and we oversampled entrepreneurs who we thought might operate
in a male-dominated sector to ensure that our sample had a representation of
women-owned businesses in male-dominated sectors. We obtained full baseline
and additional sector data on 790 female entrepreneurs who form the sample for
this paper.
  The WEDP baseline questionnaire contained a set of questions on household
demographic characteristics, socioeconomic status, business sales, proﬁts, costs,
employees, entrepreneurial proﬁle (e.g., age, place of birth, education level), and
questions designed to elicit an entrepreneur’s business knowledge and level of
ﬁnancial literacy. The additional survey module asked detailed questions about
family background, entrepreneurial capability (digit span forward recall, Raven’s
Test, entrepreneurial psychology), role models, and access to social networks and
retrospective questions about motivations for becoming an entrepreneur. The
survey module additionally included some open-ended questions about how the
women became exposed to their sector of operation, including, “Please elaborate
on the story that led you to have a business in this sector.”
  In addition to the quantitative surveys, 90 qualitative interviews were conducted
with WEDP-registered women. The qualitative research was designed to capture
narratives from WEDP entrepreneurs about their attempts to obtain loans from
formal ﬁnancial institutions. For contextual information, all qualitative interviews
started with questions about the history of the woman’s business. The qualitative
sample included 17 women who were operating businesses in male-dominated
sectors, and we use their business histories in this paper to provide illustrations
of the ways in which husbands may facilitate women entering male-dominated
sectors.

                     III.   Which Sectors Are Male Dominated?

  To proceed with the crossovers analysis, we ﬁrst need to categorize which sectors
are male dominated. In the literature, male-dominated sectors are often deﬁned
as those in which men own more than 50 percent of the ﬁrms. In the Uganda
study, Campos and colleagues (2011) deﬁned male-dominated sectors as those in
which men owned more than 75 percent of enterprises.5 In this study, we took

paid employment.
   5 Although male-dominated sectors are often deﬁned as those in which more than 50 percent of the
ﬁrms are owned by men (overrepresentation), in this study, we focused on enterprises in which male
                                          CROSSOVERS                                               5


motivation from the Uganda study, but we drew on a question administered in
the WEDP baseline survey that asked the entrepreneur, “Are most enterprises
in your business sector owned by men or women?” If more than 75 percent of
responses from the entire baseline sample (2,369 female entrepreneurs) were that
men owned most enterprises in their business sector, we deﬁned that sector as
male dominated. We used the entire core baseline sample of 2,369 entrepreneurs
to determine this deﬁnition of a male-dominated sector and deﬁned a woman
who had a business in any of these sectors as a “crossover.” Using this deﬁnition
of a male-dominated sector, we established 164 crossover businesses, with the
remaining 626 businesses in the sample considered noncrossover.




                         Figure 1. Sectors classified as male dominated




  As a robustness check, we examined the sector label names that have been
classiﬁed as male dominated based on this deﬁnition. We believe that the sectors

ownership was more than 75 percent, because the overrepresentation could have been a reﬂection of the
speciﬁc sample, which is often not representative of the entire population of ﬁrms in the country.
6


match the ones that we would classify as male dominated if we were to select based
on their labels alone, with the possible exceptions of software development and
business services. We are conﬁdent that the sectors identiﬁed as male dominated
in this paper are ones that could be generalized as so for Ethiopia in the absence
of a full census of ﬁrms. We use this deﬁnition of crossovers throughout this paper
to explore diﬀerences in outcomes between crossover and noncrossover ﬁrms.

                                           IV.     Results

                                      A.    Firm Performance

  We compare mean diﬀerences between business outcomes for crossover and
noncrossover female businesses to test whether female enterprise owners in male-
dominated sectors have higher returns than female owners in female-concentrated
sectors in Ethiopia.
  We begin by investigating the diﬀerences in proﬁts, revenues, costs, and num-
ber of workers between ﬁrms owned by crossovers and noncrossovers.6 Many of
the women who cross over into male-dominated sectors make higher proﬁts than
women in female-concentrated sectors, as was found in the Ugandan sample of
ﬁrms.
  In Table 1, we present the means of a number of business performance outcomes,
as well as whether the female owner had business partners and the age of the
business for the full sample of enterprises (column 1), separately for crossovers
(column 2) and noncrossovers (column 3), and the diﬀerences in means between
crossovers and noncrossovers (column 4). The asterisks in column 4 signify a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the particular outcome variable between crossover and
noncrossover enterprises. The results in Table 1 show that crossovers perform
better than noncrossovers.
  Crossover ﬁrms have, on average, double the proﬁts of noncrossover ﬁrms. This
proﬁt diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant and was found to be robust with alter-
native deﬁnitions of crossovers. We found no diﬀerence in revenues for crossovers
and non-crossovers when revenues are deﬁned over the last month and for a typical
month. Crossover businesses also have statistically signiﬁcantly higher operating
costs than non-crossover businesses. One possible explanation for the revenue,
cost, and proﬁt results is that a large proportion of the noncrossover businesses
are in the retail sector (50 percent), which is typically a sector associated with
higher revenues but lower proﬁt margins. On average, the crossover ﬁrms are
   6 We look for diﬀerences in average outcomes for crossovers and non-crossovers and estimate for
business i:
(1)                                yi = βCROSSOV ERi + δXi +        i

where yi is the outcome of interest and CROSSOV ER is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the ﬁrm is
a crossover (operates in a male-dominated sector). All regressions cluster standard errors within subcity
groups (there are 20 subcities in the sample). We report regression estimates controlling for the age of
the business and city dummy variables (Xi ).
                                  CROSSOVERS                                    7


                 Table 1—Business Performance and Characteristics




signiﬁcantly larger than noncrossover ﬁrms as measured according to the number
of employees, with crossover ﬁrms employing an average of 4.3 workers, whereas
noncrossover ﬁrms employ an average of 2.
  Crossover ﬁrms are also signiﬁcantly more likely to report operating with busi-
ness partners than noncrossover ﬁrms. A business partner might provide the
women with support to enter and operate in a male-dominated sector, which we
will explore further later in this paper. The average age of crossover and non-
crossover ﬁrms are not statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. When we included a
control for age of business in the average monthly proﬁts regression, we still found
that proﬁts of crossover ﬁrms were signiﬁcantly higher than those of noncrossover
ﬁrms (at the 1 percent level of signiﬁcance), so the explanation for the proﬁt
cannot simply be that older crossover ﬁrms had longer to expand their businesses
to reach a higher level of operating proﬁt.
  Overall, the business performance results in Table 1 show that female-owned en-
terprises in male-dominated sectors perform better than those in female-concentrated
sectors. It is important to evaluate the higher growth potential in the male-
dominated sectors alongside the possible business challenges that women could
face in sectors dominated by men.
8


                                   B.   Challenges

  We compare a set of discrimination outcomes and operational challenges that
women operating in male-dominated sectors face with those in female-concentrated
sectors in Table 2.

                             Table 2—Business Challenges




   Table 2 shows the main challenges that crossovers and noncrossovers face and
that crossovers report more operational challenges and seem to have more dif-
ﬁculty building networks within their sector than noncrossovers. A crossover is
signiﬁcantly more likely to face the challenge that clients prefer to do business with
male business owners and is more likely to face problems with male employees.
Harassment outcomes are similar for crossover and noncrossover entrepreneurs,
with as many as 11 percent of the women reporting being sexually harassed within
the past 12 months and 22 percent experiencing some form of other abuse in the
past 12 months, suggesting that female entrepreneurs in Ethiopia face harass-
ment problems when attempting to operate businesses in general, although this
is not necessarily a feature of the sectors within which crossovers operate. In
terms of networks, crossovers are signiﬁcantly more likely to face diﬃculty in
                                   CROSSOVERS                                   9


building networks in their sector of operation and do not seem to diﬀerentially
beneﬁt from networks of women in the same industry, with crossovers reporting
that they are more likely to feel despised by other women business owners. These
challenges suggest that any policy recommendation encouraging women to enter
male-dominated sectors should be complemented with regulatory policies to help
alleviate the gender-speciﬁc challenges that women may face operating in these
sectors.

               C.   Exploring the factors correlated with crossing over

   We looked for potential diﬀerences between crossovers and noncrossovers in
household demographic characteristics, access to ﬁnance, education and skills,
preference for business, and role models to better understand the factors associ-
ated with women crossing over to male-dominated sectors. We interpreted any
diﬀerences simply as correlations between the outcome of interest and a woman’s
likelihood of being a crossover but cannot always be sure of the direction of
causality.

                       1.   Demographic Characteristics

   The demographic characteristics of women who cross over into male-dominated
sectors may diﬀer from those of women who operate in female-concentrated sec-
tors.
   In Table 3, column 4, we present the mean diﬀerences in household demographic
characteristics between crossovers and noncrossovers. Crossovers were more likely
to be married than noncrossovers. Religious background did not seem to play a
role in the probability of crossing over in the Ethiopian context, although the
majority of households in the sample were Orthodox Christians. The spouse
of a crossover was more likely to work in a business himself than noncrossover
spouses. These outcomes suggest that a woman’s decision or ability to cross
over could be related to the inﬂuence of the productive activities of her husband.
For example, having a husband working in a business himself could facilitate the
woman’s entry into a male-dominated sector. We are cautious in how we interpret
these diﬀerences because we cannot distinguish whether being married increases
a woman’s likelihood of being a crossover or whether the causality is reversed,
although it appears that crossovers are more likely to live in homes where there
is some spousal support than noncrossovers. We investigate further the role of
the husband in helping women cross over and provide some illustrations from the
qualitative data to assess how they could be inﬂuential in a later section of this
paper.

              2.    Financial Access and Capital Requirements

   Fafchamps and colleagues (2014) reported that women who reported lower prof-
its said that they chose the sector because of low capital requirements. We ﬁrst
10


                          Table 3—Household Demographics




analyzed whether the sectors deﬁned as male dominated actually require more
starting capital and then assessed whether the wealth status and ﬁnancial ac-
cess of women who cross over into male-dominated sectors diﬀer from those who
remain in female-concentrated sectors.
  To estimate the capital requirements of male-dominated sectors, we comple-
mented the survey data collected with administrative data collected at the time
of WEDP program registration. We used data on capital at business start and
sector of operation from the registration dataset. In the full WEDP registration
data, as of July 2016, we found approximately 10 percent (1,150 ﬁrms) who are
crossovers out of 12,549 ﬁrms for which we have start-up capital information. We
regressed crossover status on capital required to start the business and found that
ﬁrms in male-dominated sectors, on average, required approximately three times
the amount of capital to start a business than ﬁrms in the female-concentrated sec-
tors. Because the majority of crossover ﬁrms in the WEDP registration database
are in the small transport services and construction sectors, the higher starting
capital requirement is unsurprising.
  Because capital requirements are higher in crossover ﬁrms, we assessed whether
there is a correlation between having better wealth or access to ﬁnance and cross-
ing over into male-dominated sectors.
                                 CROSSOVERS                                   11


                  Table 4—Household Wealth and Financial Access




  Table 4 shows diﬀerences in household wealth and access to ﬁnance between
crossovers and noncrossovers. The survey did not directly collect information on
household income levels, but we created an index of household assets to use as a
proxy for wealth. We found that crossovers were signiﬁcantly more likely to live
in households with greater wealth, obtaining a signiﬁcantly higher mean score on
the household asset index. Crossovers also reported having access to more money
in an emergency and were more likely to report contributing money regularly to
household expenditures. We do not claim a direction of causality because we could
not determine whether the ﬁnancial ﬂexibility increased the woman’s likelihood
of crossing over or being a crossover in the ﬁrst place allowed the woman greater
ﬁnancial freedom through higher proﬁts gained from owning a crossover business.
We found no diﬀerence between crossovers and noncrossovers in the likelihood of
saving money from their business in the bank or having borrowed money from
any source for their business in the past 12 months.

                    3.   Education, Skills and Experience

  We compared a number of educational, entrepreneurial ability, and psychologi-
cal index outcomes of women who crossed over into male-dominated sectors with
those who remained in female-concentrated sectors.
  Table 5 indicates that there are no diﬀerences in the level of education of
crossovers and noncrossovers. Crossovers performed slightly better than non-
crossovers on the forward digit span recall test (a proxy for short-term memory).
We found no diﬀerences for the Raven’s Test score (used to measure abstract
logical thinking). Whether the women previously received training did not diﬀer
between crossovers and noncrossovers, although crossovers scored slightly better
12


than noncrossovers on questions measuring business knowledge.



                      Table 5—Education, Skills and Experience




  We also tested whether crossover status was correlated with the entrepreneurial
propensities of crossovers by assessing diﬀerences in a number of noncognitive
skills (results not presented). Khwaja and Klinger (ongoing) designed a psycho-
metric test that analyzes ethics and character, intelligence, attitudes and beliefs,
and business skills to gauge innate entrepreneurial spirit, and de Mel and col-
leagues (2008) used measures of cognitive ability and personality tests to predict
entrepreneurial ability. We compared some of these characteristics in crossovers
and noncrossovers and found that measures of entrepreneurial propensity did not
appear to be related to the probability of crossing over. Measures of self-eﬃcacy,
striving for achievement, impatience, impulsiveness, passion for work, tenacity,
locus of control, work centrality, and organization are all similar in crossovers
and noncrossovers.
  Overall, the ﬁnding that crossovers and noncrossovers do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly
on various measures of cognitive and noncognitive skills suggests that there is
not a requirement to have greater skills and entrepreneurial ability to enter and
operate in male-dominated sectors.
                                 CROSSOVERS                                    13


            4.   Opportunity versus Necessity Entrepreneurship

   The entrepreneurship literature shows that entrepreneurs who choose to start
a business because they are able to identify a good business opportunity and
act on it (opportunity entrepreneurs) are diﬀerent from those who are forced to
become business owners because of lack of other employment alternatives (neces-
sity entrepreneurs) (Calderon et al. 2015). We asked business owners to explain
the primary reason for starting their business to establish whether their business
was opened as a preferred choice or out of necessity as a means of survival. We
asked business owners to explain their primary reason for starting their business
and coded the responses and grouped them to distinguish whether the reason
was a preferred business choice (preference) or simply a need for money for the
household (necessity).

                         Table 6—Preference for Business




  Table 6 shows that crossovers are signiﬁcantly more likely to report starting
their business as a preference and less likely to do so out of necessity. The main
reason given for preference for starting the business was “saw a market opportu-
nity when starting this business,” suggesting that the decision to enter a male-
dominated sector may be linked to the availability of information and market
entry opportunities. An alternative measure of preference for business (Revealed
preference for business in Table 6) was whether the business owner would accept
a monthly salary of anywhere between 0 and 15,000 Ethiopian birr to move into
wage employment. If they reported that they would take a wage job in this salary
range, they were deﬁned as preferring wage work to being in business; 38 percent
of the sample indicated that they would prefer to move into wage work based on
this deﬁnition. Women who demonstrated a preference for business rather than
14


wage work were more likely to be crossovers. The direction of causality is unclear
for the revealed preference variable because it may be argued that the wage a per-
son would accept to leave their business is correlated with the proﬁts they make
in that business. Crossovers were also signiﬁcantly less likely than noncrossovers
to have started the business themselves, which adds weight to the suggestion that
crossovers had easier market entry opportunity.

                   5.   Role Models and Early Influences

  In the Uganda study, Campos and colleagues (2011) highlight the “importance
of male role models and ‘gate openers,’ and the active engagement of the role
models in engaging a female entrepreneur in the activities of the crossover sector
and in breaking traditional norms.” We assessed whether having a role model
inﬂuenced the sector of operation in Ethiopia.

                             Table 7—Early Influences




   Table 7 shows the early inﬂuences in the women’s lives to assess whether there
is any predictability in crossing over based on childhood inﬂuences; no conclusive
evidence of this was found in Ethiopia. Women were asked explicitly in the
additional survey module whether they had a male or female role model while
growing up. To further analyze potential early inﬂuences, we coded the outcomes
to highlight the occupational choice of the parents and grandparents. The father
having a government wage job was positively correlated with being a crossover,
                                  CROSSOVERS                                     15


and the mother or father having worked on a farm was negatively correlated with
being a crossover. For the other occupational choices of parents and grandparents
(not reported), we found no diﬀerences between crossovers and noncrossovers.

                            6.   Husband’s Influence

   Despite the ﬁnding that a woman’s early inﬂuences in life do not seem to pre-
dict the sector of operation that she enters, one repeated observation was the
mention of the spouse as being an inﬂuential person in the decision to cross over.
Crossovers were more likely to be married, have a business partner, and report
that their husband was a business owner himself than noncrossovers. In Ethiopia,
crossovers are not signiﬁcantly more likely to report that they had a male role
model but were more likely to mention that their husband had the idea to start
the business. A pattern that emerged from the Ethiopian data and that the qual-
itative interviews corroborated is that the husband was often helpful in providing
a market entry opportunity into the crossover sector.
   To further investigate the inﬂuence of the husband, we ﬁrst restricted the analy-
sis to the sample of 511 married women and asked whether the husband was aware
of the existence of the business and, if so, speciﬁcally about the ways that the
husband helped with the business. Fifteen percent (77 women) of married women
said that their husbands did not help with the business in any way, and 6 percent
of the married sample explicitly stated that they inherited the business directly
from their husband. We deﬁne a dummy variable husband helped equal to 1 if the
married owner said her husband had the idea to start the business, contributed
money, gave advice, or helped register the business with the authorities.
   Table 8, in the sample of married women, shows the inﬂuence of the husband
according to crossover status. When women were asked about who had the idea
to open the business, 42 percent of married crossovers said that their husband
did. This is statistically signiﬁcantly higher than for noncrossovers, 18 percent of
whom reported that her husband had the idea to start the business. Correspond-
ingly, crossovers were less likely to report that opening the business was their own
idea than noncrossovers. Although 83 percent of married women overall report
that their husbands helped in the business in some way, crossovers were signiﬁ-
cantly more likely than noncrossovers to have received help. The main channel
of inﬂuence reported in the data was that the husband contributed money.
   These ﬁndings suggest that the husband could have a signiﬁcant role in in-
ﬂuencing the wife’s choice of business sector and facilitating her entry into a
male-dominated sector. Table 1 showed that crossover ﬁrms were more likely to
explicitly report that the type of business was a “business partnership.” With
respect to joint ownership, 43% of crossover ﬁrms named at least one more owner
in the survey, compared with 15% of noncrossover ﬁrms.
   We ﬁnd evidence that, crossover or not, female entrepreneurs in the sample
were actively involved in their businesses. Eighty-four percent of women in the
sample reported that they were involved in the day-to-day production or service
16


                            Table 8—Husband’s Influence




delivery of the business and identiﬁed themselves as the owner and manager of the
business, with primary decision-making power. Crossovers were more likely than
noncrossovers to identify themselves as just administrators in the business, with
26 percent of crossovers reporting that they only administered, compared with 5
percent of noncrossovers, with crossover ﬁrms using employees and husbands for
production and service delivery.
  The business histories from the qualitative research provide some illustrations
of the ways in which husbands may facilitate women entering and operating in
male-dominated sectors. In the crossover businesses, husbands provided various
combinations of the idea for the business, start-up capital or assets, trade-speciﬁc
skills, market connections, and co-management.
  The story from one of the crossover women in Bahir Dar, whose business sup-
plies construction materials, provides a good illustration of a husband playing an
important supporting role. The female entrepreneur had learned about the con-
struction industry while working with her brother in the family business before
she was married. Her husband owned a general mechanics shop and provided
his wife with start-up capital for her business in the form of a loan. Because
he operated a business in a related industry, he was also able to help her with
connections to input suppliers. As the entrepreneur described her experience, the
capital and encouragement from her husband were instrumental to her operating
this business, but she maintained ownership.
  Other entrepreneurs operating crossover businesses described their husbands as
playing a more-integral role in the start-up or operation of the business. A rela-
tively successful WEDP entrepreneur in Hawassa talked about managing multiple
businesses, some jointly with her husband and some on her own. Her business
provided heavy truck rentals, and her husband jointly ﬁnanced it. She explained
that she used proﬁts from one of her retail shops combined with her husband’s
                                               CROSSOVERS                                                       17


proﬁts from one of his businesses to build a house. After the house construction
was complete, they decided jointly to use the house blueprint as collateral for a
loan to purchase the heavy trucks.
  In other crossover ﬁrms, the husband contributed his technical skill, motivating
his wife’s trade choice. An entrepreneur in Addis Ababa opened a leather man-
ufacturing business after receiving machinery from a business that her husband
had operated and then closed. Her husband was a trained leatherworker and pro-
vided skilled labor to the business. In another example, a female entrepreneur in
Bahir Dar was running an injera supply business when she married her husband,
who was a gold and silversmith. They decided to jointly open a jewelry produc-
tion shop for which he provides the skilled labor and she provides management.
Finally, some of the crossover entrepreneurs whose husbands are the most central
to business operations are those who are providing small transport services or
renting vehicles that their husbands drive for or maintain on a regular basis.
  Overall, the extent of the husband’s involvement in the WEDP entrepreneurs’
businesses varied from household to household. Some types of support, such as
start-up capital, would be important to crossover and noncrossover businesses
alike. In other cases, as some of these examples illustrate, it is likely that the
husband’s involvement was integral to the decision to cross over into the male-
dominated trade.

                                          D.   Summary of Factors

   On average, being a crossover business owner earns a woman higher proﬁts and
allows her to have more employees. So, what does it take to cross over into a male-
dominated sector? Table 9 summarizes our ﬁndings of what predicts crossing over
into a male-dominated sector. Explanatory factors are sequentially added to the
regression, grouped into the following themes: cognitive skills (column 1), com-
mitment to business (column 2), connections (column 3), and noncognitive skills
(column 4).7 In each of the following regressions, we include only the explanatory
variables for which we believe there is an unlikely possibility of reverse causality.
Column 5 in Table 9 includes all four themes in one regression to predict the
likelihood of crossing over into a male-dominated sector.
   The evidence from Ethiopia suggests that entering a crossover sector has a lot
to do with circumstance, with starting a business venture because of a market
opportunity and having a husband who is in business himself strongly predicting

      7 We   estimate the predictors of crossing over with a regression of the form for business owner i:
(2)      CROSSOV ERi = αCogSkillsi + βCommitmenti + δConnectionsi + γN onCogSkillsi +                       i

where CROSSOV ERi is the outcome of interest, an indicator variable that equals 1 if the ﬁrm is
a crossover. All regressions cluster standard errors within subcity groups (there are 20 subcities in
the sample). The explanatory variables are grouped into themes: cognitive skills (education, digit
span, Raven’s), commitment to business (preference for business, started because of a market oppor-
tunity, business knowledge), connections (married, spouse owns a business himself, male role model),
and noncognitive skills (self-eﬃcacy, impulsiveness, organization).
18


              Table 9—Summary of factors correlated with crossing over




crossing over into a male-dominated sector.

                  E.   Is crossing over enough? Going beyond means

  The results show that, on average, female-owned ﬁrms in male-dominated sec-
tors have higher proﬁts than female-owned ﬁrms in female-concentrated sectors,
although when we assess the entire distribution of proﬁts, we ﬁnd that ﬁrms to-
ward the top end of the proﬁt distribution largely drive the outperformance of
crossovers at the mean level.
  Figure 2 shows that the diﬀerence in proﬁts is signiﬁcantly positive at the higher
quantiles of proﬁtability, where we ﬁnd a positive signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
crossovers and noncrossovers between the median and 60th percentile of the proﬁt
distribution. In the ﬁgure, we present quantiles 10, 25, 40, 50, 60, 75, and 90. This
result suggests that it might not just be about sector, but also about potential
within sectors, so we provide supplemental analysis, assessing whether there are
any deﬁning characteristics of the top proﬁt earners in our sample of crossover
ﬁrms. We deﬁne top proﬁt earners as ﬁrms in the top 25 percent of the proﬁt
distribution, which is a somewhat arbitrary cut-oﬀ. The 25 percent level was
chosen because it is expected to give us a more-reﬁned picture of what it means
to perform well in business and is representative enough that a few large outlier
ﬁrms do not drive the results.
  Table 10 shows that the factors that predict crossing over into a male-dominated
                                           CROSSOVERS                                                  19




Figure 2. Ordinary Least Squares and Quantile Regression Estimates for Average Monthly
Profit Model

Note: Figure 2 presents a summary of the quantile regression results for the eﬀect of being a crossover on
average monthly proﬁts. We plotted seven distinct quantile regression estimates ranging from 0.1 to 0.9
as the solid line. These point estimates may be interpreted as the correlation between crossover status
and average monthly proﬁt. The dashed line in the ﬁgure shows the ordinary least squares estimate of
the mean eﬀect. The shaded grey area depicts a 95 percent pointwise conﬁdence band for the quantile
regression estimates.




sector also predict success in a male-dominated sector. Table 10 reveals that the
top 25 percent of proﬁt performers among crossover ﬁrms showed more commit-
ment to being an entrepreneur than the remaining 75 percent. (The top crossovers
were more likely to start the business because they had a preference for business
and had a slight advantage in business knowledge.) In addition, the top crossovers
were more likely to report a husband who was in business. In terms of skills, ed-
ucation did not make a diﬀerence in performing well among crossover ﬁrms, but
the top crossovers scored higher on digit span recall and self-eﬃcacy and reported
being less impulsive. The top crossovers were more likely to state explicitly that
they had a male role model while growing up, which mirrors the ﬁnding in Uganda
(Campos et al. 2011).
20


                Table 10—Top Profit Earners among Crossover firms




                                V.   Conclusion

  Providing support to female entrepreneurs to transition into more-proﬁtable,
male-dominated sectors is an important step toward closing the gender gap. In
this paper, we give evidence that women are able to earn higher proﬁts in male-
dominated sectors than women who remain in female-concentrated sectors. We
also observe that women in male-dominated sectors are able to create larger ﬁrms
in terms of number of employees and capital levels.
  When we explored the factors associated with women crossing over and succeed-
ing in these male-dominated sectors, we found that the women did not necessarily
possess greater entrepreneurial ability or education, but they had better support
networks and were more likely to have the assistance of a husband or a male
role model. These support networks helped them enter untraditional business
sectors and circumvent some of the discrimination faced when interacting with
                                           CROSSOVERS                                                 21


male employees and clients in these sectors. Crossovers also demonstrated greater
entrepreneurial commitment and were more likely to be opportunity-driven en-
trepreneurs who entered businesses willingly rather than out of a lack of income-
generating alternatives.
   Programs that encourage entry into male-dominated sectors may be particu-
larly pertinent when thinking about policy eﬀorts to encourage female-owned en-
terprises to grow from microenterprises into small and medium enterprises. The
higher capital requirements of the crossover businesses means that dedicated lend-
ing initiatives for female entrepreneurs are critical to easing ﬁnancial constraints
and helping these businesses grow.
   Female-owned businesses in male-dominated sectors also oﬀer an opportunity
to boost the wage labor supply for women because there is evidence that the
number of female employees is typically higher in ﬁrms with a female than a male
top manager (World Bank Enterprise Note, 2014). The salary for employees in
crossover sectors is approximately double the salary of workers in noncrossover
sectors.8 Programs that train women on the skills needed to operate in male-
dominated sectors could help them compete for these higher-paying, salaried jobs.
   Policy eﬀorts to encourage women to enter nontraditional sectors should estab-
lish which women are committed to operating a business (measured as a preference
for business rather than a necessity for money or inability to ﬁnd wage work) as
a ﬁrst step in targeting the appropriate women for these programs. McKenzie
(2015) provides evidence on the use of business plan competitions as a tool for
identifying high-growth entrepreneurs. Understanding which entrepreneurs are
in pursuit of an opportunity could also help policy makers decipher which en-
terprises should be targeted for assistance in growing and which women should
instead be helped into the wage labor pool.
   With the ﬁnding that women with supportive husbands and male role models
are more likely to perform well in a male-dominated sector, perhaps programs
should encourage men to introduce their wives to their own business networks,
pass on key technical skills, and help them obtain start-up capital. A better
understanding of how husbands support their wives in business may help inform
policy to replicate the support or advice structures that they provide. Facilitating
access to networks and providing training on how to overcome discrimination and
improve negotiation skills could give women a collective voice and ameliorate
some of the challenges women face when operating in a male- dominated sector.
Moving forward, we encourage experimentation to determine the most-eﬀective
approaches.




    8 Average salary per employee was calculated by the total cost paid for salaries for employees in the
last 30days divided by the total number of workers reported.
22


                               REFERENCES

 [1] Amin, Mohammad. 2014. The Critical Importance of Data Collection Eﬀorts
     in Developing Countries: The Case of Gender. World Bank Group Enterprise
     Note No. 31. Washington, DC: World Bank.

 [2] Bardasi, Elena, Shwetlena Sabarwal, and Katherine Terrell. 2011. How Do
     Female Entrepreneurs Perform? Evidence from three Developing Regions.
     Small Business Economics, 37, (4), 417-441

 [3] Calderon, Gabriela, Leonardo Iacovone, and Laura Juarez. 2015. “Oppor-
     tunity vs Necessity: Understanding the Heterogeneity of Female Micro-
     Entrepreneurs”, Mimeo. World Bank.

 [4] Campos, and Gassier. 2015. Gender and Entrepreneurship in Sub-Saharan
     Africa. World Bank White Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.

 [5] Campos, Francisco, Markus Goldstein, Laura McGorman, Ana Maria Munoz
     Boudet, and Obert Pimhidzai. 2011. Breaking the Metal Ceiling: Female
     Entrepreneurs Who Succeed in Male-Dominated Sectors in Uganda. World
     Bank Policy Brief No. 93894. Washington, DC: World Bank.

 [6] De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruﬀ. 2008. “Re-
     turns to Capital in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4): 1329-1372.

 [7] De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruﬀ. 2009. “Are
     Women More Credit Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender and
     Microenterprise Returns”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
     1-32.

 [8] Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn, and Christopher
     Woodruﬀ. 2014. “Microenterprise Growth and the Flypaper Eﬀect: Evi-
     dence from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana.” Journal of Development
     Economics, 106, 211–226.

 [9] ILO (International Labour Organization). 2012. Global Employment Trends
     for Women 2012. Geneva, Switzerland: ILO.

[10] Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, and Bailey Klinger. Forthcoming. Psychometric Analysis
     of Entrepreneurs. Cambridge, MA: Entrepreneurial Finance Lab, Harvard
     University.

[11] Klapper, Leora F., and Simon C. Parker. 2011. Gender and the Business
     Environment for New Firm Creation. World Bank Research Observer, World
     Bank Group, vol. 26(2), pages 237-257
                                CROSSOVERS                                  23


[12] McKenzie, David. 2015. “Identifying and Spurring High-Growth En-
     trepreneurship. Experimental Evidence from a Business Plan Competition”.
     Policy Research working paper; no. WPS 7391; Impact Evaluation series.
     Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
[13] McKenzie, David, and Christopher Woodruﬀ. 2008. “Experimental Evidence
     on Returns to Capital and Access to Finance in Mexico.” The World Bank
     Economic Review 22 (3): 457-482.
[14] Mead, and Liedholm. 1998. “The dynamics of micro and small enterprises in
     developing countries.” World Development 26(1):61–74.
[15] Singh, Reynolds, and Muhammad. 2001. A Gender-Based Performance Anal-
     ysis of Micro and Small Enterprises in Java, Indonesia. Journal of Small
     Business Management 39(2): 174 - 182
[16] World Bank. 2009. “Unleashing the Potential of Ethiopian Women: Trends
     and Options for Economic Empowerment.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
[17] World Bank. 2012. “World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and
     Development.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
[18] World Bank. 2015. Enterprise Survey Ethiopia. Washington, DC: World
     Bank.
