                                                  WPS8039


Policy Research Working Paper                    8039




           On the Frontlines of Scaling-Up
    A Qualitative Analysis of Implementation Challenges
              in a CDD Project in Rural India

                              Shruti Majumdar
                               Vijayendra Rao
                               Paromita Sanyal




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8039


  Abstract
 This paper analyzes four years of qualitative data observ-                         beneficiaries into the project. However, as the project scaled
 ing a large participatory anti-poverty project in India as it                      up, participants were mobilized quickly with a homogenous
 scales up from its first phase (covering 400,000 households)                       and fixed script that lacked the kind of improvisation that
 to its second (covering 800,000 households). Focusing on                           characterized the first phase, and which failed to include
 the frontlines of change—at the village level, the analysis                        diverse stakeholder interests, objectives, and voices. These
 finds that the key difference between implementation in the                        differences significantly reduced the intensity of participa-
 two phases of the project was that facilitators in the first                       tion and its concomitant social impacts. The study finds
 phase deployed a discourse that was carefully “co-produced”                        that the work of facilitators was embedded in a larger shift
 with its beneficiaries. Through careful groundwork and cre-                        in organizational priorities within the project, which in
 ative improvisation, facilitators incorporated the interests                       turn was responding to a shift in the political climate.
 of multiple stakeholders on the ground while bringing




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may
  be contacted at vrao@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                          On the Frontlines of Scaling-Up:
A Qualitative Analysis of Implementation Challenges in a CDD Project
                                     in Rural India




                               Shruti Majumdar, World Bank

                               Vijayendra Rao, World Bank

                          Paromita Sanyal, Florida State University



                               JEL Codes: O2, B54, H83, L31

   Keywords: Implementation, Adaptation, Scaling-Up, Community Development, India




We	are	grateful	for	support	from	3ie,	the	World	Bank’s	Research	Support	budget,	and	by	
contributions	from	(1)	UK	Aid	from	the	UK	government,	(2)	the	Australian	Departments	of	
Foreign	Affairs	and	Trade,	(3)	the	European	Commission	(EC)	through	the	South	Asia	Food	
and	Nutrition	Security	Initiative	(SAFANSI),	which	is	administered	by	the	World	Bank,	and	
(4) the	International	Initiative	for	Impact	Evaluation	(3ie).	We	thank	Arvind	Kumar
Chaudhuri,	Ajit	Ranjan,	Shobha	Shetty	and	Vinay	Vutukuru	for	their	advice	and	support.	We
are	indebted	to	Michael	Walton	and	Michael	Woolcock	for	very	helpful	comments	on	a
previous	draft	of	the	paper.	The	views	expressed	here	do	not	necessarily	reflect	the	UK,	EC
or	Australian	government's	official	policies,	or	the	policies	of	the	World	Bank	and	its	Board
of	Executive	Directors.
INTRODUCTION
       In the past two decades, aid organizations, multilateral institutions and national
governments have increasingly sought to involve local communities in development. The
assumption is that mobilizing poor communities and involving them in all aspects of
project design and implementation leads to more effective and equitable service delivery
(WDR 2004). Billions of dollars have been spent on such community-driven anti-poverty
interventions (Mansuri and Rao 2012). However, the scale and complexity of these
interventions make such programs vulnerable to a number of challenges and considerable
variations in local capacity (Woolcock 2009). Even if projects are able to build small
islands of success in their first phase, they are unable to sustain the intensity and
momentum required to induce participation as they scale-up (Mansuri and Rao 2012).

       But why does the intensity of community participation decrease as projects
expand? One important reason is what we might call ‘implementation failure.’ Expanding
the scope of the project from a few communities to a large number puts pressure on the
project’s implementation unit, which in turn weakens its intended impact. Several papers
and project documents highlight this phenomenon (Mosse 2004, Barron et al. 2011,
Swidler and Watkins 2015). Little scholarly attention, however, has been paid to
identifying the processes and mechanisms that constitute implementation failure during
scale-up, and few studies have compared ‘successful’ and less successful implementation
within the same project.

       In this study, we draw on qualitative data that cover four years (2011–15) in the
life of one of the largest World Bank-assisted, anti-poverty projects in India. We
observed the project at a unique juncture in its trajectory, when it was scaling-up from its
first phase (covering 400,000 households) to its second phase (covering 800,000
households). Impact evaluations found stark differences in outcomes in the first phase
(Datta 2015) and the second phase (Hoffmann et al. 2017). Our own qualitative work
found that the first phase was akin to a mini-social movement that challenged traditional
structures of power and patriarchy (Sanyal et al. 2015). In this paper, we examine the
changes in the project as it expanded into the second phase in order to explain the
difference in outcomes. We use a combination of in-depth interviews, focus groups, and



                                                                                            2
participant observation to trace implementation processes and changes on the ground in
both phases.

        Focusing on the frontlines (i.e., at the village level), we find that the key
difference between implementation in the two phases of the project was that mobilizers in
the first phase deployed a discourse that was carefully “co-produced” (Ostrom 1996) with
its beneficiaries. Through careful groundwork and creative improvisation, mobilizers
incorporated the interests of multiple stakeholders on the ground while bringing
beneficiaries into the project. However, as the project scaled up to other districts,
participants were mobilized quickly with a homogenous and fixed script that lacked the
kind of improvisation that characterized the first phase and which failed to include
diverse stakeholder interests, objectives and voices. These differences significantly
reduced the intensity of participation and its concomitant social impacts. Tracing these
differences back from village level to block, block to district, and then district to capital
city, we found that the work of facilitators was embedded in a larger shift in
organizational priorities within the project, which in turn was responding to the shift in
political climate at that juncture.

        This paper focuses on the key differences in mobilization strategies adopted at the
frontlines by the project that led to the different outcomes between the first and second
phases. To this end, it is divided into five sections. Following this introduction, section
two summarizes key ideas from the literature in a range of disciplines on inducing
participation and introduces the tenets of the main conceptual argument. Section three
outlines the methodology and describes the data employed in the analysis. Section four
delves into the main argument, and section five provides a systematic comparative
analysis of six ways in which mobilizers differed in the first and second phases. The last
section concludes with a few recommendations on scaling up in large-scale community
driven development (or CDD) projects.


LITERATURE REVIEW
        Explaining why projects are unable to sustain high levels of participation requires
a detailed examination of the factors shaping dynamics at the field level; however, the



                                                                                                3
literature on this is fairly thin. Studies that have examined the implementation and
ground-level functioning of development projects point to two broad challenges: elite
capture and misalignment of project goals and staff incentives. We consider these two
potential challenges in depth.
        First, scholars argue that during the initial mobilization stages of any community-
driven project, facilitators tend to reproduce existing structural inequalities. Owing to
their position in the social hierarchy, community facilitators are said to play an influential
role in several aspects of a project. For instance, their preferences can heavily influence
the deliberation process around project selection, and these preferences, as much as the
preferences of prime movers within the community, are reflected in project proposals
(Platteau and Gaspart 2003). This ‘elite capture’ is considered one of the greatest risks of
poor facilitation, and participatory development projects routinely suffer from it.
Arguably, there are multiple junctures in the everyday life of a participatory development
project that are open and susceptible to elite capture. However, facilitators or local elites
are rarely a homogeneous category whose interests are in direct conflict with ‘marginal
groups.’ Typically, there are multiple alliances across both categories that help reproduce
inequalities. And yet, little careful analysis goes into showing how this is done or can be
undone. This paper details how in Phase I villages facilitators engaged head-on with the
messy business of preventing dominant groups (and themselves) from co-opting the
process, and how in Phase II villages the pressure to scale up resulted in less effective
facilitation.

        Secondly, scholars have also suggested that facilitators are often constrained by
the fact that they are working within the structures and hierarchies of donor and
government interventions. For instance, although their job requires intensive and constant
engagement with experimentation, facilitators are given targets (mobilize X communities
in Y days) which might force them to adopt shortcuts to persuade or force people to
participate, using messages for recruitment that are quite different from stated project
goals. Mosse (2005), for example, finds evidence of this in Western India. As the project
he studied scaled up, the fieldworkers, or jankars, working closely with but junior to the
community organization project staff, began to “regard themselves primarily as project
employees (if not private contractors), with the power to assess work and sanction


                                                                                                4
payment” (p. 114). In essence, their incentives rarely aligned in a manner that allowed
them to innovate on the frontlines.

               The consequences of misaligned incentives can be many: To begin with, they can
seriously hamper the quality of the participatory process. In other words, pressures to
scale up quickly can be at odds with the emphasis on intensive participation, and this may
influence the frontline workers’ ability to deliver. Most critically, when constrained by
the structures within which they operate, facilitators can at best induce ‘passive’
participation, which rarely leads to radical, empowered change. In other words,
facilitators working within the parameters of a government or donor-funded project can
only bring change in so far as it aids paradigm maintenance, rather than truly ‘rocking the
boat.’ Mansuri and Rao (2012) refer to the former as “induced” participation. Inducing
participation requires a fundamentally different approach, they argue; one that is long
term, context sensitive and committed to developing a culture of learning-by-doing
among its staff through honest monitoring and evaluation systems.1 It works best within a
“sandwich” of support—an effective state from above and civic action from below (Fox
1993).

               Mosse (2004) offers an example of what may constitute high-quality facilitation.
Writing about a DFID-funded participatory project in western India, he notes the positive
role that “skillful brokers” (i.e., facilitators) can have on project success when they
‘interpret’ the project goals in locally relevant and meaningful ways so that stakeholders
(both project participants and a broader network of supporters) realize their significance
and understand how their own interests are best served by them.

               This paper is closest to Mosse’s work in that it also focuses primarily on the work
of brokers. Our main contribution is to unpack how the policies and principles of
participation find meaning in the daily work of their agents of delivery on the ground
(i.e., the facilitators and mobilizers). We take the analysis a step forward by 1) illustrating

																																																													
1
 The work that project facilitators do must be separated from what the participants can do. The facilitators
may well be constrained to operate within existing paradigms, but they need not circumscribe the spaces
where project participants can or cannot operate. On the contrary, as we illustrate in later sections, the
Phase I facilitators often encourage women to leverage their skills outside JEEViKA in a way that best
furthers their interests, whether that means paradigm maintenance or ‘rocking the boat.’ On the other hand,
Phase II facilitators pay very little attention to what women do beyond the realm of the project.


                                                                                                           5
the differences in practices when projects scale up, 2) demonstrating how incentives
‘misalign,’ and 3) explaining the variation in implementation between two phases of a
project.

METHODOLOGY

               This qualitative analysis draws on a data set of almost 800 in-depth interviews
and focus group discussions conducted from 2011 to 2015 in four villages in Bihar. The
villages form two matched pairs—one each in Madhubani and Muzaffarpur districts—
representing two Phase I villages (where JEEViKA has been operating since 2006) and
two Phase II villages (where JEEViKA has been operating since 2011).

               The Phase I villages were selected randomly from a larger quantitative sample in
Muzaffarpur and Madhubani districts. These two villages were matched with a set of
Phase II villages using propensity score matching methods (Imbens and Rubin 2015) on
the basis of village-level data on literacy, caste composition, landlessness, levels of
outmigration, and availability of infrastructure from the 2001 government census.2 In
order to improve the quality of the match, field investigators visited all the possible Phase
II villages for a week, studying their geography and their economic, social and political
structures to select the two best matches for each Phase I village (see Table 1).

                                                                Table 1: Sampling
                                                                          Madhubani   Muzaffarpur

                               Phase I (project from 2006)                 Ramganj3     Saifpur

                              Phase II (project from 2011)                  Nauganj     Raipur



               The quality of the match was good. All four villages are divided into segregated
and caste-homogenous habitations or tolas, and are very similar in caste composition. In
Madhubani district, Brahmins and Bhumiars are a majority in both villages, and their
tolas are located close to the main resources of the village—the temple, pond and
school—while all the other tolas extend southwards in decreasing order of status in the
																																																													
2
  We used 2001 census data because the treatment villages were from Phase I, which was initiated in 2006
by selecting poorer villages on the basis of that census.
3
  For the purpose of keeping their identities anonymous, we have re-named the villages and informants.



                                                                                                           6
caste hierarchy. In both Phase I and Phase II Madhubani villages, the Scheduled Caste
(SC) or dalit communities are mainly comprised of Musahar, Pasi, Ram, and Dhobi
subcastes, and the Other Backward Caste (OBC) communities are comprised of Yadavs,
Mandals, Badhais, Hajams, and Telis. Inhabitants of both villages primarily depend on
agriculture and related activities for their livelihoods. In Muzaffarpur district, both
villages are also similar to one another with the dominant castes being Chaudhurys and
Rajputs, the OBCs and ‘middle castes’ being Ansaris, Badhais and Paswans, and the SCs
being Pasis, Rams and Sabzifarosh.

       Within each village, first, preliminary studies were conducted using participatory
rural appraisal (PRA) methods to gain an understanding of the local political economy.
Following this, qualitative data were collected in 11 cycles over four years. Every
quarter, a team of four ethnographers (recruited from a local research-based NGO),
accompanied by one of the principal researchers, visited the villages for a cycle of data
collection. In every cycle, the ethnographers would enter a different tola in the village for
a week (there are roughly 10 tolas in each village). The ethnographers spoke to as many
respondents as possible across the village and also returned to the first few respondents in
the concluding cycles of data collection. (These repeat interviews allowed us to see how
respondents reflected on changes experienced as a result of the project [or otherwise]
over the four-year period.) The first set of participants was selected to be representative
of different socioeconomic strata in the village, and subsequent participants were selected
via a mixture of purposive and snowball sampling. We interviewed women who were
members of JEEViKA, their husbands, and key informants in the village such as religious
heads, village council members, moneylenders, subsidized food shop dealers, landlords,
and public officials.

       Qualitative data were collected via a variety of methods: a) unstructured
interviews, b) focus group discussions (FGDs), c) passive observation of group meetings,
and trainings, workshops, mobilization drives at several levels (village, block, district).
Interviews were typically conducted in participants’ homes, and FGDs in public spaces
such as the village temple, school or panchayat office. These interviews in the field
helped us systematically compare the impact of JEEViKA in its two phases, as well as



                                                                                              7
the differences in quality of facilitation in the frontlines.

        In order to help understand this shift in organizational dynamics and management
priorities, we supplemented these data with in-depth interviews with JEEViKA staff. We
interviewed a total of 24 state, district and block project managers, training officers, area
and cluster coordinators, consultants and young professionals all the way from the village
level to the capital city. In all, we conducted interviews and 64 FGDs at multiple levels.
Counting each FGD as one transcript we have 776 transcripts of data (see Table 2).

    Table 2: Structure of Interviews and Focus Group Discussions (Total = 776)
                                     General     Key Informant   Focus    JEEViKA Staff (AC,
                                    Interviews    Interviews     Groups   CC, BPM, PM, SPM)

Madhubani      Phase I (Ramganj)       118             54          17              4

               Phase II (Nauganj)      123             53          16              4

Muzaffarpur     Phase I (Saifpur)      120             53          16              3

                Phase II (Raipur)      116             51          15              3

   Patna                                                                           10

   Total                               477            211          64              24




        The interviews were combined with direct observation of project activities and
focused on understanding how the project and its frontline workers were responsible for
the changes experienced. Interviews took one to two hours. They were conducted in the
local language (Hindi or Maithili), simultaneously recorded, and then transcribed
verbatim into English. All 776 transcripts were then coded in NVivo, after which the data
were analyzed inductively in three steps. First, we tried to understand what kind of
changes men and women talked about within treatment villages and to what extent they
were attributed to JEEViKA exclusively. Six subthemes emerged as salient: physical
mobility, husband’s reaction, dignity of borrowing, information on village-credit
network, perception of government and collectivization (see Sanyal et al. 2015 for more
details). And then, in order to understand the impact of JEEViKA in facilitating these
changes, we clustered the responses into subthemes of which six emerged as salient. The
rest of the paper goes over these six subthemes by outlining the nuts and bolts of


                                                                                                8
facilitation at the community level and then tracing them back to the larger shifts within
the organization.


JEEVIKA IN BIHAR: FROM PHASE I TO PHASE II
	

       Bihar—one of the poorest and largest states in India—was considered
synonymous with rampant corruption and deteriorating public institutions until a decade
ago. From 1990 to 2005, the state was ruled by Lalu Prasad Yadav, whose politics of
caste empowerment tended to marginalize economic development (Witsoe 2011). This
changed dramatically after November 2005 when the Nitish Kumar government came to
power. Within a short period of time, major initiatives were launched to improve
governance, infrastructure, education, health and agriculture (Singh and Stern 2013).

       One of Kumar’s main election mandates was women’s empowerment, and during
his regime several innovative programs were launched, such as the bicycles-to-girls
program. It was in the midst of this that JEEViKA, one of the state government’s largest
anti-poverty interventions primarily targeting women from the poorest families, was
launched. Supported by a World Bank low-interest loan and implemented by an
independent society (Bihar Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society or BRLPS), JEEViKA
began operation in 2007 in six districts. They borrowed heavily from the poverty
alleviation project in Andhra Pradesh (called SERP or the Society for Elimination of
Rural Poverty). Their project design was based on a similar strategy of building a solid
foundation of women’s community institutions in the form of Self-Help Groups (SHGs)
at the village level, federating them, and then rolling out different types of interventions
in order to improve their livelihoods and alleviate poverty.

       Rural Bihar was a particularly challenging context in which to run a woman-
centered poverty alleviation project. Poverty rates and illiteracy were both high, and caste
and gender hierarchies remained oppressive. Moreover, prior attempts at poverty
alleviation through a community-based livelihoods project such as the Swarnajayanti
Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) had largely failed to achieve their objectives,
generating strong mistrust at the village level towards such programs (Thomas 2013).



                                                                                               9
JEEViKA, therefore, decided to mobilize the women at the community level slowly by
first gaining their trust and gathering input from them. In order to build a strong base of
SHGs, JEEViKA brought in trained SHG members from SERP—Andhra women who
had benefitted from the project—to mobilize and motivate the women in Bihar.
Alongside that, they carefully recruited frontline workers (Area Coordinators [ACs] and
Community Coordinators [CCs]), looking for several years of experience in mobilization
and participatory rural appraisal methods. Most of those ultimately recruited were former
community workers from the National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) and the Women Development Corporation (WDC). These frontline workers
were sent on ‘immersion trips’ to Andhra Pradesh to learn from the SERP project. As we
will see in the next section, along with the women from SERP, the Bihari women were
largely successful in gaining trust at the village level, identifying the most vulnerable
women and households and gradually mobilizing them into the project.

       Careful groundwork and implementation resulted in a project that was perceived
to be transparent, legitimate and successful in its first phase. An evaluation conducted in
2011, which used matching methods with retrospective questions on changes observed by
respondents since 2006, found that the project’s impact on women’s empowerment
(measured as physical mobility, participation in decision-making, political participation
and confidence in undertaking collective action) was large (Datta 2015). In fact,
compared to JEEViKA’s success in achieving its targeted economic impacts, its social
impact was substantially deeper. By giving economically and socially disadvantaged
women access to a well-defined network of people and new systems of ‘knowledge,’
JEEViKA broke down long-standing normative restrictions and significantly shifted
gender boundaries in these villages (Sanyal et al 2015).

       However, when the project expanded to its second phase, it had positive but less
impressive results (Datta et all 2015, Hoffmann et al 2017). While the goal of debt
reduction was achieved to some extent in Phase II, the social empowerment effects
(women’s mobility, social capital, participation in the public sphere) were not




                                                                                              10
significantly different from zero.4 In this paper, our aim is to illuminate the why behind
this phase shift, something that remains invisible in the quantitative study. Why did this
distinction between Phase I and II in JEEViKA’s social empowerment effects emerge?



                            Table 3: The Impact of JEEViKA in Phase I and Phase II
                                                                Phase I: PSM Diff-in-Diff5   Phase II: RCT estimates6
Savings and Debt                                                Percentage Change            Percentage Change
Savings                                                         290.63                       60.02
Does household have high cost loans                             -43.39                       -7.48
Total high cost Debt                                            -46.72                       -15.15
Empowerment
Visit Panchayat Meetings                                        534.61                       Not Significant
Visit local shop                                                21.54                        Not Significant
Visit PDS                                                       58.99                        Not Significant
Visit Health Center                                             44.30                        Not Significant
Visit Relative                                                  37.08                        Not Significant
Report having an opinion on politics                            333.33                       Not Significant
Provide input on children’s education 36.65                                                  Not Significant


               Through our in-depth interviews, we found that the pressure to scale up and scale
up quickly led to some of these differences. Owing to its success in the first phase, the
project was able to get a buy-in both at the village and at the state government level.
Having established that the ‘model works’ in its first phase, the emphasis in the second
phase was to spread it far and wide as quickly as possible. Moreover, JEEViKA as one of
the state government’s most high-visibility projects faced great pressure in the year
before elections (i.e., 2012) to expand very rapidly. The Chief Minister insisted that along
with bringing new women into the project, all SHGs from previous projects should also

																																																													
4
  For literature on the impact of microcredit programs and the SHG model on women’s empowerment see
Sanyal 2009, 2014, 2015; Deininger and Liu 2013; Kandpal and Baylis 2013; Desai and Joshi 2014; Casini,
Vandewalle, and Wahhaj 2015; Khanna, Kochar, and Palaniswamy 2015.
5
  See Datta 2015.
6
  See Datta et al 2015.


                                                                                                                   11
be brought under the fold of JEEViKA. In addition, as the project expanded and scaled
up to cover three times as many districts as quickly as possible, the ‘phase shift’ (Mosse
2005) brought with it entirely new organizational dynamics that sped up the mobilization
phase and prioritized quantifiable targets over slow experimentation and adaptation. As
one of the State Project Managers told us, “manpower, money and monitoring—all three
were our key ingredients in the first phase, and we ignored them all in the next phase.”

               These three ingredients succinctly capture all the factors that management
identified as key. In terms of manpower, the facilitators recruited in JEEViKA’s first
phase were an intrinsically motivated group that had a much more dynamic and flexible
approach than the second phase facilitators. In contrast, in the second phase, facilitators
were less carefully handpicked and lacked the experience and drive of the first phase
facilitators. Four thousand new staff were rapidly recruited en masse and degrees were
emphasized over work experience in the field. “…there’s a certain kind of zeal missing in
the next generation. Something was lost in mass recruitment. It became hard to explain to
them that JEEViKA is a path for women, not a destination. ”7 Moreover, the proportion
of field-level staff to the number of SHGs declined in Phase II. In other words, the size of
the workforce could not keep up with the number of SHGs, or for that matter with the
increasing number of interventions that were gradually rolled out on the SHGs. “… [in
the first phase] our only agenda was to mobilize women properly. Now far too many
things are part of the mandate.”8 The sudden increase in the work force also meant that
the new facilitators could not be trained directly by the state, but instead had to rely on a
second tier of trainers at the district level. Also, unlike the first phase, where their training
involved immersion in similar projects in other parts of India, particularly in Andhra
Pradesh, in the second phase there were no such immersions. On the contrary, they had
targets and were expected to begin mobilizing women from their very first trips to the
field, thereby skipping an initial learning phase. These differences in recruitment and
training led to “…a frontline that was a dedicated group of social workers in the first
phase, and a dedicated group of salesmen in the second phase.”9

																																																													
7
  State Project Manager, Patna.
8
  Nalanda AC.
9
  District Training Officer (DTO), Cycle 2, Ramganj.


                                                                                              12
               Phase II project managers regretted having to move forward quickly without first
setting in place robust systems of monitoring and feedback. “…something worked in the
first phase, but we didn’t quite know what. There was not enough time to capture
institutional learning from the first phase to feed into the second phase… [F]or instance,
we had no idea how much time it takes to build a community.”10 Changes were made to
the project design without feedback or a full understanding of what aspects of project
design had helped achieve success in the first place. As we will see, one of the main
changes—introducing the livelihoods component during institution building, rather than
focusing on only building community institutions first as they did before—was a decision
made without sufficient feedback. This led to less participation.

               Besides facilitation, one of the key changes that had an impact on the second
phase was limited resources—money—both for the community and for the project. With
a sudden scale-up, limited resources meant there was little room for the kind of slow
learning that was possible initially. The second phase focused, therefore, on emulating
the first phase and its processes rather than innovating on the frontlines. ACs and CCs
who worked in both phases often complained that during the second phase they felt
encumbered by rules and procedures for mobilization. “Earlier, we would just simply
head out to the field and do our work; now there are formats for everything! (Pehle hum
copy liye aur field mein chal diye, ab sab kuch ka format ban gaya hai.)”11 Limited
resources also meant there was less money to go around for the SHGs, (JEEViKA
decided to cut down on the initial capitalization fund from Rs 50,000 to Rs 15,000) which
interviewees felt was responsible for the reduced intensity of inter-loaning and hence the
reduced intensity of participation in Phase II.

               Moreover, starting in 2012 there was a high turnover in leadership within the
project. (There was one CEO from 2006 to 2012. Over the next four years, there were
six.) With each change of leadership, principles and operational manuals were revised,
and the stability enjoyed during the first phase disappeared. This shift in organizational
dynamics and priorities ultimately trickled down to stark differences in mobilization

																																																													
10
     State Project Manager, Patna.
11
     Nalanda CC.



                                                                                               13
strategies on the frontlines.

        Drawing on the qualitative data that focus on daily practices and interactions in
the field, we show in this paper that JEEViKA in Phase I villages mobilized women into
the project and sustained their participation by deploying a discourse that was
“coproduced” by the facilitators and the women themselves, a discourse that incorporated
multiple interests. We draw on Eleanor Ostrom (1996) for the original formulation of
“coproduced” as a process by which “…citizens can play an active role in producing
public goods and services of consequence to them” (1073). However, some form of
‘active role by citizens’ or partnership is now so common in service delivery that it
renders such a definition trivial. Joshi and Moore (2004) further redefine “coproduction”
or “institutionalized coproduction,” as the “provision of public services (broadly defined,
to include regulation) through regular, long-term relationships between state agencies and
organized groups of citizens, where both make substantial resource contributions” (1).

        Coproducing discourse is in many ways similar to coproducing public services.
Coproduction of service delivery involves blurring the conventional distinctions between
outsider authority and insider knowledge, between public and private. Similarly,
coproducing discourse involves purposefully obfuscating boundaries between the formal
project script coming from the project HQ and the everyday circumstances of the women
in the villages.

        In Phase I, facilitators brought a script including flowcharts, images, training
modules etc., but on the frontlines, they constantly changed that script by gathering input
from women. They reminded mobilizers as well as beneficiaries to rely on their own
experience of poverty in order to help other women. The facilitators may or may not have
had an in-depth understanding of the context of every village, but they did understand
that no village or community or ‘elite group’ or ‘marginalized group’ was homogenous
and that there were multiple interests cutting across each category. Creating a common
subjective understanding of the complexity of the problem and being sensitive to the
diversity of interests was key to effective implementation. As one facilitator pointed out,
“…we are not here to preach (hum pravachan dene nahi aate). This is an opportunity for
us to ask every woman her own individual story of why she is poverty stricken. Some


                                                                                            14
say, ‘because my husband is sick or disabled,’ some say ‘because we routinely suffer
abuse in the hands of our employers,’ some say ‘it is because of an outstanding loan,’
some say ‘it’s just how things have been for generations.’ We must hear each story. The
women themselves must hear each story.”12 In other words, the SHG and VO meetings or
the training meetings were treated as a space to contest and forge, rather than to impose,
meanings of and solutions to poverty. The ultimate aim was to weave divergent narratives
into the project’s discourse and together agree on a set of principles and negotiated
language. This then provided a framework into which the future actions of both the
facilitators and the women would fit.

               This kind of coproduction of discourse was key to the success of the project in its
first phase, but, in Ostrom’s (1996) terms, the “citizen contribution” of women to this
discursive coproduction was hard to routinize. As a result, by the time the project got to
its second phase and was under pressure to expand rapidly, facilitators trained with a
homogenous and scripted discourse of poverty. On their part, the women, rather than
arriving at the solution themselves, were told that the project itself was the solution. Far
from being coproduced, in Phase II discourse was imposed from above, was closer to the
script and lacked the kind of improvisation characteristic of Phase I. In effect,
mobilization was rapid, but women found themselves alienated from the purpose of the
project, and the project became an entity outside of them rather than synonymous with
them. In the following sections, we discuss six different aspects of this argument, and
how both implementation success and failure manifested in the field.


ANALYSIS: COPRODUCTION IN PRACTICE
               This section outlines the three stages of community facilitation in JEEViKA—
village entry, mobilization and everyday life—and provides a systematic overview of
how facilitators operated in these stages in Phase I versus Phase II.

                    Table 4: Principles of Facilitation in Phase I and Phase II villages

       Stage                            Phase I                  Phase II


																																																													
12
     DTO, Cycle 1, Saifpur.


                                                                                                15
1.     Village Entry                    Doing a thorough power                     Getting a ‘buy-in’ for the project
                                        analysis/informal information gathering


2.                                      Social mapping as a means of taking site   Social mapping as a means of arriving
                                        of knowledge production to the village     at a number of target households

3.     Meetings                         Focusing on collective capabilities        Focusing on individual material
                                                                                   outcomes

4.                                      Turning first movers into eyes and ears    Turning first movers into agents of the
                                        of the community                           facilitators

5.     Everyday life of                 Ritualization                              Rote recitation
       Project
6.                                      Engaging head-on with elite capture        Keeping local politics at bay




I. Village Entry
               The first step of a project at the community level is called ‘village entry.’ In this
step, it is project protocol to first get approval from key stakeholders in the village and
then conduct a social mapping to find the poorest households. Following this, facilitators
proceed with gathering women from those identified households into the project’s fold
until they reach ‘saturation’ (i.e., when the project has mobilized 80 percent of its target
audience).

         a) Doing a thorough power analysis versus getting ‘buy-in’
               In Phase I, village entry began with a series of informal conversations with the
key stakeholders in the village—local politicians, traditional leaders, moneylenders,
school teachers, landowners and other influential men and women—as a means of
information gathering. In these initial stages, ACs and CCs collected a large amount of
information on caste dynamics, land-use patterns, informal moneylending practices and
patriarchy, and tried to locate women’s interests and positions in each village. “…it was
our main task to figure out how to work within these setups so as to be as least disruptive
as possible. We had to avoid being seen as threatening, but we also had to get them to
reveal reliable information about the village.”13 In these initial stages, facilitators
repeatedly emphasized that there was no substitute for time. For instance, one of the
district level community trainers, formerly an AC in the first phase, explained to us how

																																																													
13
     BPM and former AC, Cycle 4, Saifpur.


                                                                                                                         16
it took him between one to three months to get the information he needed to form SHGs.
“I remember going to a village once where for several months no one would speak to us.
The environment was extremely tense, but no one would tell us what was going on. It
took six months of probing in and around the village to figure it out: We had happened to
enter the village at a moment when a twenty-five-year-long feud between two dominant
caste groups over a piece of land had reach its culmination and both groups were waging
war against each other. The entire village was split up on the issue. We immediately took
note of this and knew that village-wide meetings were impossible, as were inter-caste
SHGs, at least in the initial stages. We had to find an alternative strategy.”14

               There were insights gained in this stage that were specific to each village, but
some that were universal as well. All ACs and CCs, for instance, mentioned three things
that they learned early on. First, they understood that they were about to operate in a
context with an extremely high density of failed projects that had microcredit components
similar to JEEViKA. As a result, there was a strong mistrust towards such projects and
villagers were skeptical of putting their savings into them. Second, the facilitators learned
that a long history of identity politics had created a culture of ‘caste-based handouts’:
People expected to be treated as beneficiaries, and expected more if they belonged to
particular castes. Finally, they learned that the villagers’ closest point of reference for
outsiders coming to collect demographic data was the census officers who were derided
for gathering all their information by talking only to key stakeholders and only stopping
by the first few houses in the village. As we will see later, the project’s messaging during
the initial mobilization stages rested heavily on disassociating itself from these three
things.

               Once information was gathered, an ongoing conversation between facilitators and
key stakeholders began in Phase I villages, in particular between local leaders from
traditional caste panchayats and elected Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI) members
(Mukhiya, Sarpanch, Panch, and ward members.)15 One of the DTOs gives an example,
“…In a few villages in Purnea district, for instance, we were not offered a room to stay in

																																																													
14
 DTO and former AC, Cycle 3, Ramganj.
15
 Mukhiya is the elected leader/president and the Sarpanch is the judicial head of the Gram Panchayat. The
ward members and Panchs report to the Mukhiya and Sarpanch respectively.


                                                                                                      17
by the PRI members, and spent several nights sleeping on the streets or in the village
temple. When they didn’t want to listen to us, we started a sanitation drive. We began by
going around the village and picking up trash, cleaning the public spaces, etc. We did
whatever it took in those initial days to gain their trust and hung around till they finally
listened to us.”16 Once the village heads were prepared to cooperate, a series of
negotiations and network-building exercises began. “… their first question is always,
‘What do we get out of this?’ The hardest part is to get the Mukhiya and his men to think
beyond the ‘what are we going to gain’ (humko kya fayeda) mentality, and focus their
attention squarely on the fact that no one has anything to gain; we are here to help, not
give subsidies. (hum sahayta dete hain, chhoot nahi) We give nothing, and ask for
nothing in return…”17

               Phase I facilitators claim to have treated these negotiations with utmost care. They
could not be seen by the rest of the village as colluding with or privileging certain social
groups over others, but they could not be seen as antagonizing them either. “…[G]etting
their blessings, and then respectfully bypassing them to reach the community was our
hardest challenge. And it helps to be seen as social workers in this regard, and not as
political brokers.”18 19

               In Phase I, getting support was seen as crucial not only in the initial stages but
was also constantly nurtured throughout the life cycle of the project. To give an example,
two years into the project, once women started stepping out of their homes and going to
banks, police stations, and other public spaces in order to get their JEEViKA-related
work done, the village Maulana (or Muslim religious head) began to interfere. He
accused the project for having pushed women away from their domestic duties, and he
also complained about the fact that women were now earning interest money.



																																																													
16
   State Project Manager (SPM) and former BPM, Cycle 1.
17
   CC, Cycle 5, Saifpur.
18
   DTO and former AC, Cycle 2, Ramganj.
19
   One should not confuse this strategy for ‘depoliticization’ in the Ferguson (1998) sense of the word. On
the contrary, positioning oneself as apolitical requires thinking politically. It requires understanding local
politics, and recognizing that a project of the magnitude of JEEViKA can generate political incentives,
which need not be quashed or ignored, but need to be harnessed to keep the project alive.



                                                                                                             18
               “…as the project moved along, we started facing some difficulties, particularly in
               Muslim communities. The women were concerned about having to pay interest on
               their own savings. I had to speak to the Maulana about this because that’s where
               the husbands said the pressure was coming from. When I met Maulana ji, he
               echoed the women’s concerns: ‘Taking interest is a sin, (biyaaz lena haraam
               hai),’ he said. I listened patiently, but I asked him, ‘Don’t rich people in your
               community go to the bank to save their money? Don’t they get paid interest on
               that money? Then what is the harm? Moreover, no one is really earning interest in
               the traditional sense. Women are simply adding interest into their own savings!’ It
               took a long time but I convinced him, and then the husbands, then the women.
               Thankfully now he lets the women participate.”20

               In Phase II of JEEViKA, on the other hand, this entire process of gathering
information informally was relatively short, and village entry was rarely associated with
gaining an understanding of the village. For instance, in Nauganj, the Phase II village of
the Madhubani district, the facilitators entered the village and stayed in the homes of the
landlords and ward members. The landlord’s nephew volunteered to assist the ACs and
CCs in mobilizing women, and lower caste women from neighboring tolas quickly
agreed to enter the project as well. But, as one of their husbands revealed to us, “We
accept his authority over us; it’s hard to say no! (hum unka dhaak maante hain, hum na
nahi keh sakte)” Eventually this same nephew was made a Community Mobilizer (or
CM), and his groups were run in such a way that his preferences had a heavy influence on
women’s loan decisions. During this crucial initial stage, facilitators sought ‘buy-in’ from
stakeholders without doing a power analysis; in effect, mobilization in Phase II may have
been quicker than in Phase I, but it failed to capitalize on these initial moments to build a
stronger foundation for the SHGs and foster trust. The AC in this village saw his primary
responsibility to be the numeric target that was set for village saturation. “It is difficult
under the current circumstances to meet these targets. There is a lot of resistance based on




																																																													
20
     AC, Cycle 3, Saifpur.


                                                                                                   19
their experience with previous projects of this nature, but we have to mobilize them
quickly. We have to meet our goal of a certain number of SHGs.”21

         b) Social mapping to facilitate local knowledge versus achieving numeric
                targets
               Once key stakeholders in the village agreed on the merits of the project, the next
step was to identify households to include in the project. This method of identifying the
‘poorest of the poor’ (or POP in JEEViKA’s parlance) involved using census data and
hamlet-level information, but also brought in the community to identify the most
vulnerable households in a way that established greater ownership and legitimacy over
the process.

               Facilitators in both Phase I and II demonstrated a comparable understanding of
this process. What set them apart is that in Phase I villages, ACs and CCs shared a
healthy skepticism towards the process. They knew that it was susceptible to being
captured by a few groups, that some voices were louder than others when identifying
target households, and most importantly that this list would have to be revised with time
as they gained a greater understanding of the community, and the community understood
more about the project. In a nutshell, decisions about the community were made and
changed in the field, with facilitators corrected by participants and vice versa, thereby
establishing a model of engagement that was neither entirely bottom up nor top down but
which evolved collaboratively on the frontlines.

               In Phase II villages, facilitators collected data entirely as a means of arriving at a
number of target households. The more qualitative data collected in this stage were not
utilized during the process of mobilizing women. Moreover, while the ACs and CCs did
the mapping exercise and gathered the necessary data, mobilization was ultimately left to
CRPs from another village to whom the numeric target was transferred. However, the
qualitative data and the informal knowledge on village dynamics collected in the initial
stages were not transferred to these CRPs. As a result, often the households identified by
the ACs and CCs in the initial round as the poorest were not the same the households
finally mobilized into the project by the CRPs.
																																																													
21
     Former AC, Nauganj.


                                                                                                    20
II. Mobilization

               Succumbing to the pressure of numeric targets set by the ACs and CCs during the
initial stages of Phase II forced the mobilizers to lead an enrollment drive fraught with
shortcuts. This stage in JEEViKA, called the ‘mobilization drive,’ is a crucial moment in
the project’s life because the messages communicated in these initial stages had a
significant impact not just on women’s decisions to enroll but also to continue to
participate.

       a) Focusing on individual material outcomes versus collective capabilities
               In both Phase I and Phase II, messaging was communicated, and mobilization was
executed, through flipcharts. In Phase I villages, women were encouraged to engage with
the information in the flipcharts, rather than memorizing them verbatim. Most flipcharts
had images from folk tales that demonstrated virtues of solidarity, self-help, creativity
and resourcefulness, especially in the face of adversity.

       “…we thought of these as tools that we hoped women would use as and when
       necessary, whether in the livelihoods space or within their households or in any other
       space. As we shared them, we also emboldened women from different backgrounds to
       share their own stories of deprivation. A poor Dalit woman has a story, but so does a
       poor Brahmin woman. This kind of dialogue between the tools and different
       experiences of poverty is necessary.”22

               In short, the Phase I facilitators allowed for JEEViKA to be a platform where
understandings of poverty and its solutions could be contested and forged in a
participatory manner. This was in contrast with Phase II, where a dialogue was missing.
Instead, facilitators went straight to discussing the merits of JEEViKA and the ways in
which it could help women save money, start livelihoods and decrease their debt burden.
The women existed as an audience for messages that only the facilitators fully
understood. This difference in mobilization resulted in marked differences in women’s
expectations: Women in Phase II repeatedly stated that they had not seen results yet.

																																																													
22
     DTO, former AC, Saifpur.


                                                                                               21
They were frustrated that their short-term goals were not met and threatened to drop out
of the project. Moreover, the moment of mobilization into the project barely constituted a
memory for them: When asked to recollect it, they would struggle to remember and
would provide lackluster responses. In Phase I villages, on the other hand, women
recollected this as a rite of passage, narrating names of ACs, dates of joining, events, etc.,
with great enthusiasm. “I felt so much kinship with this project when Amit bhaiyya first
came and explained it, that I suggested the name JEEViKA. We were all enthused about
it. The idea that as women we could come together to do anything was
transformational!”23

               In Phase II villages, women were told that a primary reason to join was “lower
interest rates” (i.e., loans/credit at less expense than other informal sources) or “high
paying jobs” or “toilets” (i.e., grants for building household toilets), whereas in Phase I
villages, women were told that the reason to join would be “coming together to help each
other” in order to solve their individual problems, such as reduced debt burden and
eradicating poverty. In other words, while the mobilization process in Phase II focused
directly on outcomes, mobilization in Phase I focused on developing collective
capabilities and self-reliance.

       b) Turning first movers into eyes and ears of the community versus using them
               as agents of the facilitators
               When JEEViKA first enters a village, it attracts a set of first movers, (i.e.,
intrinsically motivated women who self-select into the project early and devote time to
setting it up). In Phase I, facilitators got much of their work done through these first
movers, making them their primary conduits into the community. Many of these women
were taken to Andhra Pradesh for an immersion trip which left an indelible mark on
them; They came back with a mission to re-create in their own villages what they had
seen. An oft-repeated sentiment was “… our didis in Andhra Pradesh are so empowered,
that they not only have access to banks now, but can also run all functions of a bank by
themselves!”24 Second, the ACs and CCs encouraged these first movers to share their
experiences in their own neighborhoods in order to mobilize more women into joining
																																																													
23
     Cycle 4, Ramganj.
24
     Cycle 6 and 7, Several interviews and FGDs, Ramganj and Saifpur.


                                                                                                22
the project. In fact, for most women in JEEViKA, their first point of contact was not the
mobilization event but instead their relationship with first movers in the village whom
they trusted. When asked why they had chosen to join in the first place, it was not
uncommon to hear them say “…because Shakuntala didi (a first mover) asked me to.”
The project relied on the first movers’ knowledge of the community and their networks to
mobilize women. They were truly seen as brokers whose work was to represent the
community’s interests and in the process also construct and cement these interests.
Because these brokers came from different backgrounds, the ACs and CCs learned to
move away from a unitary representation of the ‘poor.’ They were able to understand and
convey to potential participants that there were often multiple, even contradictory,
interests within the category of ‘rural poor women.’ Finally, after the facilitators left the
village, the first movers were the women who shouldered the responsibilities of the
facilitators in their different neighborhoods. They tackled women’s questions and
concerns and helped sustain participation in the project. Many of these first movers also
went on to become mobilizers and leaders in their SHGs.

               The role of the first movers becomes even clearer when seen in comparison to
Phase II villages where their centrality is missing to some degree. In Nauganj for
instance, the facilitators’ and CRPs’ first stop was the home of Poonam Devi, a former
mobilizer with SGSY, an SHG-based program similar to JEEViKA that had a long
history of fraud in the village. Poonam Devi herself was seen to be involved in this fraud,
but the ACs had little knowledge of this. As our researcher notes “…Poonam Devi has
been a part of the loss-making SGSY group as noted by those who were reluctant to join.
Her presence made the community suspicious about the credibility of [JEEViKA]
CRPs.”25 Far from being seen as trustworthy, Poonam Devi was eventually seen by the
beneficiaries as project staff, representing the project’s rather than the community’s
interests. There was also a lot of misinformation right after the facilitators and CRPs
completed the mobilization drive and left the village. For example, men and women
inquired about whether this was a government initiative, and whether they would have to
travel beyond the village as part of JEEViKA membership, but there was no one to give
them the information.
																																																													
25
     Village entry notes, Nauganj, Baseline.


                                                                                              23
III. Everyday life of the project
               Once the process of mobilization is over, the community requires a period of
focused support to form SHGs and to ensure their regular functioning. Through direct
observation of meetings, trainings and daily interactions between the project and the
beneficiaries, this section details the role played by the facilitators and mobilizers during
the everyday life of the project.

       a) Ritualization versus rote recitation
               One of the main contributions of the facilitators was to ritualize the process of a
regular schedule of SHG meetings. As we outline in another paper (see Sanyal et al.
2015), SHG meetings in Phase I villages were very disciplined, with the time and place
of meetings treated with great sanctity. When groups were being formed, JEEViKA
facilitators and eventually the CMs taught SHG members the significance of sitting
together in a circle, and the implications of the formation for inclusion and voice. They
also taught them how to introduce themselves in every meeting with their own name
(rather than their husband’s name, or their caste affiliation), and finally how to sing the
JEEViKA song and prayer together. JEEViKA shorthand for these rituals is called the
Panchasutra,26 and one of the roles of the CM is to ensure that women follow these rituals
and the principles embodied by them, because it eventually becomes a key criterion for
establishing loan eligibility for an SHG.

               The Panchasutra is a seemingly prosaic practice, but the orchestration of this
social performance of introductions, songs, prayers and slogans, and their deliberate
repetition every week for seven years has had a profound impact on the construction of a
collective identity. It has given women a new group-based identity that is separate from
their caste, marriage and kinship identities. This identity is transformative in its own right
and can be mobilized at appropriate moments to make performative claims (Appadurai
2014: 18). For instance, the JEEViKA song, ‘Badhte Kadam,’27 gives women confidence,
and they report enjoying the act of coming together and singing, but it is also leveraged
appropriately in other contexts. Manju didi, a veteran CRP in Ramganj talks about how

																																																													
26
   Panchasutra literally means five principles, and JEEViKA’s panchasutra includes regular meetings,
regular savings, regular inter-loaning, timely repayment and keeping the book of accounts up-to-date.
27
   “Marching Forward.”


                                                                                                        24
the song guides her and gives her inspiration in particularly difficult situations. When she
goes on her mobilization drives, she often finds herself losing motivation to keep going,
particularly in the face of verbal abuse from men of dominant castes who question her
team’s right to be in a public space as lower caste illiterate women. At these junctures,
she reminds herself and her fellow mobilizers of the JEEViKA song. They sing it
together as a reminder of the essence of what they do, to keep pushing themselves to
work on behalf of JEEViKA.28

               This kind of emphasis on regimented performances is brought about by constantly
repeating the messages and songs of JEEViKA during trainings. In one of the trainings
we observed in Muzaffarpur, a JEEViKA trainer was providing a refresher course to
CRPs in preparation for an upcoming mobilization drive into a neighboring district. The
central purpose of this training was building and bolstering the collective identity of the
women as ‘gareeb didi’ (poor sisters, [i.e., women bound with the common thread of
poverty]), and exhorting them to take pride in that identity. This was evidenced by the
two most repeated sentiments at the training, “We have only one religion alone, and that
is poverty,” and “We’re poor, we’re defenseless, so what?” The women were asked to
denounce the idea that women are domesticated and meant only for serving other
members of their family. These women freely exchanged and repeated ideas about the
ways in which norms of femininity are shaped early: From the womb to the toys girls and
boys play with, from schooling to the workspace, from the parent’s household to the in-
law’s, women in every stage of their lives are reminded and constrained by gender norms.
These ideas were enthusiastically received by the CRP didis who often joked, interjected,
and added on examples from their own experience to underscore a point. Every woman
was encouraged to narrate and bring her own life story to the forefront of the
mobilization process. Those who were hesitant were encouraged by the other women in
the group and by the facilitators. The facilitators often dedicated time during and after the
workshop to work on specific details such as how the women occupied space in a room,
their body language, eye contact, and other techniques that could help boost their
confidence and make them better orators and mobilizers. These are all themes that are
constantly repeated, revised and consolidated by JEEViKA throughout its life cycle.
																																																													
28
     Butler (2015) refers to the relationship between forms of linguistic and bodily performativity.


                                                                                                       25
       In Phase II villages, on the other hand, a failure to repeat these themes meant that
Panchasutra, the songs and practices involved with coming together, were never
ritualized in the same way. On the contrary, women struggled to remember the
introductions, often thought of the song as a monotonous necessity repeated by rote
learning and felt the rituals were burdensome or distracting to their core business of
saving and borrowing. Because they considered the meeting space to be concerned
exclusively with financial transactions alone—devoid of rituals—absenteeism in
meetings was high, and many women sent money through other family members and
neighbors who attended the meeting, rather than taking the effort to come themselves. As
a result, JEEViKA, in its second phase, was less successful in creating a sense of
community among women and thus relatively ineffective in building the foundations for
what was to come.

   b) Engaging head-on with elite capture versus keeping local politics at bay
       Livelihoods projects are subject to the same risks of local elite capture and
clientelistic politics as other community-based projects. Ensuring that decision-making
around loan disbursements are inclusive and democratic requires a significant amount of
handholding. In Phase II villages, a perverse mechanism was triggered because
facilitators asked SHG members to ‘elect’ their leaders (i.e., the president, secretary and
treasurer) without any supervision. ‘Elections’ took the form of all the SHG members
coming together and nominating a few people for the three leadership positions by
acclamation. Although such an election might have had the appearance of being
democratic, in the absence of proper facilitation well-connected and upper caste women
took control over the election process and pushed their own candidacies. In effect, such a
method established a power relationship that was open to abuse throughout the lifecycle
of the project. The most deleterious consequence of this was that SHG leaders could
easily manipulate the rest of the group members to give preferential treatment to some
over others. Along with this they became adept at representing their own interests as
community concerns. In one of the groups, for instance, a few upper caste (Chaudhury)
women were found to borrow repeatedly from the group at 2 percent interest rate and
lend to non-joiners in the village at 5 percent. For a while, the remaining women, who
were from the Halwai community, were unaware this was going on. On finally


                                                                                          26
uncovering the malpractice they complained to the CM, who refused to take action
because she was a Chaudhury herself. The consequences of this are far-reaching,
particularly because it lowered trust and increased apathy towards the group and its
processes over time.

        In Phase I villages, however, ACs and CCs carefully engaged in community
politics, not just in the initial stages of elections, but throughout the project cycle. First,
the election of the SHG leaders was handled carefully, democratic selection through
deliberation rather than a ‘show of hands’ election was emphasized, and members were
encouraged to elect individuals with motivation and competence rather than influence or
wealth to leadership positions. Moreover, the work of those selected was constantly
supervised and every two years the leadership positions were rotated among the members
to avoid entrenchment of power. As the project moved along and SHGs were federated at
the village level, facilitators incentivized leaders to ratify whether or not the most
marginalized women had been included in the project’s fold and had access to loans.
Finally, and most importantly, the separation of powers between the CM, the group and
its leaders was made clear by the facilitators: During meetings, they painstakingly
repeated that leaders are the SHG’s representatives and the group has the power to assess
the work of and sanction the payment of their CMs, who on the other hand, are there to
take notes and do the bookkeeping; it is up to neither of the two—group leaders or
CMs—to arbitrate who gets a loan. The role of the members is to monitor the actions of
their leaders, compel them to defend their promises, and spawn new leaders in the
process.




CONCLUSION
        In summary, in Phase I villages, facilitators took immense pride in being seen as
‘fieldworkers’ and, occasionally, in putting in extra hours for mobilization, while Phase II
facilitators lacked intrinsic motivation and constantly felt stretched for time. In Phase I,
facilitators positioned themselves as catalysts for a change process already on its way,
rather than as initiators of change or determinants of the outcome. The refrain of



                                                                                                  27
“…neither have we come to take anything, nor to give anything” (na hum kuch lene aaye
hain, na dene hain) drove home this message most clearly.

               This resulted in stark differences in the impacts on women. First, women saw
themselves as participants who were not just contributing ideas and relying on
implementers to deliver but were also personally responsible for the success or failure of
their SHG. In effect, they too went beyond their stipulated responsibilities to make the
project a way of life. This was in direct contrast to Phase II villages, where women saw
the facilitators as employees of a project doing their job, not as social workers constantly
available to them for consultation. It gave rise to what Mosse (2005) called an ‘hourglass’
structure of reporting, “…[E]lites are the only ones who communicate with outsiders,
read project documents, keep accounts and records, and write proposals” (p. 23). For the
rest of the beneficiaries in JEEViKA Phase II villages, the project turned into tedious
work, rather than a way of life.

               Second, in Phase I villages, facilitators succeeded in creating a safe and enabling
environment for women themselves to take action in the public and private space.
Women reported that “…JEEViKA built our leadership skills and instilled confidence in
us to tackle our community and our household. No school, no formal education can teach
you that.”29 In meetings women were able to openly discuss gender norms that
constrained participation for different communities and encouraged each other to come
up with solutions themselves. For instance, in livelihoods activities, while most
JEEViKA women invested in traditional handicrafts, others chose to ‘rock the boat’ by
investing in what is considered as men’s work (PDS procurement, running a ‘kirana’ or
small dry goods store) or taking up work traditionally done by women of castes much
higher than their own (e.g., Madhubani painting, which is traditionally done by Brahmins
and Kayasthas, was adopted by Ram and Paswan women). Similarly, in the public
sphere, while some JEEViKA women went on to run for Mukhiya’s office and fight the
incumbent, some chose to ally with the incumbent, while some chose the path of social
work completely outside of politics. In short, Phase I facilitators were able to expand
opportunity structures for women, building a woman-centered mini-social movement that

																																																													
29
     Ramganj, Cycle 7, Veena Paswan, CLF Treasurer, Paswan tola.


                                                                                                 28
was leveraged beyond the project boundaries. This building of capabilities and creating a
wider institutional environment that propelled women forward to break the shackles of
normative injunctions outside the project was lacking in Phase II.

               However, as the project moved into its third phase, the shortcomings of the
second phase began to be understood. Many of lessons from Phase II were incorporated
and changes were made to procedures. First, the number of CCs to the size of Panchayats
in the field was balanced in order to ensure that the coverage was even across the state.
(Prior to this the number of CCs assigned to each Panchayat was fixed regardless of its
size.) Second, emphasis was placed on updating the Management Information System
(MIS) so that monitoring and any subsequent action necessary could occur in a more
timely manner. Third, the project began a pilot program whereby the data generated from
the MIS was taken to the field, so that in the case of delays, SHGs could take action
themselves. Fourth, at the state level, the organogram changed in order to increase the
number of State Project Managers (SPMs), Project Managers (PMs) and regional
managers needed for some key thematics, especially those important for institution- and
community-building. And finally, frontline workers began to be graded not only on the
numerical targets achieved in the field in terms of number of SHGs mobilized, but also
on their theoretical and practical knowledge base, thereby attempting to incentivize
quality as well quantity of mobilization.

               To conclude, this paper summarizes the dynamics of community-level facilitation
in a participatory development project in rural Bihar. The paper draws on qualitative
analysis spanning four years. By contrasting the project in two different phases—in its
introductory phase and then in its expansionary phase—we find that the difference in
outcomes between the phases can be explained in part by the fact that scaling-up brought
new organizational dynamics that prioritized targets over processes and quick expansion
over improvisation.30 By identifying six different stages and processes of facilitation and
showing how each of these come under strain as the project scales up, we explain

																																																													
30
  Also see Andrews et al. (2012) who propose a similar approach, PDIA (Problem-Driven Iterative
Adaptation). They advocate for the creation of an authorizing environment for decision-making that
encourages experimentation embedded in tight feedback loops.



                                                                                                     29
implementation successes and failures within the same project.

       The arguments presented in this paper have implications for both policy and
research. First, if induced participatory development projects desire to mimic organic
social movements, a shift is required in project culture and incentive systems. Regardless
of the phase of the project, facilitators must be incentivized to learn, adapt and improvise
on the frontlines by gathering input from those who are beneficiaries of the project.
Second, our analysis suggests that scholars must spend as much time understanding the
processes of implementation of a project as we do in understanding its impact. The
escalating pressure to rapidly scale up such projects without first adequately
understanding the mechanisms underlying their successes and failures can dilute project
effectiveness and undermine the potential for lasting change.




REFERENCES

Appadurai, A. (2015): “Success and Failure in the Deliberative Economy” In
Deliberation and Development: Rethinking the Role of Voice and Collective Action in
Unequal Societies, editors Heller P, Rao V, Washington DC: World Bank

Andrews, M. Pritchett, L. and Woolcock, M. (2012): “Escaping Capability Traps through
Problem-Driven Iterative Adaptation (PDIA)”. Center for Global Development, Working
Paper 299, June 2012.

Barron, P., M. Woolcock, and R. Diprose (2011)” Contesting Development:
Participatory Projects and Local Conflict Dynamics in Indonesia. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.

Butler, J. (2015): Notes Towards a Performative Theory of Assembly. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

Datta, Upamanyu (2015): “Socio-Economic Impacts of JEEViKA: A Large-Scale Self-
Help Group Project in Bihar, India.” World Development	68: 1–18.

Datta, U., Hoffman, V., Rao, V., Surendra V. (2015): “Report on the Impact of
JEEViKA: Evidence from a Randomized Rollout, 2011–2014”, Draft Report, November
2015

Ferguson, J. (1990): The Anti-Politics Machine: “Development”, Depoliticization and
Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho. New York: Cambridge University Press.


                                                                                          30
Fox, J. (1994): “The Difficult Transition from Clientelism to Citizenship: Lessons from
Mexico.” World Politics 46(2): 151–84.

Hoffman, V., Rao, V., Surendra V, U. Datta. (2017): “Relief from Usury: Impact of a
Community-Based Microcredit Program in India, Policy Research working paper; no.
WPS 8021; Impact Evaluation series. Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.


Humphreys, M., Masters, W., & Sandbu, M. (2006): “The Role of Leaders in Democratic
Deliberations: Results from a Field Experiment in Sao Tome and Principe”. World
Politics, 58(4), 583–622.

Imbens, G. W. and Rubin, D. B. 2015. Causal Inference for Statistics, Social and
Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press.

Joshi, A., and Moore, M. (2004): “Institutionalised Co-production: Unorthodox
Public Service Delivery in Challenging Environments” The Journal of Development
Studies, 40 (4): 31–49.

Labonne, J., and Chase, R. S., (2009): “Who is at the Wheel When Communities Drive
Development? Evidence From the Philippines” World Development 37 (1): 219–231.

Mansuri, G., and Rao, V. (2012): Localizing Development: Does participation work?
World Bank Publications.

Mosse, D. (2004): “Is Good Policy Unimplementable? Reflections on the Ethnography of
Aid Policy and Practice”, Development and Change 35 (4): 639–671.

Mosse, D. (2005): Cultivating Development: An Ethnography of Aid Policy and
Practice. London: Pluto Press.

Ostrom, E. (1996): “Crossing the Great Divide: Co-Production, Synergy and
Development” World Development 24(6): 1073–1087

Platteau, J.P., and F. Gaspart (2003): “The Risk of Resource Misappropriation in
Community-Driven Development.” World Development 31(10): 1687–703.

Sanyal, P, Rao, V. Majumdar, S. (2015): “Recasting Culture to Undo Gender: A
Sociological Analysis of JEEViKA in Rural Bihar, India”, Policy Research Working
Paper, No. WPS 7411. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group

Sanyal, P. Rao, V. Prabhakar, U. (2015): “Oral Democracy and Women’s Oratory
Competency in Indian village Assemblies: A Qualitative Analysis”. Policy Research
Working Paper, No. WPS 7416. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group




                                                                                          31
Singh, N. K., & Stern, N. (2014): The New Bihar-rekindling governance and
development. Harper Collins India.

Swidler A, Watkins SC (2015): “Practices of Deliberation in Rural Malawi” In
Deliberation and Development: Rethinking the Role of Voice and Collective Action in
Unequal Societies, editors Heller P, Rao V, Washington DC: World Bank

Swidler A, Watkins SC (2009): ““Teach a Man to Fish”: The Sustainability Doctrine and
Its Social Consequences” World Development 37 (7): 1182–1196

Swidler A, Watkins SC (2013): “Working Misunderstandings: Donors, Brokers and
Villagers in Africa AIDS Industry” Population and Development Review 38 (1): 198–218

Witsoe, J. (2011): "Corruption as power: Caste and the political imagination of the
postcolonial state." American Ethnologist 38.1 (2011): 73-85.

Woolcock, M. (2009). “Towards a Plurality of Methods in Project Evaluation:
A Contextualized Approach to Understanding Impact Trajectories and
Efficacy.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 1(1): 1–14.
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	
	




                                                                                      32
