                                                    WPS8014


Policy Research Working Paper                      8014




       Can Parental Migration Reduce Petty
            Corruption in Education?
                              Lisa Sofie Höckel
                             Manuel Santos Silva
                                Tobias Stöhr




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8014


  Abstract
 The income generated from parental migration can increase                          emigration rates. Contrary to the positive income effect, the
 funds available for children’s education. In countries where                       strongest migration-related response in private education
 informal payments to teachers are common migration                                 expenditure that is found is a substantial decrease in informal
 could therefore increase petty corruption in education. This                       payments to public school teachers. Any positive income
 hypothesis is tested by investigating the effect of migration                      effect due to migration must hence be overcompensated
 on educational inputs. An instrumental variables approach                          by some payment-reducing effects. A number of potential
 is used on survey data and matched administrative records                          explanations at the family level, school level or community
 from the World Bank’s Open Budget Initiative (BOOST)                               level are discussed, several of these explanations ruled out
 from Moldova, one of the countries with the highest                                and possible interpretations for future research highlighted.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at tobias.stoehr@ifw-kiel.de.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
  Can Parental Migration Reduce Petty Corruption in Education?

                Lisa Sofie Höckel, Manuel Santos Silva, and Tobias Stöhr




  JEL-Classification: F22, I22, H52, D13

  Keywords: migration, emigration, corruption, education spending, social remittances

Lisa Sofie Höckel is a doctoral researcher at the RWI - Leibniz Institute for Economic Research
and a Ph.D. Student at the Ruhr-University Bochum; her email address is lisa.hoeckel@rwi-
essen.de. Manuel Santos Silva is a Ph.D. Student at the University of Goettingen; his email
address is santos.silva@wiwi.uni-goettingen.de. Tobias Stöhr (corresponding author) is a
researcher at the Kiel Institute for the World Economy (IfW); his email address is
tobias.stoehr@ifw-kiel.de. He acknowledges funding from EuropeAid project DCI-
MIGR/210/229-604. The authors are very grateful to the editors, three anonymous referees, Inga
Afanasieva, Toman Barsbai, Julia Bredtmann, Elena Denisova-Schmidt, Iulian Gramatki,
Artjoms Ivlevs, Stephan Klasen, Miquel Pellicer, Rainer Thiele, some unnamed experts as well as
participants at seminars at the University of Goettingen, the IOS Regensburg, the 2015 PEGNet
conference, the 2016 AEL conference and the NOVAFRICA Ph.D. Workshop for valuable
comments. The usual disclaimer applies.
Emigration has long been considered detrimental to origin countries’ human capital due to the
loss of skilled workers. However, positive effects are possible either through the brain gain
mechanism (Mountford 1997) or due to a positive income effect increasing households’ inputs in
education.1 That positive income effect could in theory also increase spending on a particularly
corrosive education input - informal payments to teachers. Such payments are common in many
developing countries and have also become widespread in post-Soviet countries after the
collapse of the USSR as real wages for teachers declined abruptly. This paper shows that the
positive income effect can be overcompensated by other effects leading to an overall decrease in
informal payments to teachers due to parental migration.
    These informal payments are problematic for two main reasons. First, they impose a “tax” on
education that may reduce the incentives to human capital accumulation. Second, they distort
performance incentives for teachers, parents, and students, for example, by motivating teachers
to provide exam results to students instead of teaching them in line with the curriculum. Thus,
informal payments are understood to contribute to a less functional and less egalitarian public
education system.2 Often, they are raised by informal parental committees on a per capita basis
and tend to be regressive. Parts of the raised funds are spent on maintenance of the school and a
large part will supplement wages of teachers. These payments have many organizational
similarities to weakly enforced per capita taxes, a fact that can help tailor responses to them. The
second and even more problematic form of payments to teachers is competition for higher grades
or better treatment of individual students. Here, migrants can be expected to spend more money
per child due to an income effect. These bribes are especially common in higher education
(ESP/NEPC 2010).
    We study the effect of migration on informal payments and other forms of private
educational expenditure and control for self-selection into migration by employing an
instrumental variable approach. Our instrument is a network-based pull-effect at the local level,
which is constructed using past migrant shares and destination-specific economic growth over
time. The identifying assumption is that this network-growth interaction provides exogenous



    1. For example, McKenzie and
Rapoport (2010), Antman (2011, 2012), Caleroet al. (2009), Yang (2008), Bansak and Chezum
(2009), Cortes (2015).
    2. For example, ESP/NEPC (2010), Heyneman et al. (2008), Osipian (2009).

                                                     2
variation in the ex-ante costs and returns to migration but does not otherwise affect the
household’s educational investment decision.
    Our paper is, to our knowledge, the first to document a negative causal effect of parental
migration on such informal payments to teachers. We show that the reduction in petty corruption
occurs even though migrant households are, on average, wealthier than their non-migrant
counterparts. This suggests that the income effect is overcompensated by other channels. School-
level variation indicates strong spillovers within schools, that could partly be due to social
remittances (i.e., migrants affecting the opinions of those left behind) and partly due to migrant
families’ behavior leading to a breakdown of the social norm of taking part in petty corruption.
The results are neither explained by differences in public school funding nor by differences in
the share of migrant children across schools. The money saved on informal payments to teachers
does not translate into higher spending on out-of-school tutoring (henceforth: tutoring), which is
an alternative way of teachers to make up for lost informal wage supplements. Rather, we find
some evidence that main caregivers allocate more time to educational and school-related
activities in migrant households. The reduction in informal payments might be explained by
access to information or value change due to migration - a literature which finds that the
migration experience can alter migrants’ and their left behind families’ political values, social
norms, and behavior in general.3 Since the underlying preferences and beliefs about the spread of
corruption are unobserved, this remains a tentative hypothesis. We are, however, able to rule out
several alternative explanations: income-effects, the valuation of education, non-parental
caregivers, and several supply side factors, which we measure using matched school budget data,
community level data as well as additional parts of the survey.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I anchors the paper in the literature.
Section II provides information on Moldova and corruption in education. Section III describes
the data used, and section IV presents our empirical strategy. The main results are presented in
section V. Section VI tests alternative explanations and the robustness of the main results before
section VII concludes.




     3. For example, see the contributions of Cameron et al. (2015), Beine et al. (2013), Barsbai
et al. (forthcoming), Spilimbergo (2009), Batista and Vicente (2011), Ivlevs and King (2014).

                                                          3
                                          I. RELATED LITERATURE

Especially in developing countries, individual migration can be beneficial for children’s
education by raising and diversifying overall household income and alleviating credit constraints
(Adams and Page 2005, Calero et al. 2009). However, parental migration can prove detrimental
to children’s educational achievement. First, parental absence can cause emotional distress
jeopardizing school outcomes of children, especially if mothers or both parents are absent
(e.g., Zhang et al. 2014, Cortes 2015). Second, children could substitute for the absent migrant in
household chores or even paid work (McKenzie and Rapoport 2010, Antman 2011). Third,
parental migration might drastically reduce the educational input of the migrant’s time.
Crucially, parents could try to make up for such negative effects by paying teachers informally to
give their children extra attention or even bribe them for better grades. In addition, we expect
caregivers’ time allocation to adjust when family members migrate. The income effect could also
decrease time allocated to children by remaining adults. However, parents often cite improving
the lives of their children as the most important motive for migration. Therefore, we expect them
to treat time spent with their child for educational activities as a normal or even a luxury good.
Thus, parents would invest more time if remittances allow them to work less. Hence, instead of
consuming more leisure we expect the remaining caregiver to increase education inputs.
   In addition to affecting the budget constraint, migration can affect households’ educational
investment more fundamentally. The preferences and views of immigrants are known to change
through acculturization, personal experience, and the exposure to new ideas, knowledge, and
institutions (Berry 1997, Careja and Emmenegger 2012). For example, the values of immigrants
living in Western societies are found to converge with those of the host population over time.
Such changed values can have a lasting effect when migrants return to their country of origin
(Spilimbergo 2009, Batista and Vicente 2011).4 These effects are not confined to return
migration but can also be transmitted through communication with family or friends. Chauvet
and Mercier (2014) find spillover effects from the migrant to the non-migrant population in
terms of participation and electoral competitiveness. Barsbai et al. (forthcoming) provide
evidence that emigration from Moldova, the country studied in this paper, changed political
attitudes and may have lost the incumbent Communist government in the 2009 elections. As the
authors discuss, Moldova had very little exposure to the outside world before migration took off.

   4. See Docquier and Rapoport (2012) for an excellent discussion of the literature.

                                                        4
In such settings where information is scarce, diffusion processes are likely to be influential. As
petty corruption is often found to be dependent on the societal belief that it is widespread
(Corbacho et al. 2016, Dong et al. 2012), migration might broaden the horizon and thus decrease
its likelihood by showing migrants that school systems can work without informal payments. In
particular, payment schemes that depend on public-good-style contributions may dissolve if a
few individuals cease contributing (Fehr and Gächter 2000).




                             II. MOLDOVA AND CORRUPTION IN EDUCATION

Moldova is the poorest country in Europe with an estimated GDP per capita (PPP-adjusted) of
$4,521 (World Bank 2014).5 The potential effects of migration and societal spillovers are
therefore particularly visible in a country like Moldova because it is the country with the third
highest remittance to GDP ratio (24.9%), only surpassed by the Kyrgyz Republic and Nepal
(World Bank 2014). In comparison, other commonly studied economies like Mexico
(remittances to GDP ratio of 2%) or the Philippines (9.8%) are considerably less dependent on
remittances. Another advantage is that migration has been a relatively recent phenomenon. After
the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, some Moldovans continued working in what is now
Ukraine and Russia and were thus suddenly called international migrants. Mass migration,
however, only started when the Russian financial crisis of 1998 hit and increased unemployment
and poverty considerably in Moldova. In 2011, emigrants made up 17% of the total population
(MPC 2013), which means that 30-40% of children, depending on the sample, are affected by
emigration of at least one parent.6
    As a former member of the Soviet Union, Moldova’s public educational system has good
coverage (even in rural areas) with enrollment rates of nearly 100% for primary and lower
secondary schooling and 87% for upper secondary schooling (table S.1 in the supplemental



     5. In 2013, countries with a comparable per capita GDP (in 2011 $-PPP) were, for example, Pakistan ($4,454),
Nicaragua ($4,493), and Laos ($4,667).
     6. The most common emigration destination for circular migrants is Russia. While migration to Russia is
usually characterized by short-term stays and manual labor, emigration to the West is more permanent, service-
sector oriented, and feminized (60% women). Italy and Romania are particularly important destination countries due
to linguistic proximity.

                                                        5
appendix). Attendance is formally free of charge from first grade up to high school completion,7
and below tertiary education there are few private schools.
    There is a steep socioeconomic gradient in educational achievement (Walker 2011), which
some worry might increase due to migration, not least due to widespread informal (and often
illegal) payments to schoolteachers and other officials. The institutional causes of these are
twofold: teachers’ wages are low and often delayed, and, socially, there is public tolerance of
corruption and insufficient critical input of mass media. According to the 2013 Global
Corruption Barometer, 37% of households in Moldova that came into contact with education
authorities paid bribes in the 12 months before the survey and 58% of respondents perceived the
education system to be corrupt or highly corrupt (Transparency International 2013). Similarly, in
the 2011 Citizen Report Card study, corruption is cited to be the most common difficulty when
requiring services from public educational institutions, and paying bribes is the second most
common way of solving problems after insistence, joint with using personal contacts. Another
form of corruption in the education system is the acquisition of unnecessary tutoring from a
child’s teacher (Carasciuc 2001). This means that tutoring is often in a gray area between a
productive investment in students’ cognitive achievement and paying teachers informally.
Besides seeking individual gains for one’s own child, there is an important social component to
making illicit payments to teachers resulting from the interaction of parents, teachers, and school
principals (ESP/NEPC 2010).8
    The less frowned upon kind of these payments are monetary transfers or in-kind “gifts” that
are often collected by informal parental committees. Typically, they either supplement teachers’
wages or finance maintenance spending in schools. These expenditures face some of the
organizational issues of public goods, including committees dissolving and payments stopping
once the number of parents who are willing to contribute declines. There are only relatively blunt
mechanisms to enforce payment (e.g., parents being excluded from the committee and teachers
ignoring children in class). While payments can be seen as necessary to motivate teachers, there
are widespread detrimental consequences such as especially motivated teachers providing




    7. Moldova has compulsory schooling until the end of lower secondary schooling (roughly age 15).
    8. ESP/NEPC (2010) describes results from in-depth interviews on informal payments in seven ex-communist
countries. In that study, a majority of Moldovan parents report being pressured by both teachers and other parents to
comply with informal payments.

                                                          6
solutions to (standardized) exams, a practice that clearly undermines the education system.9
Furthermore, monetary transfers that are imposed on a per capita basis might also affect poor
households disproportionately since they have to pay a higher share of their income (Emran
et al. 2013).
    The form of corruption in schools that is locally perceived as most problematic is direct
bribing with the purpose of increasing the attention or grades a teacher gives to an individual
student at the expense of others. Furthermore, bribes can be necessary to gain access to the best
public high schools and to universities.10
    In sum, while payments to teachers are in part motivated by grade-buying or seeking better
treatment for the child, a larger share seems to operate as a per capita tax. In the latter case, the
extent and magnitude of informal payments is more likely to be determined by local norms, the
preferences and the bargaining power of teachers, parents, and school officials, and less by the
pursuit of inflated grades or preferential treatment for the child. Both kinds of petty corruption,
however, can be expected to affect incentives negatively, increase the socioeconomic gradient in
educational outcomes, and contribute to a social climate where corruption is an everyday
experience.




                                        III. DATA AND DESCRIPTIVES

In this section, we discuss the data and present key descriptive statistics of our sample.

                                                       Data

We use data from a nationally representative household survey conducted in Moldova in 2011–
12 (henceforth abbreviated CELB 2012) which was specifically designed to investigate the
effects of migration on children and elderly left behind. The survey includes 3,568 households
with 12,333 individuals, of which 2,501 are children of age 6–18.11 In addition to socioeconomic
characteristics of household members, detailed information on private financial and non-

     9. This problem was so widespread that, sometime after our survey took place, the education minister
introduced video surveillance during the final high school exam, a move that lead to a spike in failure rates.
Something similar has recently been studied in Romania; see Borcan et al. (2017).
     10. Heyneman et al. (2008), for example, discuss survey data that indicate that about 80% of university students
in Moldova, Bulgaria, and Serbia were aware of payments of illegal bribes in university admission.
     11. The response rate was above 80%. For detailed information on the survey, see Böhme and Stöhr (2014)
and Böhme et al. (2015).

                                                         7
financial inputs into children’s education was collected by identifying and interviewing each
child’s main caregiver.12 Financial expenditures include payments and other “gifts” to
schoolteachers, tutoring expenditures, and transportation expenditures that we will use as
different dependent variables in the analysis.13 Non-financial inputs include how often the main
caregiver helps the child with homework and other school activities in the month prior to the
survey interview on a six-point scale ranging from “never” to “every day.” In addition to the
household survey, community questionnaires were filled out by local officials, typically in the
mayoral office. Finally, we match data from the World Bank’s open budget initiative (BOOST)
to provide school-level data on public education expenses in the respective communities and
schools (see appendix S.1 for more details). Our baseline sample consists of 2,148 children from
1,448 households.

                                               Descriptive Statistics

A migrant household is defined by the existence of at least one adult who, in the 12 months prior
to the survey, has spent a minimum of three months living abroad. In our sample, 29% of
children live in a migrant household (table 1).14 The average student from migrant households is
12.6 years old, five months more than her non-migrant peer. Before accounting for selection into
migration, the average grade (GPA) is 0.06 points higher for children in migrant households.
Migrant families are slightly larger on average and more likely to come from rural areas. Despite
this, their average total income and average per capita income are significantly higher than those
of non-migrants.15 Figure 1 also reflects the underlying effect of migration, showing no
difference in assets in 1999 but significantly higher assets for migrant families in 2011.16




     12. The main caregiver is the person responsible for nutrition, health, and schooling of a child at the time of the
survey.
     13. In addition, there is a residual category of “other expenditure” for which we find statistically insignificant
effects.
     14. Our dataset does not allow us to compare the differences between migrant households with and without
children. Comparisons to other representative data (details on request) reveal that, in households with children,
female migration is on average less common. The education level and gender composition do not differ markedly.
     15. In reality, the difference could be even wider since migrant households systematically underreport their
received remittances and other sources of income (Akee and Kapur 2012).
     16. The asset indexes were constructed by a weighted-sum of the following items: (i.) number of cars,
motorcycles, bicycles, washing machines, refrigerators, radios, TVs, computers, and cell phones; (ii.) existence of
working phone landline and internet access; and (iii.) number of rooms in the house. For 1999, the last three items
were excluded due to a large number of missing values. The weights for the index were obtained from a principal

                                                           8
    Households in our sample report positive payments to teachers for about 37% of all school-
age children.17 Payments to teachers typically vary from 5–40 USD per child per year, which is
substantial given that public expenditure for teaching materials per pupil is about 30 USD per
year, and wage bills per pupil are about 300 USD per year (cf. appendix S.1 and table S.2). In
contrast, households only report tutoring expenses for approximately 10% of children (cf. figure
S.1). Despite higher income, both per child informal payments to teachers and tutoring expenses
are significantly lower in migrant households compared to non-migrant ones. For transportation
expenditure there is no such difference. The differences in informal payments and tutoring are
mostly driven by more migrant households reporting zero payments (not refusals or “don’t
know” answers) rather than by smaller positive expenses. This is not only evident at the
individual level but also results in a strong negative correlation at the community-level between
the share of migrant households and the share of respondents reporting payments to teachers
(table 2: panel A, column 1).18 The slope of the regression line is approximately -0.4, a very high
value that is statistically and economically significant. Note, though, that our data are designed to
be representative at the national but not at the community level. The negative correlation also
holds at the individual level (table 2: panel A, column 2-5).




                                           IV. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

To analyze whether this strong negative correlation between migration and petty corruption at
the community-level as well as the individual level is indeed closely tied to migration, we
estimate the stylized model:

yihcs     Mig hc  X ihcs   òihcs             (1)




component analysis of the asset list. Dividing the divisible assets by the squared root of household size as an
equivalent scaling rule does not change figure 1 in any qualitative way.
    17. This figure is remarkably similar to the one reported in the 2013 Global Corruption Barometer: 37% of
households in Moldova that came into contact with education authorities paid bribes in the 12 months before the
survey (Transparency International 2013). We focus on the likelihood of paying informal fees rather than the values
paid since we assume the decision to participate in the informal fee scheme to be the most affected by a change in
preferences. Note that we added one LCU to each private expenditure to ensure that the log exists.
    18. See figure S.2 for an illustration.

                                                           9
where yihcs are private inputs to the education of child i in household h from community c and
school s. We consider three financial inputs (informal payments to teachers, tutoring, and
transport expenditures) and two non-financial inputs if the child is enrolled in school and the
frequency with which the caregiver spends time supporting the child in educational activities.
The main explanatory variable of interest, Mig hc is a household-level dummy variable taking the
value one if the child lives in a migrant household and zero otherwise; Xihcs is a vector of child-
and household-level control variables; and ϵihcs is the error term.
    Clearly, migrants are not a random population group but rather self-select into migration.
Thus, it can be expected that they systematically exhibit distinct unobservable characteristics
relative to non-migrants that might bias OLS estimates of equation (1). To overcome this
problem, we estimate an instrumental variable approach by two-stage least squares (2SLS).19 Our
instrument for migration status is the interaction between pre-existing migration networks at the
local-level and destination-specific economic conditions. Formally, we use the growth rate of per
capita GDP for each destination country between 2004–2010 and weight it with the share of
migrants that, by 2004, had migrated from the community to that destination.20 The data for the
migrant-destination share at the community level are derived from the 2004 Moldovan Census.21
The variable has already been employed as an instrument for migration in other studies of the
Moldovan context (e.g., Lücke et al. 2012, Böhme et al. 2015). The rationale behind the use of
Network-Growth is twofold. First, migrant networks are known to be very important in

     19. The most common approach in the literature is instrumental variable strategies exploiting exogenous
aggregate factors at the origin or destination: past migration rates (McKenzie and
Rapoport 2010, Antman 2011, Zhang et al. 2014), financial infrastructure (Calero et al. 2009), and political unrest
(Bansak and Chezum 2009) at the origin-level; employment conditions (Antman 2011, Cortes 2015) and exchange
rate crises (Yang 2008) at the destination-level.

    20. Analytically:

                         J  migrants                  T    GDPj ,t 1  GDPj ,t  
     Network-Growth c                              
                                      c , j ,2004
                                                                                   
                            
                        j 1 population c ,2004
                                                       
                                                      t 1     GDPj ,t           
                                                                                 

     where c is the Moldovan community; j  1, 2,3,..., J is the migration destination countries and t = 2004,
2005, ..., 2010.
     21. An advantage of our setting is that migration has been a relatively recent phenomenon in Moldova, and,
thus, there is little scope for the non-migrant population to be influenced over time due to spillovers and long-term
confounding developments that might have arisen over time. As a robustness check, we exclude for the analysis the
migrant households which already had a migrant in 2004 or before as they might be included in the Census
migration rates. The main results do not change qualitatively (available upon request).

                                                           10
facilitating current migration. The network can provide ex ante information and assistance and
ex post support for the migrant upon arrival (e.g., short-term accommodation, job-searching
expertise, paperwork). Thus, pre-existent migrant networks effectively reduce the costs of
migration (e.g., McKenzie and Rapoport 2010). Secondly, the growth of GDP per capita at the
destination is a proxy for the country’s economic performance, and, more importantly,
employment conditions that are exogenous to potential migrants in Moldova. An expanding job
market is highly attractive for potential migrants and hence a pull factor to this destination
(e.g., Antman 2011).22 As a whole, our instrument captures the exogenous variation of migrant
networks at the community level,which lowers migration costs, and economic conditions at the
destination country, which increase the expected returns of migration. Exploiting variation at the
community level, our instrument does not allow exogenizing household-level choices regarding
migration such as the identity of the migrant or the duration of the stay abroad. We can only
successfully predict the probability of at least one household member becoming a migrant and,
therefore, use the household’s migration status as the main variable of interest in our analysis.
Therefore, our results should be interpreted as the average effects across all migrants and
migratory spells. The validity of the instrument depends on the exclusion restriction that
Network-Growth must only affect the provision of private educational inputs through migration
status. This seems self-evident for the growth of GDP per capita at the destination. It is hard to
conceive of a different relationship (i.e., other than migration) through which the changes in per
capita growth rates in a set of foreign countries would affect the education investment decisions
of a Moldovan household differentially between communities. For the migration network, we
assume that past migration rates are predictors of current migration rates only via network effects
and, otherwise, have no influence on the household’s education spending. Accordingly, we
include the 2004 share of the community’s population who is a migrant to Italy, Romania,
Russia, and Ukraine as additional controls in the 2SLS setup to account for proximity to the
border and any systematic differences in development that may have arisen because of migration
to any of these important destinations between the take-off of migration, in 1999, and 2004, as in




     22. To better capture the individual gains from migration, rather than the rise in opportunities, we alternatively
use the change in GDP per capita. This results in comparable results in magnitude and significance. The Kleibergen-
Paap weak identification statistic is however smaller than when using GDP growth for the IV.

                                                          11
Böhme et al. (2015).23 The IV is not systematically correlated with school expenditures, local
economic conditions as proxied by night lights (Henderson et al. 2012), local infrastructure or
public goods as reported in the community questionnaire. Further, communities with IV values
above and below median values are distributed evenly across the country (figure S.3). Summary
statistics for the IV variable can be found at the bottom of table 1.




                                               V. MAIN RESULTS

The dependent variables of our empirical analysis are the child’s school enrollment status, the
three categories of private education spending - payments to teachers, tutoring expenses,
transportation expenses - and the time spent by the caregiver. The reduced form estimates are
reported in table 2, panel B. The lack of a selection correction results in a statistically significant
correlation between the instrument and school enrollment,24 which indicates better migration
options for those who leave school after the end of compulsory schooling. Correlations between
the instrument and payments to teachers, as well as tutoring expenses, are negative and
statistically significant.25
    The first stage IV estimates are reported in panel C of table 2. The Network-Growth-IV is a
positive and highly significant predictor of the household’s migration status. The instrument’s
estimated coefficient implies that a one standard deviation increase in Network-Growth increases
the likelihood of (at least one) household adult member migrating by approximately 14
percentage points. The Kleibergen-Paap rank test rejects underidentification at least at the 5%
significance level in all the 2SLS regressions.
    The second stage indicates no statistically significant effect of migration on the enrollment
probability (column 1) as a result of parental migration. Instead, the results indicate a strong
reduction in the likelihood to pay teachers conditional on individual characteristics that is even
more pronounced than the negative correlation in panel A (column 3). For tutoring, we see a
similar negative effect whereas transport expenditure remains unchanged (columns 5 and 7).
Interestingly, the determinants of tutoring are similar to those of paying bribes, supporting the

    23. Alternatively using only one control for all migrant shares does not yield different results, but we prefer
keeping to the more conservative ability to control also for different border effects as in that earlier paper.
    24. A one standard deviation increase in the instrument implies a 2.5 percentage point reduction in enrollment.
    25. See tables S.3, S.4, and S.5 for the point estimates of the control variables for panels B and C.

                                                        12
view that tutoring offers a “cleaner” way of making informal payments to teachers. There is
some evidence of caregivers more frequently spending time on the education of their children
(column 8). In order to account for potentially inflated point estimates due to weak IVs, we
provide the conditional likelihood ratio (CLR) confidence region and cluster robust confidence
sets for the respective migration effect at the bottom of the table (Moreira 2009, Mikusheva and
Poi 2006, Finlay and Magnusson 2009). Both methods show that the effect of migration on
informal payments is bounded away from zero even when accounting for weak IVs.26 The results
point to a statistically, as well as economically, significant negative effect of migration on
informal payments.27
    The very strong negative correlation, even after rigorously accounting for self-selection,
cannot be the consequence of a mere income effect. At the same time, children’s or parents’
socioeconomic characteristics do not predict petty corruption at the extensive margin very well.
While there is more reporting of payments for older students, girls, and by more educated
parents–one of the core predictors of income–the other controls are statistically insignificant.
Additional analyses yield no evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects by age, yet this is
partly due to imprecise estimates in small subsamples (table S.8).
    Our main results are not explained by differences in household wealth (proxied by a
household asset index, table 3). Contemporaneous assets are endogenous to migration and, in
fact, constitute one of the main expected transmission channels of migration on education inputs
(column 1 and 3). Pre-migration differences in wealth across households (columns 2 and 4)
should not and do not have any impact on the second stage migration coefficient. To sum up, our
finding on bribes can neither be explained by wealth differences across migrant and non-migrant
households nor by the income effect of remittances.
    Regardless of this, the income effect of migration matters by improving families’ ability to
keep children in school. Whereas over 50% of non-migrant parents report barriers that will
prevent the child from achieving the caregiver’s desired level of education this is the case only
for 35% of migrant parents (table S.9: panel A). The modal reason, a lack of finances, is cited by

     26. In addition, alternative estimates obtained from an IV probit estimation can be found in table S.6 for
comparison.
     27. Table S.7 presents OLS estimates for the same set of covariates. Due to the inclusion of a selection
correction, covariates such as household size that are predictive of migration but not of informal payments pick up
the correlation between migration and informal payments to teachers. The lack of a selection correction also results
in statistically significant positive effects on transport expenditure, which are explained by higher available income
as additional results show (available upon request).

                                                          13
over 80% of caregivers in either group. Migration reduces barriers in general and financial
barriers in particular (table S.9: panel B). The income effect in education is thus strong, in stark
contrast with its effect on petty corruption.
   As a supporting ad hoc assessment of the mechanism, log remittances received by the
household can be used in place of the migration dummy as the endogenous variable (results
available on request). In this case, no more significant correlation between the endogenous
variable and informal payment is found in the second stage, which may be taken as tentative
evidence that variation from the instrument does not affect bribe-paying through the remittance
channel. Even though one has to be careful interpreting such evidence because it is no longer a
valid IV approach, this may be interpreted as suggesting that, instead of remittances, other
aspects of migration are likely to be the source of the bribe-reducing effect. In line with other
research, one might hypothesize that the negative coefficient of migration is explained by a
lower willingness to bribe officials in the education system. This could be due to former
migrants’ own likelihood of bribing teachers or through social remittances (cf. Ivlevs and
King 2014, Barsbai et al. forthcoming). Irrespectively of whether it is the migrants themselves or
their families who decrease bribe-paying, our finding is promising from a normative point of
view. From an economic standpoint, the money not given to teachers as informal “service fees”
or “presents” (i.e., for rent-seeking) could be used more productively on other household
expenses and would stop distorting incentives for teachers and students. The emerging picture is
thus a reduction in bribes and a simultaneous increase in the frequency of parental involvement
in children’s education due to migration. In the next section, possible transmission channels will
be discussed in more detail.




                          VI. TRANSMISSION CHANNELS AND ROBUSTNESS

According to the community leaders interviewed in the survey, the most widely perceived
constraint to school quality is not a scarcity of staff but of other inputs, such as teaching
materials or utilities (table S.10). Parental education inputs could be affected by the public
funding situation of local schools, causing omitted variable bias.28 Thus, we match our household
data with administrative school-level expenditure data from an open budget initiative of the

   28. Private educational spending responds to public funding, see for example Houtenville and Conway (2008).

                                                     14
World Bank (BOOST) to ensure that the instrument is not picking up community-level variation
in the supply of public education. Matching both datasets is imperfect because the availability of
the budget data was not anticipated at the time of the household survey (see appendix S.1 for a
detailed description of the data and matching procedure). We include the school-level executed
budget in several expenditure categories as additional explanatory variables.29 The strong
negative effect on bribes remains even after adding the additional controls, which approximately
halves the sample size.30 Schools’ wage bills, which closely correspond to the schoolteachers-
per-pupil ratio (cf. figure S.4), teaching material and schools’ maintenance funds are not
significantly correlated with household educational expenditures (table S.11: columns 1-6). By
contrast, schools’ expenditures on utilities and transports, where community leaders often report
lacking funds, exhibit signs of substitutability of private and public expenditure. There is also
some tentative evidence of substitution between the parental investment of time and the time
teachers could allocate to individual children (column 7).31

    The strong correlation between migration and informal payments to teachers is also robust
when controlling for an index of infrastructural quality of the school (table 4: column 1). We
furthermore tested whether the migration-induced reduction in informal payments is lower in
worse-funded schools where informal payments may be less controversial but did not find any
robust differences (results available upon request). Sending students to schools with funding for
school buses and attending a more distant school, both of which proxy secondary and advanced
secondary schools that cover larger areas, correlate positively (although statistically
insignificantly) with informal payments. Using school fixed-effect regressions to compare
students within schools, we find that better off parents pay more to teachers and buy more
tutoring from their children’s teachers (table 4: columns 3 and 4).32 This underscores the
importance of the income effect. The migration coefficient is negative but insignificant,
suggesting that much of the variation associated with migration occurs at the school level. This
fits well our discussions with Moldovan experts, who stated that the payments to teachers that

     29. We do not find evidence that they are systematically correlated with migration.
     30. The first-stage estimates are reported in column 2 of table S.4.
     31 Table S.12 provides OLS results when the sample is split by migration status. The negative coefficient on the
teacher-pupil ratio (proxied by wages per pupil) is similar for both migrant and non-migrant households, although
statistically insignificant for the former.
     32. Note that migration as a major source of income inequality is not exogenized here due to a lack of a valid
within-community IV.

                                                        15
are collected by informal parental committees can quickly stop completely once a few parents
refuse to pay them - an effect that often occurs in public-good settings if punishment is weak
(cf. Fehr and Gächter 2000). In line with our expert discussions, we thus interpret the migration
effects as quickly spilling over within schools.33
    To ensure that our results are not driven by local heterogeneity across communities rather
than migration, we add a within-community dimension to the original IV’s community-level
variation. We interact the network-growth IV with the household’s mean years of education
since more educated households can be expected to be better able to respond to the growth-pull
mechanism approximated by our IV. The new variable is positively related with migration and
statistically significant at the 1% level. The estimated effect of migration on payments to
teachers is almost identical to our main estimates (table S.13).
    Two motivations for ceasing bribe-paying are plausible: (i) migrant parents being generally
less tolerant of corruption due to their experience abroad; and (ii) migrant parents demanding
actual cognitive achievement instead of good grades because they have witnessed the
unimportance of Moldovan certificates relative to actual skills for success abroad. A full 96% of
caregivers replied that education was important to be successful abroad. Yet, there is no
significant reduction in the perceived quality of children’s individual schools (table S.14).34 This
gives us confidence that our results are not driven by differences in the cost-benefit analysis of
the Moldovan school system between non-migrant and migrant households.
    In order to provide some evidence of robustness as well as external validity of our study, we
draw on another, less detailed, dataset to show that a similar negative correlation of migration
and bribe paying exists also in data independent of ours. The so called Barometer of Public
Opinion of Moldova’s Institute for Public Policy, a well-regarded biannual survey which collects
individuals’ opinions on a wide range of topics regarding politics, values, and related issues in
Moldova, covered informal payments to authorities and migration status in the April 2013
survey.35 Those individuals with migration experience to the West were more likely to have had
contact with the justice system and were more likely to have been asked for bribes for the

     33. There is no statistically significant correlation between any school budget variable and the migration share
of pupils in the household survey. Also, if migrant parents were planning to send their children abroad and therefore
stopped paying local teachers, there should be strong differences within schools.
     34. Alternatively, the main effects of migration on the provision of educational inputs remain unchanged after
including the perceived school quality variable as an additional control (available upon request).
     35. The sample contains 1100 individuals from 76 communities and is nationally representative of the adult
population. All results are available upon request.

                                                        16
solution of their problem. Conditional on reporting not paying a bribe, people with any
experience of migrating and especially the typically more wealthy migrants to the West were
more likely to have been asked to pay informal fees than those without migration experience
(odds ratio: 3.6 times). Individuals with migration experience thus seem to be less likely to pay
bribes under a given level of pressure to do so.36
    Finally, our results could be driven by the migration-induced change in the identity of the
child’s caregiver, for example, reflecting that non-parental caregivers (e.g., grandparents,
siblings, aunts, or uncles) have less involvement in (or knowledge of) the education system and
are, therefore, less likely to bribe teachers. They may also have lower opportunity costs of time
and may therefore spend more time on the child’s education. To rule out this mechanism we re-
estimate the main results while excluding all children with caregivers who are not one of their
biological parents (table S.15). The slightly, but not significantly, larger coefficients of migration
provide strong evidence that our results are not driven by caregiver change. Our results are
furthermore robust to alternative but similar definitions of the migration dummy (e.g., who
migrates or how long migration spells have to be). We also find no evidence that our effect is
driven by caregivers who are return migrants.37 More generally, including a dummy variable for
return migrant households (i.e., those households with at least one return migrant but no current
migrants) does not affect the migration coefficient in our educational input IV regressions.
Return migration itself has a negative coefficient which is smaller in absolute magnitude than the
(current) migration estimate, but statistically insignificant (available upon request). Note that
correcting for self-selection into return migration lies beyond the scope of this paper.
    Despite controlling for households’ mean years of education in all regressions, it could still
be possible that households were sorted on unobserved ability within Moldova. In that case, the
size of the 2004 network could be correlated with families’ unobservable skills. In the Moldovan
context, this hypothesis is very unlikely. In Soviet times, internal migration was highly restricted
and centralized. Highly skilled individuals were not only concentrated in the main cities, where
tertiary education was available, but were often deployed as state bureaucrats to agricultural or


    36. Our instrumental variable strategy does not allow us to identify destination specific effects. Therefore, our
results are the average migration effect across all destinations, not just Western countries. If the effect is entirely
driven by migration to the West, where corruption is far less common than in Moldova, then our 2SLS estimates are
a lower bound for the true Western migration effect.
    37. We define a return migrant as an adult that spent more than three months abroad in one single spell since
1999 but is no longer a migrant at the time of the survey.

                                                         17
industrial projects all over the country, especially the countryside. After the collapse of the
Soviet Union, there has not been much internal migration. To corroborate our arguments, we re-
run our main specifications excluding children living in the two cities, Chişinău and Bălţi, that
exert the main pull effect internally. Our results remain fully robust throughout (available upon
request).
   As seen above, our main results are robust to a host of alternative explanations. If not paying
bribes, however, had dire consequences for the children’s educational performance, lower
corruption might not be in their best interest. We therefore estimate the effects of migration on
students’ grade point average (GPA) (table S.16). Throughout the different specifications,
payments to teachers remain insignificant. In addition, and in line with the literature, we find a
negative correlation between migration and the GPA that is partly compensated by household
wealth. This underlines that most of the informal payments may not be directly meant to improve
grades relative to classmates but rather operate as illicit user fees or per capita taxes. If their
payment ceases, students on average do not suffer worse grades. However, students who, relative
to their classmates, receive extra attention from teachers due to tutoring (which are partly mere
bribes), do better gradewise. Also, many Moldovans suggest that bribing of teachers for grades is
not effective anyway because students study less hard if they expect to receive higher scores.
Another possibility is that deviating from the common situation of paying bribes has no adverse
effects, especially as standardized tests are increasingly used in the most important exams with
the deliberate aim of fighting corruption in education.




                                        VII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we analyze the effect of emigration on petty corruption in education, in particular
on informal payments to teachers. Such payments are typically understood to have a dual
motivation: fundraising for maintenance of schools as well as supplementing teachers’ wages to
increase their motivation and/or to focus their attention on individual children. We use the
interaction between migrant networks and economic growth at the destination as an instrumental
variable for the household’s migration status in order to control for selection into migration.
Using this IV approach, we document a reduction in informal payments to teachers. This
aggregate migration effect consists, among others, of a non-negative income effect that is

                                                18
counteracted by other factors. By excluding alternative explanations, and in line with an
emergent literature, we speculate that the widening of migrants’ horizon (i.e., additional
information or value change) may be the main driver of the reduction in petty corruption.
   Incorporating school-level budget data in our analysis, we show that there is no strong
correlation between public school funding and petty corruption. Thus, the most socially accepted
justification for informal payments to teachers—the need for school maintenance and wage
supplements for motivation—is not a good predictor of differences between schools. Within
schools, additional analysis suggests that reductions in payments to teachers quickly spill over to
non-migrants. This is in line with qualitative evidence according to which per capita payments to
teachers cease once a few parents in a class refuse to pay due to only weak enforcement devices
in the hands of teachers or other paying parents. Our results fit with novel research that shows
how participation in corruption often depends on people perceiving it as widespread. This is a
prevalent phenomenon in low- and middle-income countries. In such a setting, simply increasing
teachers’ salaries and school resources might decrease the perceived legitimacy of informal
payments. If budget constraints made this impossible and these payments continued to exist,
structures such as teacher-parent committees should formalize them as donations. The available
funds should then be focused on making teachers wages sufficient while stepping up
enforcement of laws against individual corruption. This way, transparency and accountability
would be improved while providing solutions for underfunding that do not distort incentives.
Both the opportunity to siphon off part of the payments for private use and the necessity to do so
would thus decrease. For bribes which are used to get one’s own child ahead of the competition,
other measures are likely to be more effective. In a bold move, the Moldovan government
recently introduced videotaping of the most important high school exam to put an end to
teachers, motivated by informal payments, telling answers to their classes or, worse, individual
students. As such laudable reforms reduce the scope for corruption they may also make it easier
for both migrants and non-migrants to resist corruption. Focusing reform efforts on increasing
awareness that petty corruption in education is a problem, stoking demand for educational
achievement rather than for good grades, and creating incentives to deviate from the social norm
of participating in petty corruption hold promise. This paper thus provides evidence of a petty
corruption channel through which the all too often forgotten positive effects of emigration on



                                                19
origin countries can arise. Future work should seek to more clearly disentangle how such effects
occur and what role the institutional and social contexts play.

                                           REFERENCES

Adams, R.H., and J. Page. 2005. “Do International Migration and Remittances Reduce Poverty
   in Developing Countries?” World Development 33 (10): 1645–69.
Akee, R., and D. Kapur. 2012. “Remittances and Rashomon.” Working Paper 285, Center for
   Global Development.
Antman, F.M. 2011. “The Intergenerational Effects of Paternal Migration on Schooling and
   Work: What Can We Learn from Children’s Time Allocations?” Journal of Development
   Economics 96 (2): 200–8.
———. 2012. “Gender, Educational Attainment, and the Impact of Parental Migration on Children
   Left Behind. Journal of Population Economics 25 (4): 1187–214.
Bansak, C., and B. Chezum. 2009. “How do Remittances Affect Human Capital Formation of
   School-Age Boys and Girls?” The American Economic Review: 145–8.
Barsbai, T., H. Rapoport, A. Steinmayr, and C. Trebesch. Forthcoming. “The Effect of Labor
   Migration on the Diffusion of Democracy: Evidence from a Former Soviet Republic.”
   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Batista, C., and P.C. Vicente. 2011. “Do Migrants Improve Governance at Home? Evidence from
   a Voting Experiment.” The World Bank Economic Review 25 (1): 77–104.
Beine, M., F. Docquier, and M. Schiff. 2013. “International Migration, Transfer of Norms and
   Home Country Fertility.” Canadian Journal of Economics 46 (4): 1406–30.
Berry, J.W. 1997. “Immigration, Acculturation, and Adaptation.” Applied Psychology 46 (1): 5–
   34.
Böhme, M., R. Persian, and T. Stöhr. 2015. “Alone But Better Off? Adult Child Migration and
   Health of Elderly Parents in Moldova.” Journal of Health Economics 39: 211–27.
Böhme, M., T. Stöhr. 2014. “Household Interview Duration Analysis in Capi Survey
   Management.” Field Methods 26: 390–405.
Borcan, O., M. Lindahl, and A. Mitrut. 2017. “Fighting Corruption in Education: What Works
   and Who Benefits?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (1): 180–209.
Calero, C., A.S. Bedi, and R. Sparrow. 2009. “Remittances, Liquidity Constraints and Human
   Capital Investments in Ecuador.” World Development 37 (6): 1143–54.
Cameron, L., N. Erkal, L. Gangadharan, and M. Zhang. 2015. “Cultural Integration:
   Experimental Evidence of Convergence in Immigrants’ Preferences.” Journal of Economic
   Behavior and Organization 111: 38–58.
Carasciuc, L. 2001. “Corruption and Quality of Governance: the Case of Moldova.” Monograph,
   Transparency International.
Careja, R., and P. Emmenegger. 2012. “Making Democratic Citizens the Effects of Migration
   Experience on Political Attitudes in Central and Eastern Europe.” Comparative Political
   Studies 45 (7): 875–902.
Chauvet, L., and M. Mercier. 2014. “Do Return Migrants Transfer Political Norms to Their
   Origin Country? Evidence from Mali.” Journal of Comparative Economics 42 (3): 630–51.




                                                20
Corbacho, A., D.W. Gingerich, V. Oliveros, and M. Ruiz-Vega. 2016. “Corruption as a Self-
    Fulfilling Prophecy: Evidence from a Survey Experiment in Costa Rica. American Journal of
    Political Science 60 (4): 1077–92.
Cortes, P. 2015. “The Feminization of International Migration and Its Effects on the Children
    Left Behind: Evidence from the Philippines.” World Development 65: 62–78.
Docquier, F., and H. Rapoport. 2012. “Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development.” Journal of
    Economic Literature: 681–730.
Dong, B., U. Dulleck, and B. Torgler. 2012. “Conditional Corruption.” Journal of Economic
    Psychology 33 (3): 609–27.
Emran, M. S., F. Shilpi, and A. Islam. 2013. “Admission Is Free Only If Your Dad Is Rich!:
    Distributional Effects of Corruption in Schools in Developing Countries.” World Bank
    Policy Research Working Paper 6671, World Bank.
ESP/NEPC. 2010. Drawing the Line: Parental Informal Payments for Education across Eurasia.
    Education Support Program (ESP) of the Open Society Institute, Budapest.
Fehr, E., and S. Gächter. 2000. “Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods Experiments.”
    The American Economic Review 90 (4): 980–94.
Finlay, K., and L.M. Magnusson. 2009. “Implementing Weak-Instrument Robust Tests for a
    General Class of Instrumental-Variables Models.” Stata Journal 9 (3): 1–26.
Henderson, J.V., A. Storeygard, and D.N. Weil. 2012. “Measuring Economic Growth from Outer
    Space.” American Economic Review 102 (2): 994–1028.
Heyneman, S.P., K.H. Anderson, and N. Nuraliyeva. 2008. “The Cost of Corruption in Higher
    Education.” Comparative Education Review 52 (1): 1–25.
Houtenville, A.J., and K.S. Conway. 2008. “Parental Effort, School Resources, and Student
    Achievement.” Journal of Human Resources 43 (2): 437–53.
Ivlevs, A., and R.M. King. 2014. “Emigration, Remittances, and Corruption Experience of Those
    Staying Behind.” IZA Discussion Paper 8521, IZA.
Ivlevs, A. and R. M. King. 2017. "Does emigration reduce corruption?" Public Choice.
Lücke, M., T. Omar Mahmoud, and C. Peuker. 2012. “Identifying the Motives of Migrant
    Philanthropy.” Working paper no. 1790, Kiel Institute for the World Economy.
McKenzie, D., and H. Rapoport. 2010. “Can Migration Reduce Educational Attainment?
    Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Population Economics 24 (4): 1331–58.
Mikusheva, A., and B.P. Poi. 2006. “Tests and Confidence Sets With Correct Sive When
    Instruments Are Potentially Weak.” Stata Journal 6 (3): 335–47.
Moreira, M.J. 2009. “Tests With Correct Size When Instruments Can Be Arbitrarily Weak.”
    Journal of Econometrics 152 (2): 131–40.
Mountford, A. 1997. “Can A Brain Drain Be Good for Growth in the Source Economy?” Journal
    of Development Economics 53 (2): 287–303.
MPC. 2013. “Migration Policy Centre: Migration Profile Moldova.” Report.
Osipian, A.L. 2009. “Corruption Hierarchies in Higher Education in the Former Soviet Bloc.”
    International Journal of Educational Development 29 (3): 321–30.
Spilimbergo, A. 2009. “Democracy and Foreign Education.” American Economic Review 99 (1):
    528–43.
Transparency International. 2013. Global Corruption Barometer: Moldova.
    https://www.transparency.org/gcb2013/country/?country=moldova, [accessed 10.06.2015].




                                             21
Walker, M. 2011. “PISA 2009 Plus Results: Performance of 15-Year-Olds in Reading,
   Mathematics and Science for 10 Additional Participants.” Australian Council for Educational
   Research (ACER) Press.
World Bank. 2014. World Development Indicators. http://data.worldbank.org/country/moldova,
   [accessed 10.02.2015].
Yang, D. 2008. “International Migration, Remittances and Household Investment: Evidence
   from Philippine Migrants’ Exchange Rate Shocks.” The Economic Journal 118 (528): 591–
   630.
Zhang, H., J.R. Behrman, C.S. Fan, X. Wei, and J. Zhang. 2014. “Does Parental Absence Reduce
   Cognitive Achievements? Evidence from Rural China.” Journal of Development Economics
   111 (0): 181–95.




Figure 1. Kernel density plots of the household asset index in 1999 and 2011

                              1999                            1                       2011
    .8




                                                              .8
    .6




                                                              .6
 density
   .4




                                                              .4
    .2




                                                              .2
    0




                                                              0




           −2   −1             0               1          2        −1             0          1   2
                               x                                                       x

                non−migrant          migrant       non−migrant          migrant




Source: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012




                                                          22
Source: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. All monetary values are expressed in Moldovan Lei.
*, **, and *** indicate p  0.10 , p  0.05 , and p  0.01 , respectively.




                                                23
Source: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Standard errors in parentheses. Panel A uses
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors throughout. Panels B and C use heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors that cluster at the community level. All models include a constant. Child characteristics:
age, gender, serious illness in the past 12 months (dummy variable), and the (log) distance to school in
minutes. Household characteristics: mean years of education of adult members, older siblings (dummy
variable), household size, parents divorced, and urban/rural residence status. Main migration destinations:
2004 share of the community’s population that is a migrant to Italy, Ukraine, Romania, and Russia (four

                                                    24
variables). *, **, and *** indicate p  0.10 , p  0.05 , and p  0.01 , respectively. In panel A, column
1: migration indicates the share of migrant households in the community; the dependent variable is the
community’s share of respondents reporting positive informal payments to schoolteachers. Interpreting
panel A column 1, please note that the survey was not designed to be representative at the community
level. Panel B reports the reduced form where the outcome of the second stage is regressed on the
instrument (Network Growth) and the endogenous variable (migration) is excluded. Note that interpreting
the size of the instrumental variable is not easy, because it is a sum of Network-Growth Interactions.
Differences in missing values for the dependent variables explain the different number of observations
across columns. Panel C shows the first and second stage regressions. Migration is instrumented using a
network-growth interaction IV. K-P weakid is the Kleibergen-Paap weak identification statistic. The CLR
test refers to confidence region and the test statistic using the “condivreg” package by Mikusheva and
Poi (2006). The cluster-robust AR 95% confidence set is calculated using the “rivtest” package by Finlay
and Magnusson (2009). Coefficients for all the control variables shown in supplemental appendix:
reduced form (panel B) in table S.3, first stage (panel C) in table S.4, column 1, and second stage (panel
C) in table S.5.




Source: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster
at the community level in parentheses. See footnote 16 for a list of assets included in the asset index.
Child characteristics: age, gender, serious illness in the past 12 months (dummy variable), and the (log)
distance to school in minutes. Household characteristics: mean years of education of adult members, older
siblings (dummy variable), household size, parents divorced, and urban/rural residence status. Main
migration destinations: 2004 share of the community’s population that is a migrant to Italy, Ukraine,
Romania, and Russia (4 variables). *, **, and *** indicate p  0.10 , p  0.05 , and p  0.01 ,
respectively. K-P weakid refers to the Kleibergen-Paap weak identification statistic. Migration is
instrumented using a network-growth interaction IV.




                                                   25
Source: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster
at the school level in parentheses. The school asset index is based on dummies for working water supply,
working hot water, working sewage, working heating capacity, the existence of a library and of a medical
office, the number of classrooms, auditorium seats, and the gym and sports field size. This information as
well as the school budgets come from BOOST data. School budget variables are per student amounts.
School fixed effects estimates in columns 3 and 4. Sample size decreased due to inability to match all
schools (c.f. table S.17 in the appendix. Child characteristics: age, gender, serious illness in the past 12
months (dummy variable), and the (log) distance to school in minutes. Household characteristics: mean
years of education of adult members, older siblings (dummy variable), household size, parents divorced,
and urban/rural residence status. Main migration destinations: 2004 share of the community’s population
that is a migrant to Italy, Ukraine, Romania, and Russia (four variables). *, **, and *** indicate
 p  0.10 , p  0.05 , and p  0.01 , respectively.




                                                    26
                   Appendix



Can Parental Migration Reduce Petty Corruption in
                   Education?
                      S.1   Detailed description of school-level data


The data on school-level public expenditures are derived from the World Bank’s Open
Budget Initiative (or BOOST).38 The Moldovan Ministry of Finance provides all budgets
of public organisms at a very disaggregated level and on a yearly basis going back to 2005.
Each item is classiﬁed according to source, function and expenditure type. In Moldova,
the ﬁnancing of public schools is highly decentralized and typically, determined at the
municipality (or rayon) level. We collect all school-level budgets that were executed
during the year 2010 and aggregate expenditures in ﬁve categories: 1) staff wages, 2)
teaching materials (also includes food and ofﬁce supplies), 3) utilities, 4) transportation,
and 5) maintenance (includes small-scale purchases and repairs of physical capital). We
drop all those schools which do not have positive executed expenditures on categories 1),
2) and 3), since they are likely to suffer from severe missing data problems. However, we
allow for zero executed totals on categories 4) and 5), since these are arguably not always
necessary for the core activities of schools.
   Finally, we obtain the total number of students for each school from administrative
data of the Moldovan Ministry of Education. In summary, we have complete survey data
for a total of 2,168 school-age children (6-18 years old) from 1,463 households. School
names from the survey and the ofﬁcial records were ﬁrst matched automatically. In a
second step, we matched strings by hand, thus correcting minor errors such as typos.
Wherever we could certainly establish a link, we then manually entered the school code
for the respective child. In many cases the string variable covering the school name did
not point to a particular school with certainty. Whenever we were less than 100% sure
about the correctness of a match we did not match the respective child’s record. After
matching the survey data with the school-level budgets and number of students, we have
complete data for a sample of 1,158 children from 853 households. Most of the losses in
sample size resulted from not reporting or misreporting the school name in the household
survey and missing executed budget data at the school-level. To a smaller extent, we could
not unambiguously match some school names as reported in the household survey with
their counterparts in the BOOST dataset, for example if parents gave the school name as


                                                i
“liceu <municipality>” but there were several schools of the respective school type in that
municipality.
   Table S.17 presents summary statistics of the child-observations successfully matched
across all data sources and of those for which the matching failed. Failure to match is to
some extent random but tends to happen more often in urban areas, where, for example,
a particular part of town has more than one school of a speciﬁc kind. As a consequence,
16-18 years old children who attend upper secondary schooling are also disproportion-
ately missing from the matched sample. The reason is that, at higher education levels,
teenagers tend to move away from smaller communities to attend school in more popu-
lous towns, where the chances of ambiguous matches across data sources are higher.39
This pattern also explains why the average distance to school and transportation expen-
ditures are signiﬁcantly higher for the unmatched sample while average caregiver time is
lower.
   For a clearer interpretation of the regression results, Figure S.4 depicts that the school-
level variation on budgets for staff wages is almost completely explained by variation in
the number of teachers employed. The graph plots the values of school expenditures on
wages against the predicted values of a regression of wage spending on the number of
teachers. The red dashed line is the identity line (i.e., y = x). The regression’s R2 is
approximately 98%. Therefore, school budgets for staff wages can be thought of as a
representation of the quantity of schoolteachers.




                                             ii
                                                                      Figure S.1: Histogram of private education inputs


          3




                                                                                                                                   3
          2




                                                                                                                                   2
Density




                                                                                                                         Density
          1




                                                                                                                                   1
          0




                                                                                                                                   0
                                           0                     2         4           6                        8                      0        2       4          6       8         10
                                                                 Payments to teachers (log)                                                Supplementary tutoring expenditures (log)
          3




                                                                                                                                   3
          2




                                                                                                                                   2
Density




                                                                                                                         Density
          1




                                                                                                                                   1
          0




                                                                                                                                   0




                                           0                    2           4         6               8             10                 1         2        3         4             5        6
                                                                         Transports (log)                                                               Caregiver time


                                                             Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012.




                         Figure S.2: Correlation of bribe payments to teachers and migration rate
                                 1
          Share of respondents reporting paying bribes
               .2        .4      0 .6         .8




                                                         0                             .2                .4                .6                                                         .8
                                                                                      Share of respondents in migrant household

                                                             Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Each circle represents one community. The size corresponds to the
                                                             number of children per community.




                                                                                                                    iii
Figure S.3: Map of communities with above and below median values of the network-
growth instrumental variable




              Notes: Graph is taken from Böhme et al. (2015).




Figure S.4: School-level wage expenditure in BOOST is explained by number of teachers
                                            6000
                        Actual wage expenditures (in thousands)
                                 2000       0    4000




                                                                  0                       2000                    4000                       6000
                                                                      Wage expenditures predicted by the number of teachers (in thousands)


              Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012.




                                                                                                   iv
Table S.1: School enrollment rates in Moldova (2010)

                Age           N        Meana (%)                 (Std Error)b
                7-10         696             99                     (0.006)
               11-15         973             99                     (0.004)
               16-18         666             87                     (0.018)

                 All        2335             96                     (0.006)
               Source: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. a Nationally rep-
               resentative weighted mean. b Standards errors clustered at the commu-
               nity level.




  Table S.2: School budgets - Descriptive Statistics
  Panel A: Descriptives at the student level
      School budgets               Mean               (SD)            Min.             Max.
  Total                           5522.73         (1425.79)        847.57              19497.42

  Categories:
  Wages                           4114.28          (978.93)        372.13               9646.96
  Teaching materials               436.26          (222.29)         11.97               3265.34
  Utilities                        409.91          (300.1)          43.16               2622.54
  Transports                       159.76          (237.17)          0                  1914.40
  Maintenance                      349.05          (586.01)          0                  9178.03


  N                                                            1177



  Panel B: Descriptives at the school level
      School budgets               Mean               (SD)            Min.             Max.
  Total                           5638.62         (1960.69)        847.57              19497.42

  Categories:
  Wages                           4214.31         (1199.81)        372.13               9646.96
  Teaching materials               455.83          (300.07)         11.97               3265.34
  Utilities                        399             (362.73)         43.16               2622.54
  Transports                       122.23          (238.79)          0                  1914.40
  Maintenance                      388.96          (829.44)          0                  9178.03
  Number of students               460.27          (321.75)         53                  1438


  N                                                             182
  Notes: Authors’ calculations based on BOOST and Moldovan Ministry of Education data for 2010.
  School budgets are executed school budgets during 2010 calculated on a per student basis. Success-
  fully matched schools attended by children from the household survey only. All monetary values
  are expressed in Moldovan Lei.




                                                  v
Table S.3: The effect of migration on private education inputs: reduced form estimates

                                             School                       Payments                           Out-of-school                          Transportation                  Caregiver
                                           enrollment                    to teachers                           tutoring                              expenditure                      time
                                                (1)                (2)               (3)                   (4)               (5)                  (6)               (7)                  (8)
                                                                   log           D (Y > 0)                 log           D (Y > 0)                log           D (Y > 0)
Network-Growth                              -0.000∗∗           -0.005∗∗            -0.001∗∗           -0.002∗∗∗           -0.000∗∗              0.000               0.000            0.003∗∗∗
                                             (0.000)            (0.002)             (0.000)             (0.001)            (0.000)             (0.002)             (0.000)            (0.001)
Child characteristics
Age                                        -0.008∗∗∗           0.049∗∗∗            0.008∗∗              0.026∗             0.003∗             0.181∗∗∗           0.026∗∗∗           -0.277∗∗∗
                                             (0.001)             (0.017)            (0.003)             (0.013)            (0.002)             (0.020)            (0.003)             (0.013)
Male                                       -0.020∗∗∗           -0.389∗∗∗          -0.078∗∗∗           -0.218∗∗∗          -0.033∗∗∗              -0.042             -0.008               0.028
                                             (0.007)             (0.109)            (0.023)             (0.082)            (0.012)             (0.091)            (0.014)             (0.076)
Serious illness                               -0.007             0.351∗              0.040             0.273∗∗            0.035∗∗               0.232              0.033               -0.019
                                             (0.008)             (0.179)            (0.033)             (0.111)            (0.016)             (0.156)            (0.024)             (0.109)
Distance to school (log)                      -0.004              0.034              0.001               0.015              0.003             0.626∗∗∗           0.087∗∗∗              -0.019
                                             (0.006)             (0.089)            (0.017)            (0.055)             (0.008)             (0.105)            (0.015)             (0.060)
Household characteristics
Mean years education                        0.006∗∗∗            0.073∗∗               0.011           0.100∗∗∗            0.014∗∗∗            0.131∗∗∗           0.018∗∗∗            0.076∗∗∗
                                             (0.002)            (0.034)             (0.007)            (0.028)             (0.004)             (0.029)            (0.004)             (0.023)
Older siblings                              0.045∗∗∗           -0.233∗∗             -0.034∗           -0.178∗∗            -0.024∗∗             -0.154∗            -0.024∗           -0.223∗∗∗
                                             (0.007)            (0.099)             (0.018)            (0.076)             (0.011)             (0.092)            (0.014)             (0.063)
Household size                              -0.005∗∗             -0.039              -0.008             0.010               0.002               0.015              0.002               -0.028
                                             (0.002)            (0.046)             (0.010)            (0.029)             (0.004)             (0.036)            (0.005)             (0.036)
Parents divorced                              -0.011            0.417∗              0.083∗              -0.000              0.001               0.094              0.015              -0.240∗
                                             (0.014)            (0.212)             (0.042)            (0.137)             (0.020)             (0.166)            (0.025)             (0.136)
Urban                                         0.005            0.936∗∗∗             0.126∗∗           1.127∗∗∗            0.158∗∗∗            0.889∗∗∗           0.142∗∗∗               0.062
                                             (0.007)            (0.288)             (0.050)            (0.225)             (0.032)             (0.253)            (0.043)             (0.147)
Main migration destinations
Migrant share Italy                           -0.000             0.007              0.002∗              -0.004             -0.001              -0.001               -0.000             0.001
                                             (0.000)            (0.004)             (0.001)            (0.003)             (0.000)             (0.004)             (0.001)            (0.003)
Migrant share Ukraine                       0.001∗∗              0.010               0.003              -0.004             -0.001             -0.024∗             -0.004∗            -0.032∗∗
                                             (0.001)            (0.014)             (0.003)            (0.009)             (0.001)             (0.012)             (0.002)            (0.015)
Migrant share Romania                       0.003∗∗∗             0.004               0.001              -0.002             -0.000              -0.005               -0.000             0.015
                                             (0.001)            (0.047)             (0.010)            (0.015)             (0.002)             (0.024)             (0.004)            (0.018)
Migrant share Russia                        0.001∗∗             0.024∗∗             0.005∗∗           0.010∗∗∗            0.001∗∗∗             -0.004              -0.001           -0.015∗∗∗
                                             (0.000)            (0.010)             (0.002)            (0.004)             (0.001)             (0.010)             (0.002)            (0.006)
Constant                                    1.013∗∗∗             0.594              0.218∗              -0.671             -0.083            -4.433∗∗∗           -0.622∗∗∗           6.556∗∗∗
                                             (0.034)            (0.618)             (0.123)            (0.468)             (0.068)             (0.536)             (0.077)            (0.399)
Observations                                  2224                2148               2148                2170               2170                2168                2168               2162
R2                                            0.064               0.068              0.042               0.095              0.084               0.173               0.168             0.265
F-stat                                        5.724               7.849              5.860               4.111              4.427              13.257              13.970             40.497
Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. Columns show reduced form regressions
where the outcome of the second stage is regressed on the instrument (Network Growth) and the endogenous variable (migration) is excluded. Note that interpreting the size of the instrumental
variable is not easy, because it is a sum of Network-Growth Interactions. Differences in missing values for the dependent variables explain the different number of observations across columns.
*, **, and *** indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively.




                                                                                     vi
Table S.4: The effect of migration on private education inputs: ﬁrst stage IV regression

                                                                              Migration
                                                                        (1)                 (2)
                        Instrument
                        Network-Growth                              0.001∗∗∗           0.001∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.000)            (0.000)
                        School budgets (per student)
                        Wages (log)                                                       0.024
                                                                                         (0.072)
                        Teaching materials (log)                                          0.015
                                                                                         (0.036)
                        Utilities (log)                                                   -0.010
                                                                                         (0.024)
                        Transports (log)                                                  -0.016
                                                                                         (0.011)
                        Maintenance (log)                                                 -0.011
                                                                                         (0.011)
                        Child characteristics
                        Age                                           0.005               0.004
                                                                     (0.003)             (0.005)
                        Male                                          -0.002              0.033
                                                                     (0.018)             (0.027)
                        Serious illness                               -0.008              0.003
                                                                     (0.023)             (0.030)
                        Distance to school (log)                      -0.014              -0.006
                                                                     (0.017)             (0.024)
                        Household characteristics
                        Mean years education                        0.014∗∗             0.014∗
                                                                     (0.006)            (0.008)
                        Older siblings                                0.013              0.014
                                                                     (0.017)            (0.024)
                        Household size                             0.040∗∗∗            0.044∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.011)            (0.015)
                        Parents divorced                              -0.026             -0.054
                                                                     (0.044)            (0.051)
                        Urban                                      -0.125∗∗∗           -0.118∗∗
                                                                     (0.033)            (0.056)
                        Main migration destinations
                        Migrant share Italy                           -0.000              -0.002
                                                                     (0.001)             (0.001)
                        Migrant share Ukraine                         0.001              -0.012∗
                                                                     (0.003)             (0.007)
                        Migrant share Romania                         -0.005              -0.004
                                                                     (0.005)             (0.005)
                        Migrant share Russia                        -0.004∗∗            -0.004∗∗
                                                                     (0.002)             (0.002)

                        Constant                                      -0.165              -0.317
                                                                     (0.127)             (0.576)
                        N                                              2148               1148
                        F Statistic                                    10.6                9.1
                        Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust
                        standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. *, **, and
                        *** indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively.




                                                            vii
                                              Table S.5: The effect of migration on private education inputs

Second stage IV regressions                       School                          Payments                                 Out-of-school                             Transportation                     Caregiver
                                                enrollment                       to teachers                                 tutoring                                 expenditure                         time
                                                     (1)                   (2)                  (3)                    (4)                  (5)                   (6)                 (7)                   (8)
                                                                           log              D (Y > 0)                  log              D (Y > 0)                 log             D (Y > 0)
Migration                                          -0.129             -4.430∗∗∗              -0.829∗∗              -1.987∗∗              -0.274∗∗               0.247                 0.091              2.667∗
                                                  (0.097)               (1.717)               (0.332)               (0.869)               (0.126)              (1.905)               (0.304)             (1.449)
Child characteristics
Age                                             -0.007∗∗∗             0.072∗∗∗               0.012∗∗∗               0.037∗∗               0.005∗∗             0.180∗∗∗             0.026∗∗∗            -0.294∗∗∗
                                                  (0.002)              (0.023)                (0.004)               (0.015)               (0.002)              (0.022)              (0.003)             (0.019)
Male                                            -0.019∗∗∗             -0.400∗∗∗             -0.080∗∗∗              -0.214∗∗              -0.033∗∗               -0.042               -0.008               0.039
                                                  (0.007)              (0.142)                (0.028)               (0.089)               (0.013)              (0.090)              (0.013)             (0.096)
Serious illness                                    -0.006               0.314∗                  0.033               0.262∗∗               0.033∗∗                0.234                0.033               0.014
                                                  (0.009)               (0.181)               (0.033)               (0.113)               (0.016)              (0.156)              (0.024)              (0.131)
Distance to school (log)                           -0.006                -0.028                -0.011                -0.018                -0.001             0.630∗∗∗             0.088∗∗∗               0.021
                                                  (0.008)              (0.116)                (0.022)               (0.061)               (0.009)              (0.113)              (0.017)             (0.087)
Household characteristics
Mean years education                             0.008∗∗∗              0.136∗∗∗               0.023∗∗              0.127∗∗∗              0.017∗∗∗             0.128∗∗∗             0.017∗∗                0.042
                                                  (0.002)               (0.048)               (0.009)               (0.031)               (0.004)              (0.043)              (0.007)              (0.029)
Older siblings                                   0.047∗∗∗                -0.177                -0.023               -0.151∗                -0.021              -0.157∗              -0.025∗            -0.264∗∗∗
                                                  (0.008)               (0.127)               (0.023)               (0.086)               (0.013)              (0.092)              (0.014)             (0.091)
Household size                                     0.000                 0.139                 0.025                  0.089                 0.012               0.005                -0.001             -0.136∗
                                                  (0.005)               (0.093)               (0.018)               (0.055)               (0.008)              (0.090)              (0.014)             (0.079)
Parents divorced                                   -0.014                0.303                 0.061                 -0.044                -0.005               0.100                0.018               -0.177
                                                  (0.014)               (0.282)               (0.055)               (0.174)               (0.025)              (0.180)              (0.028)             (0.168)
Urban                                              -0.012                0.382                 0.022               0.875∗∗∗              0.123∗∗∗             0.920∗∗∗             0.153∗∗∗              0.409∗
                                                  (0.013)               (0.361)               (0.066)               (0.237)               (0.033)              (0.313)              (0.050)             (0.224)
Main migration destinations
Migrant share Italy                                -0.000                 0.005                 0.001               -0.005∗               -0.001∗               -0.001               -0.000                0.004
                                                  (0.000)               (0.004)               (0.001)               (0.003)               (0.000)              (0.004)              (0.001)              (0.003)
Migrant share Ukraine                             0.001∗                  0.014                 0.004                -0.002                -0.000              -0.025∗              -0.004∗              -0.033∗
                                                  (0.001)               (0.022)               (0.005)               (0.012)               (0.002)              (0.014)              (0.002)              (0.019)
Migrant share Romania                             0.003∗∗                -0.017                -0.003                -0.011                -0.001               -0.004                0.000                0.025
                                                  (0.001)               (0.035)               (0.008)               (0.012)               (0.002)              (0.025)              (0.004)              (0.022)
Migrant share Russia                               0.000                0.007∗                0.001∗                  0.002               0.000∗                -0.003               -0.000               -0.004
                                                  (0.000)               (0.004)               (0.001)               (0.002)               (0.000)              (0.003)              (0.001)              (0.003)

Constant                                         0.996∗∗∗                -0.136                0.081               -0.984∗∗               -0.126∗             -4.392∗∗∗            -0.608∗∗∗            6.981∗∗∗
                                                  (0.038)               (0.735)               (0.146)               (0.500)               (0.072)               (0.602)              (0.090)             (0.528)
N                                                   2223                 2148                   2148                  2170                  2170                 2168                 2168                 2162
K-P weakid                                           9.6                 10.6                   10.6                   11                    11                  10.7                 10.7                 10.6
95% CLR conﬁdence set                           [-0.4, 0.06]        [-9.25, -1.88]        [-1.76, -0.32]        [-4.99, -0.01]         [-0.71, 0.02]        [-2.34, 2.82]        [-0.28, 0.49]        [0.99, 5.57]
CLR test p-value                                    0.17                 0.00                  0.00                  0.05                   0.07                0.83                 0.60                 0.00
Cluster-robust 95% AR conf. set                [-0.51, 0.02]        [-9.12,-0.83]         [-1.68,-0.08]         [-5.12, -0.65]         [-0.72,-0.07]        [-3.45, 5.91]        [-0.47, 1.02]        [0.66, 8.35]
Cluster-robust AR p-value                           0.11                 0.03                  0.04                  0.01                   0.01                0.90                 0.76                 0.01
Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01,
respectively. K-P weakid is the Kleibergen-Paap weak identiﬁcation statistic. Migration is instrumented using a network-growth interaction IV. For ﬁrst stage, please refer to Table S.4. The CLR test refers to
conﬁdence region and the test statistic using the “condivreg” package by Mikusheva and Poi (2006). The cluster-robust AR 95% conﬁdence set is calculated using the “rivtest” package by Finlay and Magnusson
(2009).




                                                                                                       viii
Table S.6: The effect of migration on education expenditures: average marginal effects
after IV Probit

                                                       Payments to teachers                  Out-of-school tutoring                 Transportation expenditure
                                                      (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                   (6)
                                                  D (Y > 0)           D (Y > 0)            D (Y > 0)           D (Y > 0)           D (Y > 0)             D (Y > 0)
       Migration                                   -0.536∗∗∗           -0.433∗∗∗            -0.369∗∗               -0.277              0.120                0.243
                                                     (0.069)            (0.157)              (0.177)              (0.174)             (0.305)              (0.280)

       School budgets                                   No                 Yes                  No                  Yes                 No                    Yes
       Child characteristics                            Yes                Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
       Household characteristics                        Yes                Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
       Main migration destinations                      Yes                Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
       N                                               2148                1158                2170                1158                 2168                 1158
       Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. *, **, and ***
       indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively. School budgets: (log) per student school budgets for (i) staff wages, (ii) teaching materials, (iii)
       utilities, (iv) transports, (v) maintenance. Child characteristics: age, gender, serious illness in the past 12 months (dummy variable), and the (log) distance to
       school in minutes. Household characteristics: mean years of education of adult members, older siblings (dummy variable), household size, parents divorced and
       urban/rural residence status. Main migration destinations: 2004 share of the community’s population that is a migrant to Italy, Ukraine, Romania and Russia (4
       variables). Migration is instrumented using a network-growth interaction IV.




       Table S.7: The effect of migration on private education inputs: OLS regressions

                                             School                        Payments                           Out-of-school                          Transportation          Caregiver
                                           enrollment                     to teachers                           tutoring                              expenditure              time
                                                 (1)                (2)               (3)                  (4)                (5)                 (6)               (7)         (8)
                                                                    log           D (Y > 0)                log            D (Y > 0)               log           D (Y > 0)
 Migration                                  0.024∗∗∗             -0.142              -0.026              0.018               0.007             0.277∗∗            0.043∗∗      -0.053
                                             (0.008)             (0.141)             (0.028)            (0.099)             (0.015)            (0.134)            (0.020)     (0.098)
                                                                 (0.135)             (0.027)            (0.096)             (0.015)            (0.131)            (0.020)     (0.098)
 Child characteristics
 Age                                        -0.008∗∗∗           0.050∗∗∗            0.008∗∗             0.026∗               0.003            0.180∗∗∗            0.026∗∗∗   -0.276∗∗∗
                                              (0.001)            (0.017)             (0.003)            (0.013)             (0.002)            (0.020)             (0.003)     (0.013)
 Male                                       -0.019∗∗∗          -0.397∗∗∗           -0.079∗∗∗          -0.222∗∗∗           -0.034∗∗∗             -0.043              -0.008       0.031
                                              (0.007)            (0.110)             (0.023)            (0.082)             (0.012)            (0.090)             (0.013)     (0.076)
 Serious illness                               -0.004           0.370∗∗               0.044            0.283∗∗             0.036∗∗              0.235               0.033       -0.032
                                              (0.008)            (0.180)             (0.033)           (0.111)              (0.016)            (0.158)             (0.024)     (0.108)
 Distance to school (log)                      -0.003             0.035               0.001              0.017               0.003            0.630∗∗∗            0.087∗∗∗      -0.024
                                              (0.006)            (0.086)             (0.017)           (0.055)              (0.008)            (0.106)             (0.015)     (0.061)
 Household characteristics
 Mean years education                       0.006∗∗∗            0.083∗∗             0.013∗             0.104∗∗∗           0.014∗∗∗            0.128∗∗∗            0.017∗∗∗    0.070∗∗∗
                                             (0.002)             (0.034)            (0.007)             (0.028)            (0.004)             (0.030)             (0.005)     (0.023)
 Older siblings                             0.044∗∗∗            -0.235∗∗            -0.034∗            -0.180∗∗           -0.025∗∗             -0.158∗             -0.025∗   -0.220∗∗∗
                                             (0.007)             (0.100)            (0.018)             (0.077)            (0.011)             (0.092)             (0.014)     (0.062)
 Household size                             -0.006∗∗             -0.039              -0.009              0.006              0.001               0.004               0.001       -0.022
                                             (0.002)             (0.044)            (0.009)             (0.029)            (0.004)             (0.036)             (0.005)     (0.036)
 Parents divorced                             -0.011            0.418∗∗             0.083∗∗              0.003              0.002               0.101               0.017      -0.246∗
                                             (0.014)             (0.206)            (0.041)             (0.138)            (0.020)             (0.168)             (0.025)     (0.138)
 Urban                                        0.006             0.878∗∗∗            0.115∗∗            1.110∗∗∗           0.156∗∗∗            0.923∗∗∗            0.148∗∗∗       0.081
                                             (0.008)             (0.298)            (0.052)             (0.229)            (0.032)             (0.250)             (0.042)     (0.152)
 Main migration destinations
 Migrant share Italy                          -0.000              0.004                0.001            -0.005∗             -0.001∗             -0.001             -0.000       0.003
                                             (0.000)             (0.004)             (0.001)            (0.003)             (0.000)             (0.004)            (0.001)    (0.003)
 Migrant share Ukraine                        0.000               -0.010              -0.001             -0.014              -0.002           -0.025∗∗∗           -0.003∗∗     -0.018
                                             (0.001)             (0.012)             (0.003)            (0.009)             (0.001)             (0.009)            (0.001)    (0.015)
 Migrant share Romania                      0.003∗∗∗             -0.010              -0.002              -0.009              -0.001             -0.004               0.000      0.024
                                             (0.001)             (0.046)             (0.010)            (0.015)             (0.002)             (0.025)            (0.004)    (0.019)
 Migrant share Russia                         -0.000              0.002                0.000              0.000              0.000               -0.003             -0.000     -0.001
                                             (0.000)             (0.004)             (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.000)             (0.002)            (0.000)    (0.002)

 Constant                                   1.012∗∗∗              0.341               0.171             -0.773∗             -0.097            -4.389∗∗∗          -0.613∗∗∗   6.709∗∗∗
                                             (0.032)             (0.591)             (0.118)            (0.462)             (0.067)             (0.543)            (0.079)    (0.401)
 N                                             2223               2148                2148               2170                2170                2168               2168       2162
 R2                                            0.068              0.063               0.037              0.094               0.082               0.175              0.171      0.261
 F-stat                                        4.43               6.74                 4.81               3.96               4.27                13.07              13.76      39.76
 Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
 p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively.




                                                                                      ix
                                                                Table S.8: The effect of migration on private education inputs for different age groups
    Second stage IV regressions                    School                                         Payments                                                      Out-of-school                                                      Transportation                                         Caregiver
                                                 enrollment                                      to teachers                                                      tutoring                                                          expenditure                                             time

                                                    (1)                              (2)                            (3)                              (4)                             (5)                              (6)                               (7)                                   (8)
                                                                                     log                        D (Y > 0)                            log                         D (Y > 0)                            log                           D (Y > 0)

    PANEL A
    Age group 6-10

    Migration                                      -0.030                         -5.172∗                         -1.064∗                          -0.681                           -0.110                          -0.783                             -0.109                              2.085∗
    Child characteristics                           Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                             Yes                                Yes                                  Yes
    Household characteristics                       Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                             Yes                                Yes                                  Yes
    Main migration destinations                     Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                             Yes                                Yes                                  Yes
    N                                                739                            683                              683                             694                              694                             700                                700                                  718
    K-P weakid                                      9.762                          7.892                            7.892                           8.841                            8.841                           8.757                              8.757                               10.826
    95% CLR conﬁdence set                       [-0.22, 0.11]                  [-15.78, -1.63]                  [-3.27, -0.33]                  [-4.10, 1.21]                    [-0.64, 0.17]                   [-3.09, 1.83]                      [-0.46, 0.29]                        [ 0.37, 6.68]
    CLR test p-value                                0.66                            0.00                             0.00                           0.48                             0.43                            0.44                               0.48                                 0.01
    Cluster-robust 95% AR conf. set             [-0.28, 0.11]                  [-15.98, -1.75]                  [-3.30, -0.35]                  [-4.42, 2.07]                    [-0.69, 0.30]                   [-4.05, 1.55]                      [-0.59, 0.24]                        [0.07, 5.78]
    Cluster-robust AR p-value                        0.68                           0.00                             0.00                            0.59                             0.57                            0.47                               0.50                                0.04

    PANEL B
    Age group 11-15

    Migration                                      0.014                          -3.672∗                           -0.629                         -1.096                           -0.139                           1.191                             0.186                                2.751
                                                  (0.044)                          (2.232)                         (0.455)                         (1.075)                         (0.164)                          (2.140)                           (0.328)                              (2.050)




x
    Child characteristics                           Yes                              Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                               Yes                                  Yes
    Household characteristics                       Yes                              Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                               Yes                                  Yes
    Main migration destinations                     Yes                              Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                               Yes                                  Yes
    N                                                902                             892                             892                             898                              898                             895                                895                                 900
    K-P weakid                                      9.417                           9.529                           9.529                           9.754                            9.754                           9.290                              9.290                               9.831
    95% CLR conﬁdence set                       [-0.12, 0.17]                  [-11.69, -0.27]                  [-2.12, 0.07]                   [-5.35, 1.98]                    [-0.76, 0.34]                   [-1.56, 5.63]                      [-0.24, 0.87]                        [0.17, 9.23]
    CLR test p-value                                0.80                             0.04                           0.08                            0.44                             0.51                            0.36                               0.36                                 0.04
    Cluster-robust 95% AR conf. set             [-0.08, 0.14]                   [ -8.89, 2.25]                  [-1.62, 0.65]                   [-4.63, 0.90]                    [-0.65, 0.18]               [-2.28377, 9.24134]                    [-0.35, 1.42]                       [-0.09, 10.79]
    Cluster-robust AR p-value                        0.75                            0.16                            0.23                            0.28                            0.375                            0.55                               0.54                                0.07

    PANEL C
    Age group 16-18

    Migration                                      -0.889                          -2.189                           -0.275                         -5.319                           -0.650                          -1.760                             0.151                                3.957
                                                  (1.218)                          (4.187)                         (0.773)                         (5.042)                         (0.656)                          (6.882)                           (1.002)                              (4.420)
    Child characteristics                           Yes                              Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                               Yes                                  Yes
    Household characteristics                       Yes                              Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                               Yes                                  Yes
    Main migration destinations                     Yes                              Yes                             Yes                             Yes                             Yes                              Yes                               Yes                                  Yes
    N                                               582                           572                              572                               577                           577                              572                                572                                    543
    K-P weakid                                     0.992                         1.191                            1.191                             1.135                         1.135                            1.057                              1.057                                  1.352
    95% CLR conﬁdence set                (−∞, 0.23] ∪ [0.93, ∞)         (−∞, 15.70] ∪ [15.77, ∞)          (−∞, 5.42] ∪ [5.47, ∞)          (−∞, 4.20] ∪ [ 4.21, ∞)         (−∞, 0.70] ∪ [0.70, ∞)         (−∞, 18.42] ∪ [ 18.51, ∞)         (−∞, -93.81] ∪ [-80.82, ∞)             (−∞, -7.93] ∪ [-0.91, ∞)
    CLR test p-value                                0.11                         0.62                             0.75                               0.16                         0.24                             0.76                               0.86                                   0.10
    Cluster-robust 95% AR conf. set     [-5.66, 0.41] ∪ [0.70, 3.88]        [-18.60, 14.23]                   [-3.31, 2.76]             [-25.08, 0.07] ∪ [2.47, 14.44]        [-3.22, 1.92]                   [-28.74, 25.22]                     [-3.78, 4.08]                 [-13.37,-6.37] ∪ [-0.07, 21.28]
    Cluster-robust AR p-value                                                    0.61                             0.73                               0.06                         0.11                             0.78                               0.88                                   0.07

    Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively. All estimates from second stage 2SLS regressions. Migration is instrumented using a
    network-growth interaction IV. K-P weakid is the Kleibergen-Paap weak identiﬁcation statistic. The CLR test refers to conﬁdence region and the test statistic using the “condivreg” package by Mikusheva and Poi (2006). The cluster-robust AR 95% conﬁdence set is calculated using the “rivtest” package by
    Finlay and Magnusson (2009).
          Table S.9: Does migration predict perceived barriers to education?

Panel A: Perceived barriers to child’s education (%)

D.048: Is there anything standing in child’s way                                       Non-migrant             Migrant                       Total
of achieving your desired level of education?


Yes                                                                                          51.7                 34.6                        46.8
No                                                                                           45.8                 63.3                        50.8
Does not apply                                                                               1.3                  0.7                         1.1
Does not know                                                                                1.1                  1.5                         1.2

Total                                                                                        100                  100                        100
N                                                                                           1521                  610                        2131

D.049: If yes, what?


Financial reasons                                                                            87.6                 81.5                        86.3
Child’s ability                                                                               7.3                  6.8                         7.2
Other reasons                                                                                 2.6                  5.0                         3.1
No access to required level due to distance                                                  0.5                  2.7                         1.0
Does not know                                                                                2.0                  4.1                         2.4

Total                                                                                        100                  100                         100
N                                                                                            808                  222                        1030


Panel B: Second-stage IV regressions - LPM and IV Probit

                                                                                           D(Barrier to child’s education)
                                                                      (1)                    (2)                  (3)                         (4)
                                                                     LPM                    LPM                 Probita                     Probita
Migration                                                         -1.930***             -1.924***             -0.612***                   -0.618***
                                                                    (0.471)               (0.567)               (0.010)                     (0.016)

School budgets                                                        No                     Yes                  No                          Yes
Child characteristics                                                 Yes                    Yes                  Yes                         Yes
Household characteristics                                             Yes                    Yes                  Yes                         Yes
Main migration destinations                                           Yes                    Yes                  Yes                         Yes
N                                                                    2008                   1057                 2008                        1057
K-P weakid                                                           22.37                  17.15                 –                           –
Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. School
budgets: (log) per student school budgets for (i) staff wages, (ii) teaching materials, (iii) utilities, (iv) transports, (v) maintenance. Child characteristics:
age, gender, serious illness in the past 12 months (dummy variable), and the (log) distance to school in minutes. Household characteristics: mean years
of education of adult members, older siblings (dummy variable), household size, parents divorced and urban/rural residence status. Main migration
destinations: 2004 share of the community’s population that is a migrant to Italy, Ukraine, Romania and Russia (4 variables). *, **, and *** indicate
p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively. K-P weakid refers to the Kleibergen-Paap weak identiﬁcation statistic. Migration is instrumented
using a network-growth interaction IV. a average partial effect (APE) reported for IV probit.




                                                                              xi
 Table S.10: Main problems with local public schools: community leaders’ perceptions

                                                                                         Main problem for this/these school(s)
                                                                               Frequency                          Share (in %)
                       Primary schools
                       Lack of teaching materials (books, etc)                     373                                41.49
                       Lack of health and hygiene facilities                       173                                19.24
                       Other (specify)                                             172                                19.13
                       Lack of water                                               123                                13.68
                       Lack of teachers                                             58                                 6.45
                       Total                                                       899                                   100

                       Secondary schools
                       Lack of teaching materials (books, etc)                     372                                41.01
                       Other (specify)                                             200                                22.05
                       Lack of health and hygiene facilities                       129                                14.22
                       Lack of water                                               128                                14.11
                       Lack of teachers                                             78                                 8.60
                       Total                                                       907                                   100
                       Source: Community questionnaires of CELB 2012 that asked community leaders about schools in the community in general.
                       The difference in number of observations between here and the sample used in Table S.11 is due to some communities not
                       having a school or the community leader not providing an answer to the question.




Table S.11: The effect of migration on private education inputs: controlling for public
school expenditures

 Second stage IV regressions                Payments to teachers             Out-of-school tutoring            Transportation expenditure              Caregiver time
                                              (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)                (5)                (6)                      (7)
                                              log         D (Y > 0)             log         D (Y > 0)              log            D (Y > 0)
 Migration                                 -2.576∗          -0.470∗          -0.926            -0.123             0.897               0.168                  1.189
                                           (1.494)          (0.285)          (0.810)          (0.116)            (1.890)             (0.295)                (1.263)
 School budgets (per student)
 Wages (log)                                0.049            -0.007           -0.341           -0.048            0.535               0.067                  -0.553∗
                                           (0.454)          (0.088)          (0.391)          (0.056)           (0.456)             (0.069)                 (0.291)
 Teaching materials (log)                   -0.081           -0.016           -0.013           -0.006           -0.222               -0.024                  -0.043
                                           (0.248)          (0.045)          (0.191)          (0.026)           (0.210)             (0.030)                 (0.117)
 Utilities (log)                            -0.252           -0.051           -0.168           -0.021          -0.306∗∗            -0.048∗∗                   0.099
                                           (0.179)          (0.033)          (0.110)          (0.016)           (0.138)             (0.021)                 (0.084)
 Transports (log)                           0.043            0.014            -0.046           -0.005          -0.212∗∗            -0.030∗∗                   0.075
                                           (0.083)          (0.015)          (0.053)          (0.008)           (0.092)             (0.013)                 (0.048)
 Maintenance (log)                          -0.062           -0.004           -0.028           -0.005            0.065               0.007                    0.070
                                           (0.078)          (0.014)          (0.071)          (0.011)           (0.068)             (0.011)                 (0.052)

 Child characteristics                       Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes                     Yes
 Household characteristics                   Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes                     Yes
 Main migration destinations                 Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes                     Yes
 N                                          1148             1148             1158             1158               1158                1158                   1177
 K-P weakid                                 9.092            9.092            9.112            9.112              8.934               8.934                  8.889
 Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. Child characteristics: age,
 gender, serious illness in the past 12 months (dummy variable), and the (log) distance to school in minutes. Household characteristics: mean years of education of adult
 members, older siblings (dummy variable), household size, parents divorced and urban/rural residence status. Main migration destinations: 2004 share of the community’s
 population that is a migrant to Italy, Ukraine, Romania and Russia (4 variables). *, **, and *** indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively. K-P weak id is
 the Kleibergen-Paap weak identiﬁcation statistic. Migration is instrumented using a network-growth interaction IV.




                                                                                  xii
Table S.12: Determinants of caregiver time: OLS results when splitting sample by migra-
tion status

                                                                                                       Caregiver time
                                                                                (1)                (2)               (3)                  (4)
        Migrants                                                                no                yes                no                  yes
        Estimator                                                              OLS                OLS               OLS                  OLS
        School budgets (per student)
        Wages (log)                                                         -0.633**             -0.693
                                                                             (0.270)            (0.438)
        D(School wage bills per student above median)                                                              -0.314*               -0.171
                                                                                                                   (0.163)              (0.233)
        Teaching materials (log)                                               -0.127            0.218              -0.244                0.182
                                                                              (0.157)           (0.199)            (0.148)              (0.194)
        Utilities (log)                                                       0.0858            0.0960              0.105               0.0706
                                                                              (0.105)           (0.147)            (0.111)              (0.148)
        Transports (log)                                                      0.0685            0.0320            0.0761*               0.0192
                                                                             (0.0451)          (0.0763)           (0.0446)             (0.0737)
        Maintenance (log)                                                     0.0696           0.139**             0.0856              0.146**
                                                                             (0.0536)          (0.0672)           (0.0541)             (0.0697)

        Child characteristics
        Age                                                                 -0.269***         -0.269***          -0.272***            -0.268***
                                                                             (0.0177)          (0.0309)           (0.0179)             (0.0310)
        Male                                                                   0.128            0.407*              0.127               0.429*
                                                                              (0.106)           (0.220)            (0.107)              (0.224)
        Serious illness                                                       -0.0358            -0.300            -0.0369               -0.306
                                                                              (0.155)           (0.214)            (0.152)              (0.211)
        Distance to school (log)                                              -0.0880          0.00838             -0.0946             0.00763
                                                                             (0.0975)           (0.143)           (0.0970)              (0.146)

        Household characteristics
        Household size                                                       0.0266            -0.00339            0.0247             0.00357
                                                                            (0.0574)           (0.0862)           (0.0570)            (0.0882)
        Mean years education                                                 0.0430            0.124**             0.0436             0.126**
                                                                            (0.0342)           (0.0566)           (0.0338)            (0.0556)
        Older siblings                                                      -0.219**           -0.457**           -0.228**            -0.470**
                                                                             (0.103)            (0.186)            (0.102)             (0.190)
        Parents divorced                                                    -0.470**             -0.340           -0.435**              -0.335
                                                                             (0.202)            (0.374)            (0.205)             (0.376)
        Urban                                                               0.538**              0.579            0.560**               0.560
                                                                             (0.261)            (0.413)            (0.264)             (0.394)

        Constant                                                            11.81***            9.052**          7.256***              3.687**
                                                                             (1.911)            (3.596)           (1.265)              (1.760)
        N                                                                       862               315                862                  315
        R2                                                                     0.227             0.285              0.226                0.282
        Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses.
        *, **, and *** indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively.




                                                                           xiii
  Table S.13: Household level IV: second stage

Second stage IV regression                            Payments to teachers
                                                        (1)                (2)
Xh = Mean years education                               log             D(Y > 0)
Migration                                          -4.161∗∗∗             -0.776∗∗∗
                                                    (1.593)               (0.299)
Child characteristics
Age                                                0.071∗∗∗               0.012∗∗∗
                                                    (0.022)                (0.004)
Male                                               -0.382∗∗∗             -0.076∗∗∗
                                                    (0.137)                (0.027)
Serious illness                                     0.325∗                  0.036
                                                    (0.177)                (0.033)
Distance to school (log)                             -0.016                 -0.009
                                                    (0.109)                (0.021)
Household characteristics
Mean years education                                0.232∗∗∗             0.038∗∗∗
                                                     (0.078)              (0.014)
Older siblings                                       -0.186                -0.025
                                                     (0.124)              (0.023)
Household size                                        0.116                0.020
                                                     (0.084)              (0.016)
Parents divorced                                      0.305                0.060
                                                     (0.275)              (0.054)
Urban                                                 0.461                0.038
                                                     (0.351)              (0.063)
Main migration destinations
Migrant share Italy                                  0.030∗                  0.005
                                                     (0.015)               (0.003)
Migrant share Italy * Xh                              -0.002                -0.000
                                                     (0.001)               (0.000)
Migrant share Ukraine                               -0.094∗∗             -0.022∗∗∗
                                                     (0.040)               (0.008)
Migrant share Ukraine * Xh                           0.010∗∗              0.002∗∗
                                                     (0.005)               (0.001)
Migrant share Romania                              0.324∗∗∗               0.067∗∗∗
                                                     (0.113)               (0.023)
Migrant share Romania * Xh                         -0.032∗∗∗             -0.006∗∗∗
                                                     (0.010)               (0.002)
Migrant share Russia                                   0.008                 0.001
                                                     (0.013)               (0.003)
Migrant share Russia * Xh                             -0.000                -0.000
                                                     (0.001)               (0.000)
Constant                                             -1.170               -0.080
                                                     (1.001)              (0.186)
N                                                      2148                 2148
K-P weakid                                             12.3                 12.3
Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors
that cluster at the community level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate p < 0.10, p <
0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively. Mean years education is the mean years of education of
the adult household members. K-P weakid refers to the Kleibergen-Paap weak identiﬁcation
statistic. Migration is instrumented using a network-growth * Xh interaction IV.




                                          xiv
Table S.14: Second stage on perceived school quality

Second stage IV regression                                Perceived school quality
                                              (1)                               (2)
Migration                                   0.433                             0.560
                                           (0.786)                           (0.798)
School budget (per student)
Wages (log)                                                                   -0.032
                                                                             (0.112)
Teaching materials (log)                                                      -0.022
                                                                             (0.049)
Utilities (log)                                                               0.033
                                                                             (0.034)
Transports (log)                                                              0.022
                                                                             (0.019)
Maintenance (log)                                                             -0.024
                                                                             (0.023)
Child characteristics
Age                                        0.000                              -0.002
                                          (0.006)                            (0.005)
Male                                      -0.043∗                             -0.067
                                          (0.022)                            (0.043)
Serious illness                           -0.075∗                             -0.077
                                          (0.040)                            (0.048)
Distance to school (log)                   -0.013                             -0.022
                                          (0.021)                            (0.031)
Household characteristics
Mean years education                      0.030∗∗                            0.028∗
                                          (0.013)                            (0.015)
Older siblings                             0.008                              -0.000
                                          (0.024)                            (0.033)
Household size                             -0.018                             -0.033
                                          (0.035)                            (0.042)
Parents divorced                           0.005                               0.019
                                          (0.049)                            (0.070)
Urban                                      -0.077                             -0.017
                                          (0.096)                            (0.113)
Main migration destinations
Migrant share Italy                        -0.000                             -0.000
                                          (0.001)                            (0.001)
Migrant share Ukraine                      -0.002                             -0.008
                                          (0.005)                            (0.012)
Migrant share Romania                     0.024∗∗                           0.032∗∗∗
                                          (0.012)                            (0.010)
Migrant share Russia                       -0.001                             -0.001
                                          (0.001)                            (0.002)
N                                           2205                              1174
K-P weakid                                  10.15                              8.8
Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster
at the community level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p <
0.01, respectively. K-P weakid refers to the Kleibergen-Paap weak identiﬁcation statistic. Migration is
instrumented using a network-growth interaction IV. Perceived school quality is the caregiver’s perception
of the public school’s quality in a 5-item scale from very poor ... very good.




                                                    xv
Table S.15: The effect of migration on private education inputs: when the caregiver is a
biological parent

 Second stage IV regressions                Payments to teachers               Out-of-school tutoring             Transportation expenditure             Caregiver time
                                              (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)                     (7)
                                              log          D (Y > 0)              log          D (Y > 0)               log           D (Y > 0)
 Migration                               -4.640∗∗∗          -0.858∗∗∗         -2.128∗∗          -0.276∗∗            -0.214              0.006                 2.160∗
                                           (1.354)            (0.256)          (0.960)           (0.135)            (1.533)            (0.228)                (1.154)
 Child characteristics
 Age                                     0.071∗∗∗           0.012∗∗∗          0.035∗∗            0.004∗            0.191∗∗∗           0.028∗∗∗              -0.294∗∗∗
                                           (0.024)            (0.005)          (0.017)           (0.002)            (0.022)            (0.003)                (0.018)
 Male                                    -0.393∗∗∗          -0.082∗∗∗         -0.185∗∗          -0.030∗∗            -0.023             -0.003                  0.067
                                           (0.148)            (0.029)          (0.093)           (0.013)            (0.101)            (0.015)                (0.099)
 Serious illness                          0.406∗∗               0.052         0.253∗∗            0.031∗             0.291∗              0.039                 -0.091
                                           (0.207)            (0.037)          (0.127)           (0.018)            (0.177)            (0.027)                (0.120)
 Distance to school (log)                   -0.046             -0.013           -0.002            0.001            0.584∗∗∗           0.082∗∗∗                 0.033
                                           (0.120)            (0.023)          (0.067)           (0.010)            (0.113)            (0.016)                (0.084)
 Household characteristics
 Mean years education                     0.124∗∗∗           0.019∗∗          0.140∗∗∗          0.019∗∗∗           0.120∗∗∗           0.016∗∗∗                  0.032
                                           (0.047)           (0.009)           (0.032)           (0.005)            (0.040)            (0.006)                (0.028)
 Older siblings                            -0.268∗            -0.042          -0.222∗∗          -0.031∗∗            -0.162             -0.026∗               -0.185∗∗
                                           (0.137)           (0.025)           (0.089)           (0.013)            (0.102)            (0.015)                (0.086)
 Household size                             0.052              0.007            0.053             0.006              0.023               0.003                 -0.081
                                           (0.069)           (0.013)           (0.048)           (0.007)            (0.054)            (0.008)                (0.069)
 Parents divorced                           -0.037            -0.000            -0.221            -0.028             -0.085             -0.006                  0.054
                                           (0.353)           (0.068)           (0.230)           (0.032)            (0.219)            (0.032)                (0.207)
 Urban                                      0.425              0.031          0.837∗∗∗          0.119∗∗∗           0.944∗∗∗           0.156∗∗∗                0.377∗
                                           (0.354)           (0.064)           (0.261)           (0.036)            (0.301)            (0.046)                (0.210)
 Main migration destinations
 Migrant share Italy                        0.004              0.001          -0.006∗∗          -0.001∗∗            -0.001             -0.000                   0.004
                                           (0.005)           (0.001)           (0.003)           (0.000)            (0.004)            (0.001)                (0.003)
 Migrant share Ukraine                      0.011              0.003            -0.003            -0.001           -0.025∗∗           -0.004∗∗                -0.032∗
                                           (0.026)           (0.005)           (0.014)           (0.002)            (0.012)            (0.002)                (0.019)
 Migrant share Romania                      -0.019            -0.003            -0.012            -0.001             -0.012             -0.001                  0.025
                                           (0.033)           (0.008)           (0.011)           (0.002)            (0.023)            (0.004)                (0.020)
 Migrant share Russia                      0.009∗∗           0.002∗∗            0.003            0.000∗             -0.003             -0.000                  -0.002
                                           (0.004)           (0.001)           (0.002)           (0.000)            (0.003)            (0.000)                (0.002)

 Constant                                   0.446              0.202           -0.929∗           -0.112           -4.269∗∗∗           -0.597∗∗∗              6.882∗∗∗
                                           (0.733)            (0.143)          (0.508)           (0.073)            (0.598)             (0.086)               (0.561)
 N                                          1849               1849              1865              1865              1859                1859                  1860
 K-P weakid                                13.857             13.857            14.114            14.114            13.820              13.820                12.736
 Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
 p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively. K-P weakid is the Kleibergen-Paap weak identiﬁcation statistic. Migration is instrumented using a network-growth
 interaction IV.




                                                                                xvi
                       Table S.16: Determinants of grade point average (GPA)

                                                                                                      GPA (0-10)
                                                            (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)                    (6)
                                                           OLS             OLS              OLS               IV              IV                     IV
  Migration                                                0.041          0.044             0.004          -0.828           -0.832               -1.527∗∗
                                                          (0.077)        (0.077)           (0.069)         (0.533)         (0.518)                (0.600)

  Household asset index in 1999 (log)                     -0.037          -0.072                           -0.075           -0.109
                                                          (0.070)        (0.071)                           (0.073)         (0.072)
  Endogenous outcomes
  Household asset index in 2011 (log)                                                    0.310∗∗∗                                               0.539∗∗∗
                                                                                          (0.079)                                                (0.141)
  Payments to teachers (log)                                             0.007             0.012                            -0.002                0.000
                                                                        (0.014)           (0.014)                          (0.017)               (0.021)
  Tutoring expenditures (log)                                           0.041∗∗           0.027∗                           0.037∗∗                0.022
                                                                        (0.016)           (0.016)                          (0.017)               (0.021)
  Transportation expenditures (log)                                     0.038∗∗            0.019                           0.047∗∗               0.032∗
                                                                        (0.016)           (0.014)                          (0.018)               (0.019)
  Caregiver time                                                         0.032             0.029                            0.034                 0.025
                                                                        (0.023)           (0.021)                          (0.026)               (0.025)

  School budgets                                            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes                   Yes
  Child characteristics                                     Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes                   Yes
  Household characteristics                                 Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes                   Yes
  Main migration destinations                               Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes                   Yes
  N                                                        804             799              1019             804             799                   1019
  adj. R2                                                 0.200           0.215             0.230           0.071           0.083                 -0.160
  K-P weakid                                                –               –                 –             12.767          12.414                 7.201
  Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors that cluster at the community level in parentheses. School
  budgets: (log) per student school budgets for (i) staff wages, (ii) teaching materials, (iii) utilities, (iv) transports, (v) maintenance. Child characteristics:
  age, gender, serious illness in the past 12 months (dummy variable), and the (log) distance to school in minutes. Household characteristics: mean years
  of education of adult members, older siblings (dummy variable), household size, parents divorced and urban/rural residence status. Main migration
  destinations: 2004 share of the community’s population that is a migrant to Italy, Ukraine, Romania and Russia (4 variables). *, **, and *** indicate
  p < 0.10, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively. K-P weakid refers to the Kleibergen-Paap weak identiﬁcation statistic. Migration is instrumented
  using a network-growth interaction IV. Please interpret columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 with caution since they include endogenous covariates for illustrative
  purposes.




              Table S.17: Summary statistics: sample selection from matching

                                                                  Matched                                   Matching failed                      Mean equality
                                                      N           Mean             (SD)              N       Mean          (SD)                    (t-test)
Child characteristics

Age                                                 1265          11.96              (3.21)        1413          13.61              (4.41)              ***
Male                                                1265           0.50                            1413           0.51
Serious illness (past year)                         1265           0.31                            1413           0.27                                  **
Distance to school (min)                            1190          19.18            (12.87)         1296          22.90            (24.9)                ***

Household characteristics

Migration                                           1265           0.26                            1413           0.32                                  ***
Household size                                      1265           4.80              (1.57)        1413           4.84              (1.48)
Mean years education                                1265          10.81              (2.28)        1412          10.68              (2.22)
Urban                                               1265           0.19                            1413           0.23                                     **
Older siblings                                      1260           0.61                            1241           0.57                                     *
Parents divorced                                    1265           0.12                            1413           0.11

Private inputs to child’s education

Caregiver time                                      1189          4.00             (1.9)           1153          3.24            (1.97)                 ***
Payments to teachers                                1151         80.23           (236.3)           1186         90.68          (266.59)
Tutoring expenditures                               1161        198.74          (1240.23)          1202        133.65          (693.28)
Transportation expenditures                         1162        145.78           (604.34)          1197        315.93         (1002.93)                 ***
Notes: Authors’ calculations based on CELB 2012. All monetary values are expressed in Moldovan Lei. *, **, and *** indicate p < 0.10, p < 0.05,
and p < 0.01, respectively.




                                                                              xvii
