                                                      WPS8195


Policy Research Working Paper                        8195




          Short-Term Impact of Brexit
   on the United Kingdom’s Export of Goods
                                  Hiau Looi Kee
                                 Alessandro Nicita




Development Research Group
Trade and International Integration Team
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8195


  Abstract
 The short-term impact of Brexit on goods exports is assessed                       Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariffs are higher on products
 using the Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index of the United                        that are less responsive to tariffs, and lower on products that
 Kingdom’s major trading partners. The analysis shows that                          are more responsive to tariffs. The study assumes that there
 in the short run, leaving the European Union may cause the                         are no further compliance costs associated with the existing
 United Kingdom’s exports to the European Union to decrease                         nontariff measures facing firms in the United Kingdom,
 by 2 percent, and the prospect of a major trade collapse                           should the United Kingdom leave the European Union.
 post-Brexit is unlikely. This is because the European Union’s




  This paper is a product of the Trade and International Integration Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at hlkee@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                                 s
Short-Term Impact of Brexit on the United Kingdom’
                                    Export of Goods

                         Hiau Looi Keey               Alessandro Nicitaz
                          World Bank                       UNCTAD




     The preliminary …nding of this paper was …rst presented at the World Bank’s Policy Research Talk on
Sep 27, 2016, titled “Trade, FDI and Global Value Chains.” We thank Chad Bown, Aaditya Mattoo and
participants in World Bank’ s Policy Research Talk for feedback and comments. The results and opinions
present in this paper are our own, and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank and
UNCTAD, their Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
   y
     Development Research Group, The World Bank, Washington, DC 20433, USA; Tel.: (202) 473-4155;
Fax: (202)522-1159; e-mail: hlkee@worldbank.org.
   z
     UNCTAD. Email: Alessandro.Nicita@unctad.org.
1     Introduction

On June 23, 2016, UK voters stunned the world by deciding to leave the EU. The news sent

the British pound to a 30 year low, stock markets plummeted as much as 8 percent around

the world, and David Cameron resigned as the Prime Minister. The vote result went against

the advice of many experts. In fact, most economists thought that Brexit was a bad idea

(see Baldwin, 2016). Some actually predicted a big short-term drop in trade and income per

capita post-Brexit (see Dhingra, Ottaviano, Sampson and Van Reenen, 2016).

                                                      s exports in the presence of global
    What are the potential impacts of Brexit on the UK’

value chains? A weaker currency should boost exports, but for global value chains, many

exports contain imports, which are now more expensive, so the net impact of a devalued

pound on exports is not clear. Without any new trade agreements between the UK and

its major trading partners, post-Brexit, how will the UK trade with the EU and its other

trading partners such as the US and China in the short run?

    This paper analyzes the short-term fallout of trade in goods from Brexit, through po-

tential changes in the trade policies of its main trading partners. We construct the Overall

                                                                                    s
Trade Restrictiveness Index (OTRI) (Kee, Nicita, Olarreaga, 2008 and 2009) of the UK’

major trading partners, based on newly estimated bilateral trade elasticities and the ad val-

orem equivalent of non-tari¤ measures (Bown, Kee and Nicita, 2016). Our analysis shows

that in the absence of any trade agreement between the UK and the EU post-Brexit, facing

      s Most Favored Nation (MFN) tari¤s could cause the UK’
the EU’                                                    s export of goods to the

EU to drop by 2 percent. The impact is not larger because the higher tari¤s are placed on

the less elastic products that the UK exports, while the lower tari¤s are placed on the more

elastic products that the UK exports. The negative relationship between the MFN tari¤s

                                                              s exports of goods to the EU,
and demand elasticity softens the potential collapse in the UK’

in the event the UK and the EU fail to strike any trade agreement post-Brexit. We assume

                                             1
that there are no further compliance costs associated with the existing NTMs facing UK

…rms should the UK leave the EU.

        It should be noted that this paper will not talk about services trade, “passporting” and

the role of London as a …nancial center post-Brexit, or immigration and the social aspect

of Brexit.1 It also will not speculate about the optimal timing to invoke Article 50 and

“soft Brexit”. Finally the long-run impact of Brexit could depend on whether the UK can

                                                                                        s
continue to retain and attract foreign direct investment, which surely will shape the UK’

exports for years to come, which is beyond the scope of the current paper.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 brie‡y describes the theoretical framework

underpinning OTRI. Section 3 provides a data description for the paper. Section 4 presents

                  s major trading partners, while Section 5 concludes the paper.
the OTRI of the UK’



2         Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index

The Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index (OTRI) summarizes the trade policies stance of a

country. For a country, c; OTRI takes into account the trade responsiveness of product n;

"n;c , with respect to its trade policy, Tn;c ; weighted by its total import, mn;c :

                                                 P
                                                  n mn;c "n;c Tn;c
                                         OT RIc = P                :
                                                    n mn;c "n;c



Trade policy includes both tari¤s and the ad valorem equivalent (AVE) of non-tari¤ measures

(NTM), which consist of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, such as requirements on la-

beling, hygiene, maximum pesticide residue limits and testing; as well as Technical Barriers

to Trade, such as requirements on labeling, product quality, packaging, and certi…cations, as

well as other measures. The OTRI was …rst developed in Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (here-
    1
        For the impact of Brexit on services trade, please refer to Mulabdic, Osnago and Ruta (2016).


                                                        2
                                          s (1995) partial equilibrium simpli…cation of the
after, KNO, 2008, 2009), based on Feenstra’

theoretical framework of Anderson and Neary (1992, 1994, 1996, 2003 and 2007). It mea-

sures the uniform ad valorem equivalent tari¤ that could replace the current tari¤ and NTM

                                                                                    s
structure, and keep the trade volume of a country constant. While Anderson and Neary’

                                                                s simpli…cation focuses on
work focuses on general equilibrium feedback of tari¤s, Feenstra’

partial equilibrium and ignores the substitution or income e¤ects of import demands when

the tari¤ changes. KNO (2008, 2009) further include the AVE of NTMs in trade policy.

Hence, the basic ingredients for the calculation of OTRI are trade elasticities and AVE of

NTMs at Harmonized System (HS) 6 digit-level.

   HS 6 import demand elasticities were …rst estimated in KNO (2008), while the AVE of

NTMs were estimated in KNO (2009). Based on these estimates, KNO (2009) constructed

the OTRI of a wide range of countries and showed that NTMs contribute signi…cantly to the

level of trade restrictiveness, and developing countries tend to have higher trade barriers than

developed countries. In a more recent paper, Kee, Neagu and Nicita (2013) used the OTRI

framework to assess the role played by trade policy in the collapse of world trade between

2008 and 2009. They concluded that, while the rise in tari¤s and antidumping duties may

have jointly caused global trade to drop by US$43 billion, it explained less than 2 percent of

the collapse in world trade during the crisis period.

   For our current application, we will construct the OTRI for the major trading partners

of the UK, namely, the EU, US and China. We will utilize the most recent estimates of

trade elasticities facing UK exports in these markets (Bown, Kee and Nicita, 2016). Based

on these elasticities, we also construct the AVE of NTMs of the markets facing UK exports.

We assess short-term trade impacts based on changes in tari¤s and NTMs in these markets

post-Brexit.




                                               3
3    Data

Data used in this study come from UN-Comtrade for HS 6 digit-level import and export data,

and UNCTAD TRAINS for tari¤ and NTM data. Most of the NTM data were collected

around 2015/2016, so that determines the year coverage of the sample used in the analysis.

                                                s exports by destination country from
Figure 1 presents the time series plot of the UK’

2000 to 2015. The EU is by far the top destination market for the UK exports, even

though its importance has steadily declined over time, from about 60 percent in 2000 to 44

                                                               s exports throughout
percent in 2015. The US has absorbed about 15 percent of the UK’

this period, while China is gaining from 2 percent to close to 10 percent. Figure 2 presents

the export pro…le of the UK by sector. Machinery, Chemical Products and Transportation

                                              s export in 2015. Table 1 presents the some
jointly accounted for more than half of the UK’

                                                            s main partners. With the
summary statistics that capture the trade policies of the UK’

exception of the EU, both the US and China do not currently give tari¤ preferences to the

  s exports. Products from the UK enter the US and China facing the Most Favored
UK’

Nations (MFN) tari¤ with no preferences. The EU on the other hand gives full preference to

      s exports under the EU Single Market arrangement, so products from the UK enter
the UK’

the EU with no tari¤s.



4                                             s Main
     Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index of UK’

     Partners

                                   s main trading partners, based on trade elasticity and
Table 2 presents the OTRI of the UK’

AVE estimates from Bown, Kee and Nicita (2016). For details about the estimations of trade

elasticity and AVEs, please refer to that paper. For the EU, the import-weighted average



                                             4
MFN tari¤ is 3 percent, while the import weighted AVE of NTMs is 3.4 percent. However,

given that the UK currently is part of the EU Single Market, the OTRI in the EU facing UK

exports is 0. Both the US and China impose MFN tari¤s on UK exports. For the US, the

import-weighted average MFN tari¤ is 1.2 percent, while for China, it is 5 percent. When

factoring in import demand elasticity and AVE of NTMs, the OTRI of US and China facing

UK exports is 0.5 percent and 2.4 percent respectively.

      Table 3 presents the potential trade impact of Brexit in the short run. Here we assume

                                                                                      s
that no new trade agreements will be signed between the UK and its partners, so the UK’

exports will face MFN treatment in all markets. For the US and China, nothing will change

in terms of tari¤s and NTMs, so the potential trade impact is zero. For the EU, moving from

no tari¤ to MFN tari¤ will lead to the OTRI to increase to 0.93 percent, which may cause

trade to decrease by almost 2 percent, which is equivalent to a loss of USD$3.14 billion. The

short-term disruption in trade due to trade policy is likely to be small: the OTRI of the

main partners are low, even after factoring in possible compliance costs of NTMs facing the

UK exporters in these markets.2 The bottom line is that, without any new trade deals, UK

exports to the EU may drop by less than 2 percent, while UK exports to the US and China

may not be a¤ected by Brexit in the short term, before any relocation adjustment of FDI.

      It may be surprising that the short-run trade impact of Brexit is not larger. This is

because OTRI can be decomposed into the sum of the import-weighted tari¤ (and AVEs)

and the covariance between tari¤ (and AVEs) and import demand elasticity.3 For the EU, the

covariance between tari¤ and trade elasticity is negative, meaning higher tari¤s are placed

on less elastic products (such as Transport Equipment, Plastics, Foods and Apparels), while
  2
     It should be noted that NTMs consist of many di¤erent areas, including standards conformity and
assessment, certi…cation requirements and more. Currently UK …rms exporting to the EU satisfy all their
NTMs requirements. We assume that there are no further compliance costs associated with the existing
NTMs should the UK leave the EU.
   3
     Please see Kee (2007), which shows that OTRI equals import weighted average tari¤ and the import
weighted covariance between tari¤ and trade elasticity.


                                                  5
lower tari¤s are on the more elastic products (such as Pulp and Paper, Scienti…c Instruments,

Precious Stones). This negative relationship between tari¤ and trade elasticity causes the

  s OTRI to be lower than its import-weighted average tari¤, which leads to a smaller
EU’

trade impact in the short run.



5    Concluding Remarks

                                                                     s goods exports in its
This note constructed the overall trade restrictiveness facing the UK’

major markets. Based on new estimates on trade elasticity and the ad valorem equivalent

                                                                  s goods trade due to
of NTMs, we show that the overall short-run trade impact on the UK’

Brexit is less than 2 percent. This result assumes that the UK will not have any preferential

access to the EU market and all its products will enter the EU, the US and China on the

Most Favored Nations (MFN) basis. This result also assumes that in the short-run, …rms

and investments are not free to move across borders. The long-run consequences of Brexit

most likely depend on whether the UK can continue to attract and retain its foreign direct

investment.



References

                                        Trade reforms with quotas, partial rent retention
 [1] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (1992). ‘

              , Econometrica, vol. 60(1), pp. 57-76.
    and tari¤s’


                                        Measuring the restrictiveness of trade policy’
 [2] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (1994). ‘                                            , World

    Bank Economic Review, vol. 8(2) (May), pp. 151-169.


                                        A new approach to evaluating trade policy’
 [3] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (1996). ‘                                        , Review

    of Economic Studies, vol. 63(1) (January), pp. 107-125.


                                             6
                                        The Mercantilist index of trade policy’
 [4] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (2003). ‘                                     , International

    Economic Review, vol. 44(2) (May), pp. 627-649.


                                        Welfare versus market access: the implications
 [5] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (2007). ‘

                                       , Journal of International Economics, vol. 71 (2)
    of tari¤ structure for tari¤ reform’

    (March), pp. 627-649.


                         Brexit Beckons:
 [6] Baldwin, R. (2016). ‘                       Thinking ahead by leading economists,’

    http://voxeu.org/content/brexit-beckons-thinking-ahead-leading-economists.


                                                Non-tari¤ measures and trade restrictive-
 [7] Bown, C., Kee, H.L. and Nicita, A. (2016). ‘

    ness: Evidence from a new database,’mineo.


                                                                         The consequences
 [8] Dhingra, S., Ottaviano, G., Sampson, T., and Van Reenen, J., (2016) ‘

    of Brexit for UK trade and living standards,’CEP working paper.


                          Estimating the e¤ects of trade policy’
 [9] Feenstra, R. (1995). ‘                                    , in (G. Grossman and K.

    Rogo¤, eds.), Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier.


[10] Kee, H.L. (2007). Book review of James Anderson and Peter Neary, Measuring the

    Restrictiveness of International Trade Policy, in Journal of International Economics,

    vol. 73, no. 2, p. 434-438.


                                                     Import demand elasticities and trade
[11] Kee, H.L., Nicita, A. and Olarreaga, M. (2008). ‘

               , Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 90, no. 4, p. 666–
    distortions’                                                            682.


                                                     Estimating Trade Restrictiveness In-
[12] Kee, H.L., Nicita, A. and Olarreaga, M. (2009). ‘

    dices,” Economic Journal, 2009, vol. 119, p. 172–199.




                                             7
                           Figure 1: Exports of UK by Country




          Table 1: Summary Statistics of Trade Policies of UK’ s Main Partners
                                                            EU China USA
                       Maximum MFN tari¤ ( percent) 74.9            65    350
                        Minimum MFN tari¤ ( percent)          0      0      0
          Product subjected to positive tari¤ ( percent)     75     93     58
                             Maximum AVE ( percent) 1725          1627 1900
                              Minimum AVE ( percent)          0      0      0
           Product subjected to positive AVE ( percent)      33     48     25


[13] Kee, H.L., Neagu, C., and Nicita, A. (2013). “Is Protectionism on the Rise? Assessing

    national trade policies during the crisis of 2008,”the Review of Economics and Statistics,

    2013, Vol. 95, No. 1: 342–346.


[14] Mulabdic, A., Osnago, A., and Ruta, M. (2016). “Deep Integration and UK-EU Trade:

    Before and After Brexit,”World Bank Mimeo.




                Table 2: Current OTRI of UK’s Main Trading Partners
                                                          EU China USA
         Import Weighted Average MFN Tari¤ ( percent) 3.04      5.00 1.19
                        Import Weighted AVE ( percent) 3.43     1.31 4.50
                       Import Weighted Trade Elasticity -2.11 -1.57 -1.29
                               Current OTRI ( percent)      0   2.38 0.53

                                             8
                Figure 2: Exports of UK by Sector




         Table 3: Potential Short-Run Trade Impact of Brexit
                                                   EU China USA
Potential Change in OTRI post Brexit ( percent) 0.93         0 0
Potential Change in Trade post Brexit ( percent) -1.96       0 0
Potential Change in Trade post Brexit ($Billion) -3.14       0 0




                               9
