                                                     WPS8037


Policy Research Working Paper                       8037




                How Much Labor Do
            South African Exports Contain?
                                Massimiliano Calì
                                Claire H. Hollweg




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8037


  Abstract
  Like many emerging economies, South Africa has identi-                            the domestic economy. In contrast, manufacturing exports
  fied exports as an engine for more inclusive, job-intensive                       support jobs and wages primarily in input-providing sectors,
  growth. However, employment growth did not follow the                             where indirect manufacturing employment is nearly 4.5
  substantial export growth that South Africa experienced in                        times greater than direct manufacturing employment. The
  the 2000s. This paper uses a newly developed World Bank                           paper also documents a shift in the labor content of global
  database—the Labor Content of Exports—to show that the                            value chain–intensive manufacturing sectors away from
  composition of South Africa’s export growth helps to under-                       direct manufacturing to indirect services. Such a shift has
  stand the weak relationship between export and employment                         been biased toward skilled labor. As a results of these trends,
  growth. Minerals exports, which propelled export as well                          labor in services sectors has been the main beneficiary of
  as wage growth, are not job intensive and as a result sup-                        South Africa’s export growth, absorbing more than half of
  ported far less job growth. Minerals have also increasingly                       the growth in wage income from exports over the 2000s,
  become an enclave sector with few backward linkages to                            primarily by supplying inputs to other sectors’ exports.




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at chollweg@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                                  How Much Labor Do
                           South African Exports Contain?

                                                               Massimiliano Calì
                                                               Claire H. Hollweg1




Keywords: International trade and labor markets, labor compensation, jobs, global value chains
JEL classification codes: J2, J3, F16, F66




                                                            
1
  Massimiliano Calì and Claire H. Hollweg are, respectively, Senior Economist in the East Asia Pacific Region and
Economist in the Trade & Competition Unit, Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank. The
corresponding author can be contacted at chollweg@worldbank.org. The authors thank Jakob Engle, Thomas Farole,
Fernando Im, Daria Taglioni, and Deborah Winkler for very useful inputs, and Alen Mulabdic for excellent research
assistance. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
1. Introduction

Export growth can be a powerful avenue to increase employment and earnings, both directly within
exporting firms and indirectly through these firms’ demand for goods and services from the domestic
economy. The extent to which exports support domestic labor depends on several factors, including the
labor-intensity of export sectors and the linkages of exporting firms to domestic, input-supplying firms.
Differences in the skills-intensity across sectors can also mean distributional implications of export growth.
Surprisingly, though, only a scant literature provides empirical support that the composition of exports
matters for their labor impacts, as opposed to the more prominent literature on the nexus between the
sectoral composition of exports and economic growth, or between import liberalization and labor impacts.
For example, the boom in exports to the United States following the US–Vietnam Bilateral Trade
Agreement of 2001 was particularly beneficial to wages of unskilled workers, reduced the skill premium,
and was a key driver of poverty reduction in Vietnam because it was concentrated in unskilled, labor-
intensive manufacturing sectors, most notably textiles (Fukase 2013, McCaig 2011).2 At the other end of
the spectrum, commodity exports are often concentrated in capital-intensive sectors that pay high wages
but with few linkages to the rest of the economy and typically support relatively small levels of domestic
employment (Berry 2008). The paucity of this literature is surprising, given that many countries’ industrial
policy is predicted on the basis that promotion of exports supports employment and wage growth.

A case in point is South Africa, which liberalized trade and promoted exports with this view (Behar 2010a,
Edwards et al. 2008). The results, however, have been mixed. Trade liberalization and other domestic
reforms during the 1990s preceded a significant expansion in exports, which also rose as a share of
production and consumption. Employment growth remained poor, and greater inequality accompanied an
increasing skill and capital intensity of production (Bhorat and van der Westhuizen 2012, Edwards and
Behar 2005, Thurlow 2006). This phenomenon of export-led “jobless growth” stimulated considerable
research on the impact of trade on labor and inequality in South Africa, with the results largely inconclusive.
Some studies found that trade liberalization negatively affected employment, specifically in manufacturing;
others that skill-biased technology change was behind low employment growth and rising inequality and
that the impact of trade on labor was small; and others that trade-induced growth changed the structure of
production, contributing to technological change, a higher skill intensity of production and increased
inequality (Edwards 2004, Edwards 2001, Jenkins 2008, Edwards and Behr 2005, Thurlow 2006, Pauw et
al. 2007). South Africa has since identified export growth coupled with export diversification—by
improving non-traditional export performance, particularly in more sophisticated, value-added products—
as an engine for faster, job-intensive growth to combat unemployment (World Bank 2014). Continued
efforts to uncover the impact of trade on labor in South Africa and the factors behind this ‘jobless growth’
are therefore needed to better understand the possible role that expanding exports in traditional versus non-
traditional export sectors can play for job creation.

In this paper, we measure how South Africa’s exports support jobs and wages and show that the composition
of South Africa’s exports can help understand this incidence of export-led ‘jobless growth’. Between 2001
and 2011 the total number of jobs supported by South Africa’s exports declined from 3.0 million to 2.9
million, despite strong growth in exports (10.3% annually) as well as the wages paid to produce exports
                                                            
2
  In addition, changes in labor earnings—rather than in demographic trends, public transfers, or remittances—have
been the main source of poverty reduction in developing countries that achieved dramatic declines in poverty over the
last decade (Azevedo et al. 2013).

                                                               2
 
(7.9% annually). Minerals exports, which propelled export growth as well as wage growth, are not job
intensive and as a result supported far less job growth. Our data also show that exports in South Africa have
become less labor intensive, where the quantity of jobs and the labor value added per unit of exports has
diminished overall, and more capital intensive. The composition of exports also matters for the impact of
trade on jobs and wages in South Africa. While minerals have increasingly become an enclave sector with
few backward linkages to the domestic economy, the labor impact of manufacturing exports in South Africa
is increasingly felt in input-providing sectors, particularly services sectors, which had distributional
implications by skill. Studies that only consider the jobs and wages to directly produce exports will
underestimate the impact of trade on labor.

Our analysis is enabled by a newly developed World Bank database—The Labor Content of Exports
(LACEX) (Calì et al. 2016)—that measures the contribution of labor to a given country’s domestic
production and exports, measured as employees’ compensation (wages) or the number of jobs. Using input-
output tables, exports and production data from the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) and employment
data from the International Labour Organization (ILO), the LACEX database represents a methodological
innovation for developing countries. We consider aggregate exports as well as sectoral exports for South
Africa and compare them to other emerging and middle-income countries and the other BRIC (Brazil, the
Russian Federation, India and China) in particular. We also consider how exports contribute to labor market
outcomes separately through their direct and indirect linkages (including both forward and backward
linkages), and distinguish between skilled and unskilled labor. By considering the fuller labor implications
of exports for the economy, our data allow us to evaluate the extent to which traditional versus non-
traditional exports indeed support incomes and jobs.

The paper has three key findings. First, the sectoral composition as well as the labor intensity of exports in
South Africa provides a nuanced understanding of the observed export-led ‘jobless growth’. The LACEX
data combined with South Africa’s Labor Force Survey data suggest that much of the labor content of
exports is shaped by the minerals sector. Between 2001 and 2011, minerals exports grew 22.2% annually,
wages supported by minerals exports grew 24.6% annually, but jobs supported by minerals exports grew
by only 3.9% annually.3 South Africa is one of the middle-income countries in the sample with the lowest
number of jobs associated with exports, and the quantity of jobs and the labor value added per unit of
exports has diminished overall. Decompositions show that the observed decline in the labor intensity of
exports is driven by exports becoming less labor intensive (labor-intensity effect), only slightly amplified
by South Africa shifting to less labor-intensive exports (composition effect). While this is generally
consistent with unbundling of production globally, where exports contain more foreign inputs, the data also
show that exports in South Africa are becoming more capital intensive and less labor intensive: a decline
in the share of total labor value added in gross exports has been accompanied by an increase in the share of
capital value added in gross exports.4



                                                            
3
  Direct wages supported by minerals exports grew 33.4% annually, but direct jobs supported by minerals exports
contracted by 16.8% annually.
4
  These findings are consistent with the labor-saving technology changing across countries (see, for example, Kumar
and Russell (2002) and Berman (2000)). Behar (2010a) shows that the elasticity of substitution between capital and
labor has been negative in South Africa, also supporting our finding of a substitution away from labor toward capital
for production.

                                                               3
 
Second, our findings highlight the importance of considering the indirect labor impacts of export growth
through the forward and backward linkages across sectors. For example, similar to Kerr et al. (2014), our
data show that direct manufacturing exports are not job-intensive and direct manufacturing (and economy-
wide) jobs have been declining. But manufacturing becomes labor-intensive once taking into account its
backward linkages to input-providing sectors. In fact, manufacturing employs about two-thirds of export-
oriented workers in South Africa. However, more than three-quarters of these jobs were in sectors providing
inputs into manufacturing, up from two-thirds in 2001. In contrast, in 2011 the indirect wages represented
only one-third of all wages supported by minerals exports, compared to two-thirds in 2001. This confirms
that South Africa’s commodities exports are increasingly an enclave sector, where most of the labor value
added is generated directly within the sector with few backward linkages with the rest of the economy. The
increasing importance of indirect jobs and wages in South Africa has instead been felt in the services
sectors. Services sectors absorbed 55% of the growth in labor income from exports over the 2000s, of which
four-fifths was through forward linkages.5 This confirms other literature that services’ contribution to
exports is primarily through forward linkages (Francois et al. 2015). This high percentage is consistent with
the fact that more than half of the additional labor value added in South Africa over the 2000s has been
indirect.

Third, the increasing importance of indirect jobs and wages in South Africa, coupled with differences in
the skills-intensity across sectors, appears to have had distributional implications through skills demand.
We focus in on the labor impact of non-resource intensive manufacturing exports, particularly in
sophisticated, value-added products traditionally governed in GVCs, to examine what growth in non-
traditional export sectors could mean for labor outcomes. A case in point is the automotive sector, a value
chain that South Africa became increasingly integrated in over the 2000s, which enabled rapid growth of
South African motor vehicle exports (Engel 2015). Consistent with an increasing import content of exports,
a key feature of GVC participation, the labor intensity of automotive exports declined. But export growth
propelled a significant increase in the wages supported by automotive exports, almost trebling between
2001 and 2011. Although direct wages paid in the automotive sector increased modestly between 2001 and
2011 (3.6% per year), wage growth from motor vehicle exports happened mainly in upstream input sectors,
especially services sectors, due to extensive backward links to the domestic economy (15.4% per year). The
substitution of direct manufacturing jobs to indirect services jobs in the motor vehicle GVC has been biased
towards skilled labor, suggesting skilled job creation may have happened in the services sector through
backward linkages (as services are relatively more skilled intensive). This trend contrasts with a declining
skills intensity of exports in aggregate (though South Africa maintains one of the largest skills ratios relative
to peer countries).

This paper is related more broadly to the literature on the labor impact of exports. Other recent efforts to
quantify the labor and jobs content of exports across countries tend to focus on high-income economies
(Timmer et al. 2013, Jiang and Milberg 2013, Stone et al. 2011). A burgeoning literature on the impact of
export shocks on conflict also provides empirical support for a differential effect of export shocks across
sectors depending on their relative labor intensity (Dube and Vargas 2013, Berman and Couttenier 2015).
A positive shock to labor-intensive sectors increases the opportunity cost of conflict because it benefits
                                                            
5
  Obinyeluaku and Sako (2014) find that in South Africa the elasticity of employment with respect to real output in
the services sector appears to be greater than that of manufacturing. One explanation for the rising share of
employment in the service sector is that manufacturing industries increasingly outsource their services activities to
firms specialized in the provision of such services. These results are consistent with those of this paper.

                                                         4
 
mainly laborers, while the opposite is true for extractive sectors, which do not have much impact on wages.
There has also been an attempt to estimate the sectoral labor effects of the trade contraction following the
2008 global crisis using social accounting matrices in a Leontief multiplier model, specifically in South
Africa and India (Kucera et al. 2012). The industry-level changes in exports on industry-level changes in
employment was mediated by its indirect and income-induced effects as well as differences in labor-
intensity of production across sectors. Los et al. (2015) also use input-output analysis to show that the
composition of export growth mattered for job growth and ultimately structural transformation in China.

The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the World Bank database on
the labor content of exports and the methodology to measure the wages and jobs content. Section 3 presents
the findings of labor and jobs content of aggregate production and exports in South Africa relative to peer
countries. To control for compositional effects, Section 4 presents these results at the sectoral level first in
South Africa and second relative to peer countries. Section 5 narrows the focus even further to GVC-
oriented sectors to understand how changes in labor content relate to changes in GVC-participation in South
Africa. Section 6 concludes with policy implications.

2. Data

The main data we use in the analysis is the newly developed World Bank Labor Content of Exports
(LACEX) database. The database encompasses information on the contribution of labor to a given country’s
domestic production and exports, measured as employees’ compensation (wages) or the number of jobs.
The LACEX database has been computed by Calì et al. (2016) on the basis of a panel of global input-output
tables and other aggregate data spanning intermittent years from 1995 to 2011 from GTAP and employment
data from ILO.6 The input-output tables in the GTAP data set allow one to exploit a form of social
accounting data—a variation on the social accounting matrix (SAM) where incomes are shown in the rows
of the SAM and expenditures are shown in the columns (see Hertel (2013) and McDougal (2001)). The
structure of the underlying social accounting data provides a comprehensive and consistent record of
national income accounting relationships between different sectors, including intermediate and final
demand linkages. These are used to construct country-specific measures of the contribution of labor to the
value added contained in a given country’s domestic production and exports.7 The resulting data set covers
24 sectors (6 services sectors, 3 primary sectors and 15 manufacturing sectors), over 100 countries, and
intermittent years between 1995 and 2011. As such, the data allow to examine the labor content of South
Africa’s exports at the aggregate and sectoral levels, including exports associated to trade traditionally
governed within GVCs.

Specifically, in order to obtain these labor value added measures, two intermediate multiplier matrixes need
to be calculated from the social accounting and other aggregate data. The first is the Leontief inverse matrix,
which measures the inputs contained in a unit of final output, and includes both direct and indirect inputs
                                                            
6
  GTAP represents a massive combined effort of international institutions and universities. Over time, the data set has
grown to include more countries and more sectors. The latest version, GTAP 9, has data on 129 countries/regions and
57 sectors (Narayanan 2012). To maintain backward compatibility, Calì et al. (2016) start with the 1997 structure of
regions and sectors, and carry this forward in aggregation of more recent iterations of the data set. The GTAP website
also provides extensive documentation on the underlying data structure, its sources, and the GTAP model structure
for each release (www.gtap.org).
7
  In the remainder of the paper we refer interchangeably to total labor value added content, wages and compensation
to employees.

                                                               5
 
across all sectors of the economy. The second is a diagonal matrix with elements equal to the compensation
of employees’ shares of the sector’s total output. Using these two intermediate matrixes as multipliers of a
diagonal matrix with elements equal to either the sector’s domestic production or exports, one can obtain
the compensation of employees’ shares of final outputs or exports. Appendix 1 provides more details and
formalizes these calculations.

Using the same method, we can isolate the jobs content of exports by replacing the underlying labor value
added share in production with the number of jobs contained in production, which can be derived from ILO
employment data or country-specific data sources. ILO employment statistics contain data for a number of
countries, including South Africa, for 11 macro sectors. In order to get a more refined sectoral
disaggregation, we also match the GTAP data with employment statistics from South Africa’s labor force
surveys. This allows the examination of a different type of disaggregation across 16 sectors.

With this methodology, we can split the total contribution of labor (either the labor value added or the
number of jobs) to final output and exports into its direct and indirect components based on the linkages
with the rest of the economy. The direct component measures the wages paid or number of jobs a sector
uses to produce its own output or exports directly. The indirect component measures the wages paid or
number of jobs a sector contributes to other sectors’ output or exports—if measured by forward linkages—
or the wages paid or number of jobs a sector uses from other sectors to produce its output or exports—if
measured by backward linkages. Forward linkages are the indirect contribution of a sector when
considering the contribution of that particular sector as an input to other sectors’ domestic production or
exports. This treats the particular sector as an upstream activity, and measures how much labor a particular
sector is used by all other sectors. Backward linkages are the indirect contribution of a sector when
considering the contribution of all other sectors to that particular sector’s value added. This treats the
particular sectors as a downstream activity, and measures how much labor a particular sector uses from all
other sectors. These contributions can be further split between skilled and unskilled employees. As such,
the paper can consider not only the wages paid and jobs employed directly within export sectors, but also
the linkages with the rest of the economy that South Africa’s exports support. That is particularly important
for a large middle-income economy like South Africa, where such indirect linkages are typically more
important.

The labor value added of exports is measured as nominal values in US$ (denoted LVAX), and as a share
of gross exports (LVAX share), which is a measure of the labor intensity of a country’s or sector’s exports. 
The jobs content of exports is measured as the number of jobs (denoted JobX), and relative to gross exports
(JobX share), which is a measure of the job intensity of a country’s or sector’s exports. We also use
measures of the labor value added and job content of domestic production (denoted LVAD and JobD) for
comparisons.

3. Economy-wide Labor Content of Exports

We begin our analysis of how exports support labor in South Africa by looking at aggregate trends in the
total labor value added and jobs content. We measure across all sectors of the economy when looking at
the country-wide labor and jobs content of exports, including services, industry and agriculture. We
measure how the total labor value added and jobs content of South Africa’s exports has changed since 2001,
in nominal values and relative to gross exports. Without yet taking a sectoral perspective, we uncover
sources of these changes by decomposing them into direct versus indirect contributions, as well as capital

                                                     6
 
versus labor content of exports. We also look to see whether exports have become more or less important
for wages and jobs in South Africa, relative to total domestic production as well as total employment.

a. Labor Value Added

The LACEX data show that the total labor value added contained in South Africa’s exports has been
growing robustly and steadily since 2001 (Figure 1). Growth in all the wages paid to produce exports
including those to produce domestic inputs of exports—considering the indirect linkages—was 7.9%
annually, reaching $34.7 billion in 2011 (up from $16.3 billion in 2001).

The labor value added supported by the indirect linkages with export activities is relatively more important
and grew slightly faster than the labor value added directly supported by exports themselves. Growth in the
wages paid to produce exports directly over the last decade was 7.7% annually in nominal terms, reaching
$15.4 billion in 2011 (up from $7.4 billion in 2001). Growth in the wages paid to produce exports indirectly
was 8.1% annually, reaching $19.3 in 2011 (up from $8.9 billion in 2001).

                            Figure 1: Direct and total labor content of exports, South Africa
                                                        2001-2011
                       40000
                          30000
                  US$ Mil
               20000   10000




                                  2000                       2005                       2010
                                                                Year

                                                      Direct LVAX          Total LVAX


                                         Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

However, labor value added per unit of exports in South Africa has declined since 2001 (Figure 2 and Table
A1), witnessed in both the direct and indirect LVAX shares in spite of the nominal value of both direct and
indirect LVAX increasing. In 2001, each $100 of gross exports generated $41 of domestic wages (of which
$21 came directly from the export sector, with the remaining $19 coming through backward linkages to the
domestic economy), while by 2011 this figure had reduced to $33 ($16 directly and $17 indirectly). The
more pronounced decline in the direct than the indirect LVAX share is a result of the slightly higher growth
and greater importance of the indirect labor value added in South Africa’s exports.


                                                              7
 
This $33 is well below that of China, which has greatly increased its domestic labor per unit of exports, and
Brazil. The labor intensity of South Africa’s exports is in line with India, which has also followed a similar
trajectory to that of South Africa.8 The only BRIC country with a labor share in gross exports below that of
South Africa is Russia, an oil and gas dependent exporter. South Africa’s labor share has also fallen below
the world average of $36. On the other hand, South Africa registers a higher labor content than other middle-
income countries, including Colombia, Chile, Thailand and Turkey (Peru is an exception).9

Unskilled labor value added dominates in South Africa and other comparator countries, and to a larger
extent than the rest of the world, although South Africa has a slightly higher share of skilled wages in gross
exports than its middle-income country comparators. Table A1 splits the total labor value added share by
skilled and unskilled wages. The share of skilled export wages in total export wages declined in South
Africa as well as all comparator countries between 2001 and 2011, with the exception of China.
Nevertheless, the skilled-unskilled labor value added ratio remains the highest in South Africa (0.3) relative
to all its comparators, but below the rest of the world (0.5).

To help understand better the impact of trade on labor in South Africa, we decompose the change in the
LVAX share into the actual change in the labor value added in sectoral exports of South Africa (pure labor-
intensity effect) and the change in the composition of exports across industries (export-composition
effect).10 We find that between 2001 and 2011 the change in the labor intensity of the exporting industry
when the export composition is kept constant was negative, amounting to a decline of $7.6 of domestic
labor value added per $100 of gross exports. The change in the export composition when the labor intensity
of the exporting industries is kept constant was negligible though slightly negative, responsible for a further
decrease of $0.3 of domestic labor value added per $100 of gross exports. Thus, the observed decline in the
LVAX share is driven by exports becoming less labor intensive, which has only been slightly amplified by
the shift of South African exports towards less labor-intensive sectors.
                                                            
8
  This pattern is in line with China’s increasing export content of domestic value added due to backward linkages, as
documented by inter alia Kee and Tang (2016).
9
  Nine countries were chosen as comparators for South Africa. The first group includes the BRIC countries of Brazil,
Russia, India and China. These countries are all deemed to be at a similar stage of newly advanced economic
development, in which South Africa has since been included. The second group includes other emerging and middle-
income countries of Colombia, Chile, Peru, Thailand and Turkey. These countries were chosen because they have
achieved a similar level of economic development, economic, population size, and/or export structure as South Africa.
10
   In order to disentangle the direct and indirect components, we decompose the change in the labor value added share
in exports as follows. First, define Li as total labor value added in exports (in US$) in sector i and LSi its ratio to gross
exports (LSi=Li/Xi) with X as gross exports. The LS for the entire economy is:

                                                               ∑
                                                               ∑       ∑


If we multiply the term in parenthesis by Xj/Xj, then we can re-write that as: ∑              ∑
                                                                                                      . Then the difference
between time 0 and 1 is defined as:




The first term is the labor intensity effect, the second term is the export composition effect. 

                                                                   8
 
The fall in the share of labor value added relative to gross exports is consistent with unbundling of
production globally and South Africa becoming more integrated in GVCs (discussed below), where exports
tend to be characterized by a greater import content.11 But the data also show that exports in South Africa
are becoming more capital intensive, contributing to the decline in the domestic labor value added share of
gross exports. There has been a substitution away from labor to capital for domestic export production in
South Africa: the decline in the share of total labor value added of exports has been accompanied by an
increase in the share of domestic capital value added in gross exports. The capital content went from being
lower than the labor content of exports in 2001 (35% vs. 41%) to being higher in 2011 (43% vs. 33%)
(Table A2). This generalized decrease in the labor value added in sectoral exports is consistent with labor-
saving technological changes across developing countries (see, for example, Kumar and Russell (2002) and
Berman (2000)). Behar (2010a) shows that the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor has been
negative in South Africa, supporting this finding of a substitution away from labor toward capital for
production. The share of capital in South Africa’s gross exports is average among the middle-income
countries of the sample, and closest to that of Brazil.

                                                         Figure 2: Total labor content per $100 of gross exports
                                                                                1995-2011
                                        45       40
                            Total LVAX share (%)
                                  30    35
                                        25
                                        20




                                                      1995               2000                 2005                 2010
                                                                                       Year

                                                                          ZAF             BRA           RUS
                                                                          IND             CHN




                                                            
11
   These two effects are not necessarily unrelated. For example, the requirement of GVCs to meet strict quality
standards often leads to increased mechanization, and the scale economies possible from accessing larger global
markets may make capital investments more viable.

                                                                                   9
 
                          50      40
                Total LVAX share (%)
               20        30
                          10




                                       1995              2000                2005            2010
                                                                    Year

                                                          ZAF              COL         CHL
                                                          PER              THA         TUR


                                              Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

Exports have become less important for wages in South Africa relative to total domestic production. Not
only has the labor value added supported by exports declined relative to gross exports, it has also declined
relative to total domestic labor value added (Figure 3). Growth in all the wages paid to produce final output
including those to produce domestic inputs of final output—considering the linkages—was 11.8% annually,
reaching $182.9 billion in 2011 (up from $59.7 billion in 2001). Growth in all the wages paid to produce
exports was substantially lower (7.9% annually). As a result, $19 of each $100 of labor value added
generated from total domestic production was exported in 2011, versus $27 in 2001.

This trend in labor value added reflects a broader trend whereby non-export production has outperformed
export production, and exports have declined relative to domestic production. This is consistent with a
general underperformance of South Africa’s exports over the past decade, which have made limited inroads
into global markets and lagged behind those of peers in minerals, non-minerals and services (World Bank
2014, Matthee et al. 2016). This is also likely a by-product of Dutch Disease induced by the commodity
boom and amplified by the relatively high labor content of mineral exports (discussed below), which boosts
the spending effect of the commodity boom.

Nevertheless, exports continue to be more labor intensive than domestic production in South Africa, and
the labor intensity has evolved similarly for both. As noted above, in 2001 each $100 of gross exports
generated $41 of domestic wages, versus $27 of domestic final output. By 2011, this figure had reduced to
$33 for exports and $21 for domestic final output.




                                                                  10
 
           Figure 3: Total labor content of exports and domestic production, South Africa
                                              2001-2011




                  200000
                  150000
               US$ Mil
               100000
                  50000
                  0




                           2000                      2005                         2010
                                                        Year

                                               Total LVAD           Total LVAX


                                  Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

b. Jobs

The slower growth in the labor value added of exports compared to domestic final output is mainly due to
the fact that the export sector has been slowly shedding jobs. The LACEX data combined with South
Africa’s Labor Force Survey data show that between 2001 and 2011, the total number of jobs supported by
South Africa’s exports declined from 3.0 million to 2.9 million, despite positive growth in exports (10.3%
annually) as well as the wages paid to produce exports (7.9% annually). This finding confirms previous
literature that exports in South Africa have not been job-creating (Chinembiri 2010, Smet 2013).

The LACEX data allow us to consider not only the direct impact of exports on jobs but the indirect impact,
by considering the backward linkages with the rest of the economy that exports support. In fact, the LACEX
data combined with South Africa’s Labor Force Survey data highlight the importance of considering both
the direct and indirect contributions for understanding how exports support jobs in South Africa: only two
in five jobs generated by exports were generated directly in 2011. Failing to account for the indirect jobs
presents only a partial view of how exports contribute to labor outcomes in South Africa and other countries
throughout the world, which have become more important over time. The direct number of jobs supported
by South Africa’s exports declined from 1.47 million to 1.15 million between 2001 and 2011, but the
indirect number of jobs increased from 1.51 million to 1.71 million. However, the increase in indirect jobs
was not enough to offset the decline in direct jobs. Because export growth has been more positive for labor
in input-providing sectors, studies that only consider the jobs and wages to directly produce exports will
underestimate how jobs growth has accompanied export growth.

These trends have also translated into a reduction of the total number of jobs contained in $1 million of
gross exports (Figure 4 and Figure A1). South Africa moved from having 49 jobs per $1 million exports in

                                                      11
 
2004 to 29 jobs in 2011, the result of declines in both the direct and indirect job intensity of exports.12 While
this is a sizable reduction, South Africa maintained a lower rate of job reduction per unit of gross exports
than most other comparator countries. But in spite of this less-dramatic reduction, South Africa remains
one of the middle-income countries in the sample with the lowest number of jobs associated with $1 million
of exports—either directly or indirectly. That is explained partly by export composition, where the mining
and energy sector that dominates South Africa’s exports tends to employ fewer workers per unit of gross
exports than other sectors, and partly by the lower job intensity of all sectors but mining and energy
(discussed below). We control for this effect in the following section by comparing similar sectors across
countries.

On the other hand, South Africa has a higher share of jobs contained in exports relative to total employment
than any other comparator country except Thailand (Figure 5 and Figure A2). As a share of total
employment, 8% of the workforce is employed directly by exports, and another 15% of the workforce
indirectly. Yet this ratio is in decline—in 2004 more than 1 in 4 jobs were directly or indirectly supported
by exports, but by 2011 this ratio was just above 1 in 5 jobs.13

                                                                            Figure 4: Total jobs per $1 million of gross exports
                                                                                                 2004-2011
                                                               200
                            Jobs (per $1 mil of gross exports)
                                50        100   0     150




                                                                     1995                 2000                2005                 2010
                                                                                                      Year

                                                                                   ZAF             BRA            RUS              COL
                                                                                   PER             THA            TUR


                                                                              Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.




                                                            
12
   The direct number of jobs per $1 million of gross exports fell from 18.3 to 9.1 between 2004 and 2011 and the
indirect number of jobs per $1 million of gross exports also fell from 30.5 to 18.6.
13
   The direct number of jobs contained in exports relative to total employment fell from 9.9% to 7.9% between 2001
and 2011, the indirect number of jobs contained in exports relative to total employment fell from 16.5% to 15.0%, and
the total number of jobs contained in exports relative to total employment fell from 26.4% to 22.9%. 

                                                                                                    12
 
                        Figure 5: Total job content of exports as a share of total employment
                                                      2004-2011




                                                    50
                Export jobs in total employment (%)
              10        20         30       40




                                                         1995              2000               2005             2010
                                                                                      Year

                                                                    ZAF            BRA           RUS           COL
                                                                    PER            THA           TUR


                                                                Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

4. Labor and Jobs Content of Exports across Sectors
a. Within South Africa

The aggregate trends mask a wide heterogeneity across sectors. In particular, we show in this
section how commodity exports versus manufacturing and services exports contribute differently
to jobs and wages, which depends on whether we consider the direct versus indirect content as
well as the forward versus backward linkages. A sectoral perspective also shows how the
composition of South Africa’s exports are driving the above aggregate results.

Natural resource sectors – which tend to be capital intensive – generate most of South Africa’s
labor value added contained in its exports. Figure 6 shows that in 2011 the leading export sectors
in terms of total labor content were minerals, metals, machinery and equipment, and ferrous
metals. Minerals contributed over $6 billion in wages, by far the largest contributor to wages
among export sectors, reflecting the large value of gross exports and a relatively high – and
growing - labor intensity of exports vis-à-vis other sectors (more on this below). Together these
four sectors contributed 51% of South Africa’s total labor contained in its exports and 52% of
South Africa’s gross exports.

Consistent with its enclave-type characteristics, the minerals sector primarily generates domestic
labor value added directly within the sector’s exports, as opposed to its backward linkages with
input sectors. On the other hand, around three-quarters of the total labor contained in exports of
machinery and equipment and of transport equipment is due to labor used by domestic suppliers

                                                                                    13
 
of these sectors. In the case of minerals, that share is less than one-third. Indeed, while the minerals
sector generates the most direct labor value added, due to its dominance in the export basket and
relatively high labor intensity, its weak backward links with the domestic economy limit its overall
employment impact.

     Figure 6: Direct and indirect labor content of exports across sectors, South Africa
                                            2011

                                    Minerals nec
                                      Metals nec
                 Machinery and Equipment nec
                                 Ferrous Metals
                          Transport Equipment
             Chemical, Rubber, Plastic Products
                 Trade and Transport Services
                        Other Private Services
                        Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
                              Processed Foods
              PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
                              Energy Extraction
                    Paper Products, Publishing
                                 Metal Products
              Beverages and Tobacco Products
                              Manufactures nec
                                 Wood Products
                                         Textiles
                          Mineral Products nec
                               Wearing Apparel
                         Electricity, Gas, Water
                               Leather Products
                                     Construction
                                       Dwellings

                                                    0        2,000       4,000        6,000
                                                                     US$ mil.

                                                             Direct LVAX         Indirect LVAX


                          Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

Smaller export sectors instead generate labor value added more intensely. Exploring the labor
intensity of exports shows that the labor content per $100 of exports also varies across sectors for
2001 and 2011 (Figure 7). For example, wearing apparel has a very high intensity of labor in its
exports. Each $100 of gross wearing apparel exports generates $43 of wages, of which $18 go the
workers directly producing these goods. At the lower end of the spectrum, $100 of metal exports
generate only $21 of labor value added, shared equally between the direct and indirect components.
With the exceptions of minerals and beverages and tobacco products, the labor intensity of sectors’
exports has declined, again confirming that the observed decline in the LVAX share is driven by
exports becoming less labor intensive.




                                                        14
 
    Figure 7: Total labor content per $100 of gross exports across sectors, South Africa
                                       2001 vs. 2011

                PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
                                 Wearing Apparel
                                   Metal Products
                                   Wood Products
                                      Construction
                                      Minerals nec
                            Mineral Products nec
                                           Textiles
                      Paper Products, Publishing
                                 Leather Products
                    Trade and Transport Services
                           Other Private Services
                                   Ferrous Metals
                   Machinery and Equipment nec
                                Processed Foods
                Beverages and Tobacco Products
               Chemical, Rubber, Plastic Products
                          Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
                               Manufactures nec
                           Electricity, Gas, Water
                            Transport Equipment
                                        Metals nec
                                Energy Extraction
                                         Dwellings



                                                      0   20                40             60   80
                                                                    Total LVAX share (%)

                                                                     2001         2011


                                  Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

The services sector absorbs a much larger share of labor value added from exports than it generates
directly via its exports. Figure 8 shows how much the labor of each sector is used by other sectors
for their exports (i.e., the forward linkages). The picture again is very different, highlighting an
asymmetry that is typical of many economies. The services sectors, while being relatively small
contributors to the direct labor content of exports, are the most important contributor of labor to
exports when accounting also for the forward linkages. Trade and transport services as well as
other private services have large wage bills servicing export sectors, paying for over $8 billion and
$7 billion in wages, mostly indirectly by supplying services to other export sectors rather than
exporting directly.

Consistent with other literature (Farole, 2015), domestic value chains in South Africa appear to be
relatively short. While the goods sector shows strong backward linkages in the domestic economy,
particularly through services, it also has very weak forward linkages. Labor in the minerals and
metals sectors are hardly employed to produce inputs for other exporting sectors, indicating very
limited domestic downstream connectivity. Perhaps even more surprising, while the machinery
and equipment sector has a large labor content in exports, labor in machinery and equipment is
also not involved in the production to supply other exporting sectors. The majority of its wages
are paid to employees producing equipment to be directly exported (even though doing so requires
inputs from other domestic sectors of the economy, as illustrated in Figure 6). This asymmetry
suggests a mismatch between the domestic supply of machinery and the demand for machinery
from the domestic minerals, metal and manufacturing sectors.

                                                               15
 
      Figure 8: Direct and indirect labor content of exports across sectors, forward linkages,
                                           South Africa
                                               2011

                             Trade and Transport Services
                                    Other Private Services
                                                Minerals nec
                                                  Metals nec
                                             Ferrous Metals
                         Chemical, Rubber, Plastic Products
                             Machinery and Equipment nec
                                             Metal Products
                          PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
                                      Transport Equipment
                                    Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
                                Paper Products, Publishing
                                     Electricity, Gas, Water
                                          Energy Extraction
                                          Processed Foods
                                             Wood Products
                                      Mineral Products nec
                                                     Textiles
                                          Manufactures nec
                                                 Construction
                                           Wearing Apparel
                          Beverages and Tobacco Products
                                           Leather Products
                                                   Dwellings

                                                                0        2,000   4,000    6,000    8,000
                                                                                 US$ mil.

                                                                          Direct LVAX       Indirect LVAX


                                                Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

In line with other comparators, labor value added associated to exports tends to be biased towards
unskilled workers. While the unskilled component of total labor content of exports is larger in
most sectors, in public administration, defense, health and education and in other private services
exports, the unskilled-skilled labor value added split is about even (Figure 9).14 This is the case
whether considering total value added computed through the backward or forward linkages
method. At the other extreme, agriculture, forestry and fishing have the lowest shares of skilled
labor contained in total exports.




                                                            
14
     We use 2007 as the split for 2011 is not compatible with previous years.

                                                                    16
 
    Figure 9: Skilled and unskilled labor content of exports across sectors, South Africa
                                            2011

                                  Minerals nec
                                    Metals nec
               Machinery and Equipment nec
                               Ferrous Metals
                        Transport Equipment
           Chemical, Rubber, Plastic Products
               Trade and Transport Services
                      Other Private Services
                      Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
                            Processed Foods
            PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
                            Energy Extraction
                  Paper Products, Publishing
                               Metal Products
            Beverages and Tobacco Products
                            Manufactures nec
                               Wood Products
                                       Textiles
                        Mineral Products nec
                             Wearing Apparel
                       Electricity, Gas, Water
                             Leather Products
                                   Construction
                                     Dwellings

                                                  0        2,000        4,000          6,000
                                                                   US$ mil.

                                                      Total LVAX Unskilled      Total LVAX Skilled


                           Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

Manufacturing matters for jobs, but its importance comes mainly through its backward linkages to
the domestic economy. Replacing the underlying labor value added share in production (from
national accounts contained in GTAP) with the number of jobs contained in production (from
ILO), we can isolate the number of direct and indirect jobs contained in exports. Figure 10 shows
the direct and indirect jobs in exports for 2011. Due to differences in sectoral aggregations across
data sources, we can only group the sectors into 11 macro sectors. Manufacturing dominates the
ranking, responsible for almost two-thirds of all jobs contained in exports. In 2011, manufacturing
exports contributed 1.9 million jobs. The vast majority of these jobs are created in sectors
providing inputs to manufacturing (1.5 million indirectly and 0.4 million directly): the indirect
employment impact of manufacturing exports (jobs in industries providing inputs into
manufacturing exports) is nearly 4.5 times greater than the direct manufacturing employment.




                                                      17
 
            Figure 10: Job content of exports across macro sectors, South Africa
                                            2011

                               Manufacturing
                          Mining and Energy
                   Other commercial services
                                  Agriculture
                Transport and communication
               Trade, sales and accomodation
                              Public services
                           Financial services
                    Electricity, gas and water
                         Real estate, renting
                                Construction

                                                 0    500         1,000      1,500     2,000
                                                                 Thousands

                                                          Direct JOBX         Indirect JOBX


                          Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

The intensity with which manufacturing exports support jobs is instead lower than agriculture as
well as most services sectors. Figure 11 shows the direct and indirect jobs per $1 million of gross
exports for 2011. Aside from real estate and renting, manufacturing has the lowest direct job
intensity of exports, with 6 jobs directly supported per $1 million in exports. The indirect job
intensity of exports is instead higher than all other sectors, at 22 jobs indirectly supported per $1
million in exports. Overall, the total job intensity of exports is about average, but below agriculture
and other services sectors. The job intensity of mining and energy, on the other hand, is among the
lowest.




                                                     18
 
     Figure 11: Direct and indirect job content per $1 million of gross exports across macro
                                      sectors, South Africa

                                   Other commercial services
                                                           Construction
                            Trade, sales and accomodation
                                                               Agriculture
                                                       Public services
                                      Electricity, gas and water
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                  Financial services
                               Transport and communication
                                                 Mining and Energy
                                               Real estate, renting

                                                                             0        20            40          60         80
                                                                                           Jobs per $1 mil. exports

                                                                                      Direct JOBX               Indirect JOBX


                                                Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

One drawback of the classification is that manufacturing is a very broad and heterogeneous
category. In order to explore this heterogeneity further, we use sectoral employment data from
South African labor force surveys instead of ILO, shown in Figure 12. Machinery, other metal
products and ferrous metal products becomes the largest sector in terms of the number of jobs
contained in its exports (which was all contained within the broad manufacturing sector in Figure
10).15 It also witnessed the largest increase in jobs contained in exports across all sectors between
2001 and 2011, from 837,000 to 992,000 jobs. This growth was entirely explained by jobs in input-
providing sectors; in 2011, indirect jobs represented three quarters of the total jobs contained in
machinery, metal products and ferrous metal exports. Minerals also experienced an important
growth in the number of jobs contained in exports, jumping from 273,000 jobs in 2001 to 400,000
jobs in 2011. The indirect content grew as well, though at a much slower rate than that experienced
by machinery and metals. But for each of these sectors, the growth in jobs was substantially lower
than the growth in gross exports, resulting in a sharp decline in the number of jobs per $1 million
of gross exports.

On the other hand, export jobs in agriculture fell dramatically in the 2000s, from over 300,000 to
less than 200,000 jobs between 2004 and 2011, as did jobs contained in trade and transport services
exports. These trends – a rising number of jobs for capital-intensive exports and a declining number

                                                            
15
  The sector ‘ferrous metals’ includes manufacture of basic iron and steel and casting of iron and steel, which by its
ISIC concordance is considered manufacturing (ISIC 27) rather than minerals (ISIC 12-14).

                                                                                 19
 
of jobs for labor-intensive exports – may help explain the declining labor intensity of exports
highlighted in Figure 2 above. Nevertheless, the proceeding analysis and other literature also
suggests that the relatively low labor content of South African exports seems to be due not only to
a composition effect, but also a generally low use of domestic labor in production relative to other
countries. The factor content of South Africa’s export basket is associated with products with
human capital and especially physical capital intensity far beyond those in South Africa’s
endowments (Hollweg and Ruppert-Bulmer, 2014).

The sluggish growth in labor-intensive exports in recent years is also consistent with other findings
that exports have performed least well in manufacturing sectors that are labor-intensive (World
Bank, 2014). This is also likely a by-product of Dutch Disease induced by the commodity boom
and amplified by the relatively high labor content of mineral exports, which boosts the spending
effect of the commodity boom. With this in mind, we focus in on non-resource intensive
manufacturing exports that are traditionally part of GVCs.




                                                 20
 
                            Figure 12: Direct and indirect job content of exports across refined sectors, South Africa
                                                                  2001 vs. 2011

                                                           2001                                                                                  2011
achinery, Metal Prod, Metal, Ferrous Metal                                           achinery, Metal Prod, Metal, Ferrous Metal
                   Agr, Forestry, Fisheries                                                                         Minerals nec
            Trade and Transport Services                                                          Energy Ext, Chem/Rub/Plast
             Energy Ext, Chem/Rub/Plast                                                          Trade and Transport Services
                               Minerals nec                                                                Transport Equipment
            Processed Food, Bev and Tob                                                                 Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
                         Manufactures nec                                                        Processed Food, Bev and Tob
                      Transport Equipment                                                               Other Private Services
               Paper/Pub, Wood Products                                                             Paper/Pub, Wood Products
                   Other Private Services                                                                     Manufactures nec
                 Apparel, Textiles, Leather                                                           Apparel, Textiles, Leather
                     Mineral Products nec                                                    PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
        PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat                                                                    Mineral Products nec
                    Electricity, Gas, Water                                                              Electricity, Gas, Water
                                Construction                                                                         Construction
                                  Dwellings                                                                            Dwellings

                                               0   200     400      600     800                                                     0   200   400   600    800    1,000
                                                          Thousands                                                                            Thousands
                                                    Direct JOBX      Indirect JOBX                                                        Direct JOBX      Indirect JOBX


                                Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX and South African labor force surveys.




                                                                               21
  
b. Between Countries

As observed in Section 3, South Africa has a lower share of total labor content in gross exports
than most of the BRIC countries, but it has a higher share than most other comparators. To
investigate to what extent this may be due to a composition effect, Figure 13 shows a comparison
for similar sectors across comparator countries (in terms of total labor value added per $100 of
gross exports). This comparison confirms that South Africa generally has a lower share of labor in
exports across sectors than its BRIC comparators (first panel), while it generally has a higher share
across sectors relative to the other comparator countries. This suggests that the aggregate result is
not mainly driven by the compositional nature of exports. This was confirmed with the
decomposition of the LVAX share into an export intensity component and a compositional
component, where the change in the compositional component was positive, but was not strong
enough to offset the negative change in the intensity component.

           Figure 13: Total labor content per $100 of gross exports across sectors
                                            2011

                          Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
                Beverages and Tobacco Products
               Chemical, Rubber, Plastic Products
                                      Construction
                                         Dwellings
                           Electricity, Gas, Water
                                Energy Extraction
                                   Ferrous Metals
                                 Leather Products
                   Machinery and Equipment nec
                               Manufactures nec
                                   Metal Products
                                        Metals nec
                            Mineral Products nec
                                      Minerals nec
                           Other Private Services
                      Paper Products, Publishing
                                Processed Foods
                PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
                                           Textiles
                    Trade and Transport Services
                            Transport Equipment
                                 Wearing Apparel
                                   Wood Products



                                                      0         20                40               60         80
                                                                          Total LVAX share (%)

                                                          ZAF         BRA         RUS            IND    CHN




                                                                     22
 
                         Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
               Beverages and Tobacco Products
              Chemical, Rubber, Plastic Products
                                     Construction
                                        Dwellings
                          Electricity, Gas, Water
                               Energy Extraction
                                  Ferrous Metals
                                Leather Products
                  Machinery and Equipment nec
                              Manufactures nec
                                  Metal Products
                                       Metals nec
                           Mineral Products nec
                                     Minerals nec
                          Other Private Services
                     Paper Products, Publishing
                               Processed Foods
               PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
                                          Textiles
                   Trade and Transport Services
                           Transport Equipment
                                Wearing Apparel
                                  Wood Products



                                                     0         20                40             60       80
                                                                         Total LVAX share (%)

                                                         ZAF   COL         CHL         PER       THA   TUR


                                 Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

Minerals have a relatively high share of labor in exports even vis-à-vis other sectors. Exports of
the minerals sector in South Africa are the most labor intensive among any of its comparators. In
Figure 6 we observed that labor value added contained in South Africa’s minerals exports was
primarily direct labor content with weak backward linkages, and in Figure 14 we assess whether
this over performance is due to direct value added or indirect value added via backward linkages.
Figure 14 repeats Figure 13 except for the direct LVAX shares across sectors and countries. The
direct LVAX share continues to be above all other countries for minerals as well as for ferrous
metals. In other sectors, however, the direct LVAX share is no longer higher than other non-BRIC
comparators, implying that South Africa’s high LVAX share relative to other countries is due to
backward linkages, rather than the direct content. Adding this result to the below finding that the
number of jobs supported by exports of minerals is limited suggests exports support high wages in
the minerals sector (around US$18,000 per average worker per year if dividing the direct LVAX
in minerals by the direct number of jobs in minerals).




                                                                    23
 
           Figure 14: Direct labor content per $100 of gross exports across sector
                                            2011

                          Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
                Beverages and Tobacco Products
               Chemical, Rubber, Plastic Products
                                      Construction
                                         Dwellings
                           Electricity, Gas, Water
                                Energy Extraction
                                   Ferrous Metals
                                 Leather Products
                   Machinery and Equipment nec
                               Manufactures nec
                                   Metal Products
                                        Metals nec
                            Mineral Products nec
                                      Minerals nec
                           Other Private Services
                      Paper Products, Publishing
                                Processed Foods
                PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
                                           Textiles
                    Trade and Transport Services
                            Transport Equipment
                                 Wearing Apparel
                                   Wood Products



                                                      0               20                40                60                80
                                                                                Direct LVAX share (%)

                                                                ZAF         BRA         RUS             IND         CHN




                         Agr, Forestry, Fisheries
               Beverages and Tobacco Products
              Chemical, Rubber, Plastic Products
                                     Construction
                                        Dwellings
                          Electricity, Gas, Water
                               Energy Extraction
                                  Ferrous Metals
                                Leather Products
                  Machinery and Equipment nec
                              Manufactures nec
                                  Metal Products
                                       Metals nec
                           Mineral Products nec
                                     Minerals nec
                          Other Private Services
                     Paper Products, Publishing
                               Processed Foods
               PubAdmin/Defence/Health/Educat
                                          Textiles
                   Trade and Transport Services
                           Transport Equipment
                                Wearing Apparel
                                  Wood Products



                                                     0                20                40                60                80
                                                                                Direct LVAX share (%)

                                                          ZAF         COL         CHL         PER             THA         TUR


                                  Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

Figure 15 shows this comparison across all countries for 2001 and 2011 for the three largest South
African export sectors. In machinery and equipment, South Africa’s labor content as a share of
exports declined relative to the average in the other countries, although it remains still slightly
above the level expected given its income per capita. In metals, the country has moved from being

                                                                           24
 
above to being below the expected share of labor in exports, and in 2011 it was also below most
comparator countries. In minerals on the other hand, South Africa’s labor intensity of exports has
markedly increased and by 2011 it had the highest share of labor in exports not only among the
comparator countries but vis-a-vis most other countries in the world. This change was due entirely
to an increase in the intensity of labor directly supporting minerals exports, rather than labor
supporting exports via their backward linkages. There was a significant increase in the direct
LVAX share, more than doubling from $13 to $30 per $100 of gross exports, while the indirect
LVAX share declined by almost half, from $22 to $12 per $100 of gross exports.

This finding is consistent with micro evidence based on annual reports from listed mining firms,
which suggests that between 2001 and 2011, wages as a percent of total costs in South Africa’s
mining sector almost doubled, from 20% to 35% (Gwatidzo and Benhura, 2013). The mining
sector also experienced increases in the number of jobs by over 25% between 2001 and 2011
according to official statistics. South Africa’s top minerals exports in 2011 were unwrought gold
(HS 710812, accounting for 10% of total goods exports) and unwrought platinum (HS 711011,
accounting for 7% of total goods exports). South African gold and platinum production is highly
unionized, which helped drive these wage increases.

Figure 15: Total labor content per $100 of gross exports across sectors and GDP per capita
                                      2001 vs. 2011
                                    Machinery and Equipment nec, 2001                                               Machinery and Equipment nec, 2011
                           70




                                                                                                           70
                           60




                                                                                                           60
    Total LVAX share (%)




                                                                                    Total LVAX share (%)




                                                                                                                                          PER
                                                          ZAF
                           50




                                                                                                           50




                                                         COL
                                                                                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                                                                                      RUS

                                                        RUS
                           40




                                                                                                           40




                                                              BRA                                                                         CHNZAF
                                                                                                                                            COL       CHL
                                                 CHN
                                                                    CHL
                           30




                                                                                                           30




                                                              TUR                                                               IND
                                          IND
                           20




                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                  TUR

                                                                                                                                          THA
                           10




                                                                                                           10




                                                       THA
                                                        PER
                           0




                                                                                                           0




                                4     6                   8               10   12                               4     6               8                 10   12

                                    Log GDP per capita (current USD)                                                Log GDP per capita (current USD)
                                                Metals nec, 2001                                                            Metals nec, 2011
                           70




                                                                                                           70
                           60




                                                                                                           60
    Total LVAX share (%)




                                                                                    Total LVAX share (%)
                           50




                                                                                                           50




                                                         COL
                                                                                                                                          PER
                           40




                                                                                                           40




                                                 CHN      ZAF
                                                        RUS BRA                                                                           CHN
                                                                                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                                                                                      RUS
                           30




                                                                                                           30




                                          IND          PER          CHL                                                                     COL       CHL
                           20




                                                                                                           20




                                                              TUR                                                               IND             ZAF

                                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                                          THA
                           10




                                                                                                           10




                                                       THA
                           0




                                                                                                           0




                                4     6                   8               10   12                               4     6               8                 10   12

                                    Log GDP per capita (current USD)                                                Log GDP per capita (current USD)




                                                                               25
 
                                                       Minerals nec, 2001                                                                                  Minerals nec, 2011
                           70




                                                                                                                               70
                           60                                    COL




                                                                                                                               60
    Total LVAX share (%)




                                                                                                        Total LVAX share (%)
                           50




                                                                                                                               50
                                                                     BRA

                                                                                                                                                                             ZAF
                                                                   TUR
                           40




                                                                                                                               40
                                                         CHN                                                                                                              PER
                                                                RUS                                                                                                       CHN
                                                                  ZAF                                                                                                               BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                   TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                     RUS
                           30




                                                                                                                               30
                                                 IND
                                                               PER                                                                                              IND
                                                                           CHL                                                                                               COL
                                                                                                                                                                          THA        CHL
                           20




                                                                                                                               20
                                                               THA
                           10




                                                                                                                               10
                           0




                                                                                                                               0
                                4            6                   8                10               12                               4               6                 8                10   12

                                           Log GDP per capita (current USD)                                                                             Log GDP per capita (USD)

                                    Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX and World Development Indicators.

The job intensity of South Africa’s manufacturing exports continues to be low vis-a-vis comparator
countries, while the job intensity of mining and energy is higher than all other countries. The
following two figures show a comparison of the job intensity of exports across sectors and
comparator countries (in terms of the total number of jobs per $1 million of gross exports in Figure
16 and the direct number of jobs per $1 million of gross exports in Figure 17). Unlike the labor
value added intensity of exports (which was lower than the BRIC countries but higher than other
comparators), the job intensity of exports tends to be lower than all comparators, with the exception
of mining and energy. Again, with the exception of mining and energy, the direct job intensity of
exports tends to be lower than comparators across sectors.

                                Figure 16: Total job content per $1 million of gross exports across macro sectors
                                                                     2011

                                                                           Agriculture
                                                                     Construction
                                                 Electricity, gas and water
                                                           Financial services
                                                                 Manufacturing
                                                          Mining and Energy
                                            Other commercial services
                                                                Public services
                                                         Real estate, renting
                                        Trade, sales and accomodation
                                         Transport and communication

                                                                                         0              100                                200               300            400
                                                                                                                                    Jobs per $1 mil. exports

                                                                                             ZAF        BRA                         RUS       CHL        COL       THA     TUR


                                                               Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

                                                                                                   26
 
          Figure 17: Direct job content per $1 million of gross exports across macro sectors
                                                2011

                                                          Agriculture
                                                      Construction
                                 Electricity, gas and water
                                             Financial services
                                                    Manufacturing
                                            Mining and Energy
                              Other commercial services
                                                  Public services
                                          Real estate, renting
                      Trade, sales and accomodation
                         Transport and communication

                                                                        0          100           200              300          400
                                                                                         Jobs per $1 mil. exports

                                                                            ZAF   BRA    RUS       CHL      COL         THA   TUR


                                                Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

5. Labor Content of Exports in Global Value Chains

In this section, we narrow our focus and measure the labor content of non-resources intensive
manufacturing exports traditionally governed in GVCs, to examine how growth in non-traditional export
sectors has impacted the level and nature of labor in South Africa. South Africa has become more integrated
in GVCs, and is looking to upgrade in GVCs as an avenue to generating higher quality jobs (Farole 2015).
GVCs are fundamentally about restructuring the location of economy activity: what used to be produced
under one factory roof may now take place across a number of different countries. This has fundamental
impacts on where jobs go, who gets them, and what types of jobs they are (Farole 2015). A priori, the net
impact of joining and upgrading in GVCs on labor markets in developing countries is unclear and not well
studied in the literature,16 as it can occur in opposite directions through a variety of channels.17

Separating the domestic content from the foreign content contained in a country’s exports—as achieved in
the LACEX data—is a necessary step when disentangling the impact of production across multiple borders.
However, when defining GVC-trade as value addition across different geographical locations governed by
                                                            
16
  Exceptions include Kucera et al. (2012).
17
  For example, the requirement of GVCs to meet strict quality standards often leads to increased mechanization, and
the scale economies possible from accessing larger global markets may make capital investments more viable. Less
labor-intensive methods of production may result, lowering the number of jobs for a given volume of output/exports.
GVCs may also have distributional consequences in terms of the nature of skills demand and their implications for
wages. On the other hand, if greater foreign value added in exports leads to an increase in total exports, by
complementing the domestically available intermediate products and skills, it may lead to higher demand for labor in
an industry. However, if it substitutes domestic production, it can lead to a lower share of domestic value added in
exports and thereby lower labor demand. As another alternative, it could substitute the direct labor within an industry,
but complement the indirect labor (Farole 2015).

                                                                                  27
 
a lead firm, we are unable to distinguish between GVC and non-GVC trade in the LACEX due to its sectoral
level of aggregation. Instead, we focus on important GVC sectors globally: motor vehicles, textile and
apparel, electronic equipment, and food products. We assess how South Africa’s level of GVC participation
in these sectors has changed over the last decade, and link this to changes in the direct and indirect labor
intensity (Figure 18), labor content (Figure 19) and the skills mix (Figure 20 and Figure 21) in South
Africa’s GVC exports.

South Africa’s participation in these GVC-oriented sectors has been varied. Using data from the UNCTAD-
Eora GVC database, between 2001 and 2011 South Africa’s participation in the automotive GVC—
measured by foreign content embodied in South Africa’s exports as a buyer and South Africa’s content
embodied in foreign exports as a seller—more than tripled and GVC participation remained the second
highest for manufacturing. In contrast, South Africa remained weakly integrated in the wearing apparel
GVC, and GVC participation fell to one of the lowest for manufacturing. More generally, domestic apparel
manufacturing has been in decline over the past 15 years due to increased import competition, a process
that accelerated significantly when South Africa acceded to the WTO’s Agreement on Textiles and Clothing
in 1994 (van der Westhuizen 2006). Nevertheless, it is classically one of the most GVC-intensive sectors
globally, and an important sector for unskilled labor.

A high import content of exports is a key feature of GVC participation as a buyer, and as expected the labor
intensity of motor vehicle exports declined sharply in South Africa. Automotive exports contributed around
$37 of domestic labor per $100 of exports in 2001, and declined to below $30 in 2011, well below that of
Brazil and China, where the labor content instead increased, and India, where it remained stable. Enhanced
participation in the automotive GVC—as both a buyer and a seller—fueled rapid growth of South Africa’s
motor vehicle exports (Engel 2015), and more than compensated the decline in domestic labor intensity:
the total labor content of motor vehicles exports increased significantly, almost tripling from $862 million
to $2.3 billion between 2001 and 2011. Nevertheless, the growth in total labor value added (in USD)
between 2001 and 2011 in South Africa was also lowest among these countries, growing annually on
average at 10.4%, compared to 33.0% in China, 30% in India, and 13.5% in Brazil.

The significant growth in wages supported by motor vehicle exports occurred primarily as a result of the
sector’s extensive backward linkages to the domestic economy. Direct wages paid to produce automotive
exports increased modestly between 2001 and 2011, averaging 3.6% per year, and the direct labor content
per $100 of gross exports more than halved. Instead, wage growth was largely concentrated in upstream
input sectors, including other manufacturing sectors but primarily services sectors. Indirect wages paid to
produce automotive exports increased annually by 15.4%, causing the indirect-to-direct labor value added
ratio to increase from about one-half to more than two-thirds over the decade.

This greater need for services is consistent with greater GVC participation. Exporters increasingly make
use of foreign inputs (reducing the labor value added paid directly to motor vehicle workers). But
coordinating these inputs requires more intensive use of (mainly domestic) services, including financial
services, transport and logistics, and other business services (Farole 2015), and overall the net result for
wage growth in South Africa was positive. This finding reinforces the importance of services for a
competitive manufacturing sector, whose production is increasingly fragmented across countries (Lanz and
Maurer 2015).



                                                    28
 
Though slight, the labor content of wearing apparel exports increased over the 2000s—both in nominal
values and as a share of gross exports. In nominal values, the wages paid to produce wearing apparel exports
in South Africa continue to be lower than in comparators—consistent with low GVC integration. As a share
of gross exports, the labor intensity of wearing apparel exports has become higher than most comparators,
with the exception of Brazil and China. This suggests a generally high use of domestic labor in production
even by international standards (as confirmed above—whereby each $100 dollars of gross exports generates
$43 of wages), and is consistent with the observed decline in GVC participation on the buying side.

Similar to what was observed for motor vehicle exports, the increase in export-wages in wearing apparel
was concentrated in upstream input sectors, including services, due to the backward linkages to the domestic
economy. Both in nominal values and as a share of gross exports, the direct content of wearing apparel
exports decreased while the indirect content increased over the 2000s in South Africa. Direct wages are
behind the large labor content in Brazil’s wearing apparel exports, while the indirect content explains
China’s high labor intensity, in line with recent evidence (Kee and Tang 2016).

The labor content of South Africa’s exports in the food products GVC also increased slightly between 2001
and 2011, both in nominal values and as a share of gross exports. While indirect wages paid to produce
food product exports are more important than direct wages across countries, most comparators show a
higher indirect content per $100 of exports than South Africa. The domestic labor contained in South
Africa’s electronic equipment exports dropped substantially, despite an increase in the indirect content.
Nevertheless, the labor intensity of electronic exports remains relatively high, behind only Peru and Brazil.

    Figure 18: Direct and indirect labor content per $100 of gross exports in GVC-intensive sectors
                                             2001 vs. 2011
                           Wearing Apparel                                                        Motor Vehicles
          2001                                                                2001
    BRA   2011                                                          BRA   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    CHL   2011                                                          CHL   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    CHN   2011                                                          CHN   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    COL   2011                                                          COL   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    IND   2011                                                          IND   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    PER   2011                                                          PER   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    RUS   2011                                                          RUS   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    THA   2011                                                          THA   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    TUR   2011                                                          TUR   2011
          2001                                                                2001
    ZAF   2011                                                          ZAF   2011


                 0    20                   40                 60                     0   20              40             60          80
                           Total LVAX share (%)                                                  Total LVAX share (%)

                      Direct LVAX             Indirect LVAX                                   Direct LVAX           Indirect LVAX




                                                                   29
 
                                         Other Food                                                               Electronic Equipment
          2001                                                                                 2001
    BRA   2011                                                                           BRA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    CHL   2011                                                                           CHL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    CHN   2011                                                                           CHN   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    COL   2011                                                                           COL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    IND   2011                                                                           IND   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    PER   2011                                                                           PER   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    RUS   2011                                                                           RUS   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    THA   2011                                                                           THA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    TUR   2011                                                                           TUR   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    ZAF   2011                                                                           ZAF   2011


                 0         10         20           30             40         50                       0           20                  40                  60
                                     Total LVAX share (%)                                                              Total LVAX share (%)

                                 Direct LVAX             Indirect LVAX                                            Direct LVAX             Indirect LVAX


                                               Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

                     Figure 19: Direct and indirect labor content of exports in GVC-intensive sectors
                                                       2001 vs. 2011
                                    Wearing Apparel                                                                    Motor Vehicles
          2001                                                                                 2001
    BRA   2011                                                                           BRA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    CHL   2011                                                                           CHL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    COL   2011                                                                           COL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    IND   2011                                                                           IND   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    PER   2011                                                                           PER   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    RUS   2011                                                                           RUS   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    THA   2011                                                                           THA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    TUR   2011                                                                           TUR   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    ZAF   2011                                                                           ZAF   2011


                 0       1,000     2,000       3,000           4,000     5,000                        0   2,000             4,000             6,000            8,000
                                           US$ mil.                                                                         US$ mil.

                                 Direct LVAX             Indirect LVAX                                            Direct LVAX             Indirect LVAX



                                         Other Food                                                               Electronic Equipment
          2001                                                                                 2001
    BRA   2011                                                                           BRA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    CHL   2011                                                                           CHL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    COL   2011                                                                           COL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    IND   2011                                                                           IND   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    PER   2011                                                                           PER   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    RUS   2011                                                                           RUS   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    THA   2011                                                                           THA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    TUR   2011                                                                           TUR   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    ZAF   2011                                                                           ZAF   2011


                 0               1,000                 2,000                3,000                     0   1,000             2,000             3,000            4,000
                                           US$ mil.                                                                         US$ mil.

                                 Direct LVAX             Indirect LVAX                                            Direct LVAX             Indirect LVAX


                                               Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

The increasing importance of indirect wages that accompanied South Africa’s GVC integration, coupled
with differences in the skills-intensity across sectors, appears to have had implications on skills demand.
Figure 20 and Figure 21 replicate the above graphs but with the skilled-unskilled instead of the direct-
indirect split. The share of skilled wages is in general higher in South Africa than in most other comparators

                                                                                    30
 
in all four sectors except motor vehicles (where the share of skilled wags appears to be lower in South
Africa than in comparators). Nevertheless, job creation in GVC exports has generally been biased in favor
of skilled workers. In the motor vehicle, wearing apparel and other food GVCs, the relative contribution of
skilled labor to each $100 of gross exports has increased significantly over the decade. However, the relative
contribution has somewhat declined in electronic exports. Behar (2010b) shows that skilled labor
complements unskilled labor in South Africa’s manufacturing sector, supporting our findings that skilled
labor is used in the indirect production of (unskilled) export sectors.18

These findings suggest that GVC integration is likely to have distributional consequences, which may in
fact accelerate the underlying skills bias that are already prevalent in South African export production. The
substitution of direct manufacturing jobs to indirect services jobs has been biased towards skilled labor.
Coupling this with the strong shift toward indirect services employment suggests that skilled job creation
may also happen through the services sector’s forward linkages (given that services are relatively more
skilled intensive). This increase in the demand for skills in the export sector is consistent with the rising
inequality experienced by South Africa throughout the period (Bhorat and van der Westhuizen 2012).

     Figure 20: Skilled and unskilled labor content per $100 of gross exports in GVC-intensive sectors
                                               2001 vs. 2011
                                           Wearing Apparel                                                              Motor Vehicles
            2001                                                                                  2001
     BRA    2011                                                                            BRA   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
     CHL    2011                                                                            CHL   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
     CHN    2011                                                                            CHN   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
     COL    2011                                                                            COL   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
      IND   2011                                                                            IND   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
     PER    2011                                                                            PER   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
     RUS    2011                                                                            RUS   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
     THA    2011                                                                            THA   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
     TUR    2011                                                                            TUR   2011
            2001                                                                                  2001
     ZAF    2011                                                                            ZAF   2011


                   0                  20                   40                    60                      0     20              40               60                 80
                                           Total LVAX share (%)                                                        Total LVAX share (%)

                               Total LVAX Unskilled               Total LVAX Skilled                         Total LVAX Unskilled             Total LVAX Skilled




                                                            
18
  Edwards and Behar (2005) also find evidence that trade liberalization and technological change have affected the
skill structure of employment, where export orientation is positively associated with the skill intensity of production.

                                                                                       31
 
                                       Other Food                                                                 Electronic Equipment
          2001                                                                                 2001
    BRA   2011                                                                           BRA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    CHL   2011                                                                           CHL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    CHN   2011                                                                           CHN   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    COL   2011                                                                           COL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    IND   2011                                                                           IND   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    PER   2011                                                                           PER   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    RUS   2011                                                                           RUS   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    THA   2011                                                                           THA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    TUR   2011                                                                           TUR   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    ZAF   2011                                                                           ZAF   2011


                 0      10          20           30              40            50                     0           20                  40                    60
                                   Total LVAX share (%)                                                                Total LVAX share (%)

                         Total LVAX Unskilled             Total LVAX Skilled                              Total LVAX Unskilled                Total LVAX Skilled


                                           Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

                 Figure 21: Skilled and unskilled labor content of exports in GVC-intensive sectors
                                                    2001 vs. 2011
                                  Wearing Apparel                                                                      Motor Vehicles
          2001                                                                                 2001
    BRA   2011                                                                           BRA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    CHL   2011                                                                           CHL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    COL   2011                                                                           COL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    IND   2011                                                                           IND   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    PER   2011                                                                           PER   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    RUS   2011                                                                           RUS   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    THA   2011                                                                           THA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    TUR   2011                                                                           TUR   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    ZAF   2011                                                                           ZAF   2011


                 0    1,000       2,000       3,000           4,000    5,000                          0   2,000             4,000             6,000              8,000
                                          US$ mil.                                                                          US$ mil.

                         Total LVAX Unskilled             Total LVAX Skilled                              Total LVAX Unskilled                Total LVAX Skilled



                                       Other Food                                                                 Electronic Equipment
          2001                                                                                 2001
    BRA   2011                                                                           BRA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    CHL   2011                                                                           CHL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    COL   2011                                                                           COL   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    IND   2011                                                                           IND   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    PER   2011                                                                           PER   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    RUS   2011                                                                           RUS   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    THA   2011                                                                           THA   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    TUR   2011                                                                           TUR   2011
          2001                                                                                 2001
    ZAF   2011                                                                           ZAF   2011


                 0             1,000                  2,000                3,000                      0   1,000             2,000             3,000              4,000
                                          US$ mil.                                                                          US$ mil.

                         Total LVAX Unskilled             Total LVAX Skilled                              Total LVAX Unskilled                Total LVAX Skilled


                                           Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

6. Conclusions

This paper has used the newly developed World Bank’s Labor Content of Exports database to provide some
novel evidence on the wages and jobs in South Africa’s exports. As have other large commodity-dependent

                                                                                    32
 
emerging economies, South Africa has been trying to diversify into manufacturing sectors through greater
integration into global production networks. The estimates in this paper can shed light on the extent to
which such a strategy has supported labor value addition and jobs. The database offers a unique opportunity
to examine the value-added linkages between different sectors for South Africa’s exports, for both skilled
and unskilled labor, and compare those to other lower-middle and middle-income countries.

On aggregate, export growth has been associated with positive labor-market outcomes in terms of jobs and
wages, despite the labor content declining as a share of gross exports. This reflects in part a higher import
content of exports—a key feature of GVC participation—but exports have also become more capital
intensive in South Africa and we see a substitution away from labor to capital in the data. While this is
consistent with labor-saving technologies, it may also reflect distortions in the labor-market that favor
capital for production.

South Africa remains one of the middle-income countries in the sample with the lowest number of jobs
associated with exports. We observed a rising number of jobs in capital-intensive export sectors and a
declining number of jobs for labor-intensive export sectors. However, the analysis suggested that the
relatively low labor content of South African exports seems to be due not only to a composition effect, but
also to a generally low use of domestic labor in production where the number of jobs even across sectors
are lower than peer countries. Removing distortions that may be favoring capital over labor will be
important for promoting more inclusive exports.

Consistent with its enclave-type characteristics, our results confirm that the minerals sector primarily
generates domestic labor value added directly within the sector’s exports, as opposed to its backward
linkages with input sectors. Nevertheless, much of the labor content of exports is shaped by mining, which
despite being capital intensive generates most of South Africa’s labor value added contained in its exports.
Minerals also experienced an important growth in the number of jobs contained in exports, but the mining
and energy sector tends to employ fewer workers per unit of gross exports than other sectors.

In addition, other labor-intensive exports may be penalized by the growth in commodity exports through
the appreciation of the real exchange rate. Export growth in real terms has stagnated, and South Africa’s
exporters have made only limited inroads into global markets. Exports have also declined relative to
domestic production, with non-export sectors outdoing export sectors in South Africa. Exports also support
a lower share of total employment in 2011 than in 2004. This is also likely a by-product of Dutch Disease
induced by the commodity boom and amplified by the relatively high labor content of mineral exports,
which boosts the spending effect of the commodity boom.

The aggregate manufacturing sector dominates the number of jobs in exports, but the importance of the
manufacturing sector’s exports for jobs extends well beyond those jobs in the manufacturing sector itself.
Rather, its importance comes mainly through its backward links to the domestic economy. In fact,
manufacturing employs about two-thirds of export-oriented workers, whose jobs are mainly in the services
sectors. Manufacturing-export growth also supported wages in services sectors, which absorbed 55% of the
growth in labor income from exports over the 2000s, of which four-fifths was through forward linkages.
The most important manufacturing sectors for jobs are resource-intensive, such as metal products and
ferrous metals, and we explored how these results change for GVC-oriented sectors.



                                                     33
 
The observed declining labor intensity and concurrent labor value added growth in GVC-oriented sectors
is consistent with the unbundling of production, where countries are opening on the import side so they can
export more, becoming more integrated in GVCs, which has allowed wages and gross exports to grow very
rapidly. The growth in labor content of GVC-oriented exports has also been mainly through the backward
linkages with the services sector, the substitution of direct manufacturing jobs to indirect services jobs has
been biased towards unskilled labor. It is also consistent with labor saving technological changes. Opening
to trade increases capital flows through FDI, which improves production technologies, and this creates a
bias toward skilled workers who are needed to use these technologies.

Overall, manufacturing exports appear to be more job-inclusive, but in services sectors through backward
linkages. Supporting a competitive services sector will thus be important for promoting services jobs as
well as manufacturing exports. These findings also suggest that GVC integration is likely to have
distributional consequences, which may in fact accelerate the underlying skills bias that is already prevalent
in South African export production. To the extent that unemployed workers are more likely to be unskilled,
this may have implications for the ability of export-led growth to combat unemployment.




                                                     34
 
References

Alleyne, T., and A. Subramanian (2001). “What Does South Africa’s Pattern of Trade Say about its Labor
       Market?” IMF Working Paper WP/01/148, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Azevedo, J. P., G. Inchauste, S. Olivieri, J. Saavedra, and H. Winkler (2013). “Is Labor Income Responsible
      for Poverty Reduction? A decomposition approach.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 6414,
      World Bank, Washington, DC.

Behar, A. (2010a). “Would Cheaper Capital Replace Labour?” South African Journal of Economics 78(2):
        131-51.

Behar, A. (2010b). “Would More Skills Raise Demand for Those Who Do Not Get Them? Evidence from
        South African manufacturing.” Journal of African Economics 19(4): 496-535.

Berry, A. (2008). “Growth, Employment and Distribution Impacts of Minerals Dependency: Four case
        studies.” South Africa Journal of Economics 76(2): 148-74.

Berman, E. (2000). “Does Factor-Biased Technological Change Stifle International Covergence? Evidence
      from manufacturing.” NBER Working Paper No. 7964, National Bureau of Economic Research,
      Cambridge, MA.

Berman, N., and M. Couttenier 2015). “External Shocks, Internal Shots: The geography of civil conflict.”
      Review of Economics and Statistics 97(4): 758-76.

Bhorat, H., and C. van der Westhuizen (2012). “Poverty, Inequality and the Nature of Economic Growth in
        South Africa.” DPRU Working Paper No. 12/151, Development Policy Research Unit, University
        of Cape Town, Rondebosch, South Africa.

Calì, M., J. Francois, C. H. Hollweg, M. Manchin, D. A. Oberdabernig, H. Rojas-Romagosa, S. Rubinova
        and P. Tomberger (2016). “The Labor Content of Exports Database.” Policy Research Working
        Paper No. 7615, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chinembiri, E. (2010). “An Empirical Assessment of the Impact of Trade liberalization on Employment in
      South Africa.” Working Paper, Trade and Industry Policy Strategies (TIPS), Pretoria, South Africa.

Dube, O., and J. F. Vargas (2013). “Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence from
      Colombia.” Review of Economic Studies 80(4): 1384-421.

Edwards, L. (2001). “Globalisation and the Skills Bias of Occupational Employment in South Africa.”
      South African Journal of Economics 69: 40-71.

Edwards, L. (2004). “A Firm Level Analysis of Trade, Technology and Employment in South Africa.”
      Journal of International Development 16(1): 45-61.

Edwards, L., and A. Behar (2005). “Trade Liberalisation and Labour Demand within South African
      Manufacturing Firms.” Working Paper No. 6, School of Economic, University of Cape Town.



                                                    35
 
Edwards, L., N. Rankin and V. Schöer (2008). “South African Exporting Firms: What do we know and
      what should we know?” Journal of Development Perspective 4(1): 67-92.

Engel, J. (2015). “SACU in Global Value Chains: Measuring GVC integration, position, and performance
        of Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa and Swaziland.” Mimeo, World Bank, Washington,
        DC.

Farole, T. (2015). Factory South Africa? SACU in Global Value Chains. World Bank: Washington, DC.

Francois, J., M. Manchin and P. Tomberger (2015). “Services Linkages and the Value Added Content of
        Trade.” The World Economy 38(11): 1631-49.

Fukase, E. (2013). “Export Liberalization, Job Creation and the Skill Premium: Evidence from the U.S.-
        Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 6419, World Bank,
        Washington, DC.

Gwatidzo, T., and M. Benhura, (2013). “Mining Sector Wages in South Africa.” Working Paper No. 1,
       Labour Market Intelligence Partnership, South Africa.

Hertel, T. W. (2013). “Global Applied General Equilibrium Analysis Using the Global Trade Analysis
        Project Framework.” In P. Dixon and D. Jorgenson (eds.) Handbook of Computable General
        Equilibrium Modeling. Elsevier: North Holland.

Hollweg, C. H., and E. Ruppert Bulmer (2014). “What Would Export Growth Mean for Jobs and Wages?
       Analysis of export products, destination markets and labor market implications.” Mimeo, World
       Bank, Washington, DC.

Jenkins, R. (2008). “Trade, Technology and Employment in South Africa.” Journal of Development Studies
        44: 60-79.

Jiang, X., and W. Milberg (2013). “Capturing the Jobs from Globalization: Trade and employment in global
        value chains.” Working Paper No. 30, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Kucera, D., L. Roncolato and E. van Uexkull (2012). “Trade Contraction and Employment in India and
       South Africa during the Global Crisis.” World Development 40(6): 1122-34.

Kee, H. L., and H. W. Tang (2016). “Domestic Value Added in Exports: Theory and firm evidence from
       China.” American Economic Review 106(6): 1402-36.

Kerr, A., M. Wittenberg and J. Arrow (2014). “Job Creation and Destruction in South Africa.” South
       African Journal of Economics 82(1): 1-18.

Kumar, S., and R. R. Russell (2002). “Technological Change, Technological Catch-up, and Capital
       Deepening: Relative contributions to growth and convergence.” American Economic Review 92(3):
       527-48.

Lanz, R., and A. Maurer (2015). “Services and Global Value Chains—Some evidence on servicification of
       manufacturing and services networks.” WTO Working Paper ERSD-2015-03, Economic Research
       and Statistics Division, World Trade Organization, Geneva.

                                                  36
 
Los, B., M. P. Timmer and G. J. de Vries (2015). “How Important are Exports for Job Growth in China? A
        demand side analysis.” Journal of Comparative Economics 43: 19-32.

Matthee, M., T. Farole, T. Naughtin and N. Rankin (2016). “South African Exporters and the Global Crisis:
       Intensive Margin Shock, Extensive Margin Hangover.” South African Journal of Economics 84(2):
       183-98.

McCaig, B. (2011). “Exporting Out of Poverty: Provincial poverty in Vietnam and U.S. market access.”
      Journal of International Economics 85(1): 102-13.

McDougall, R., ed. (2001). The GTAP Database: Version 5. Center for Global Trade Analysis: Purdue
     University.

Narayanan, B., A. Aguiar and R. McDougall (eds) (2012). Global Trade, Assistance, and Production: The
       GTAP 8 data base. Center for Global Trade Analysis: Purdue University.

Obinyeluaku, M., and C. Sako (2014). “Anchoring Growth and Employment: The interaction between
       manufacturing and services in South Africa.” Mimeo, International Trade Administration
       Commission of South Africa, Pretoria, South Africa.

Pauw, K., D. Edwards and M. Leibbrandt (2007). “Trade-induced Employment Changes: Promising or
       problematic for poor household in South Africa?” Journal for Studies in Economics and
       Econometrics 31(2): 89-108.

Stone, S., R. Cavazos Cepeda and A. Jankowska (2011). “The Role of Factor Content in Trade: Have
        changes in factor endowments been reflected in trade patterns and on relative wages?” Trade Policy
        Papers No. 109, OECD, Paris.

Smet, K. (2013). “Trade-induced Unemployment: The case of post-apartheid South Africa.” South African
       Journal of Economics 81(2): 240-59.

Timmer, M. P., B. Los, R. Stehrer and G. J. de Vries (2013). “Fragmentation, Incomes and Jobs: An analysis
      of European competitiveness.” Economic Policy 28(76): 613-61.

Thurlow, J. (2006). “Trade Liberalization and Pro-poor Growth in South Africa.” Trade and Poverty
       Project, Southern Africa Labour and Development Research Unit, University of Cape Town,
       Rondebosch, South Africa.

World Bank (2014). South Africa Economic Update: Focus on export competitiveness. World Bank:
      Washington, DC.




                                                   37
 
Appendix 1: The direct and indirect value added generated by export sector

This section illustrates how Calì et al. (2016) generate the (direct and indirect) value added associated with
each sector-country using the panel of global input-output tables from GTAP. The methodology follows
Francois et al. (2013), which forms the basis for the computation of the compensation of employees. Calì
et al. (2016) begin by denoting a representation of intermediate and final demands as follows:

Y=Z—AZ                                                                                                      (1)

In equation (1), the term Y denotes a final demand vector, Z denotes a gross output vector, and A denotes
a matrix of intermediate use coefficients, which can be calculated using data from input-output tables.
Equation (1) therefore defines final output with respect to intermediate input requirements.

The first matrix that is calculated is the widely used Leontief inverse matrix, also known as the multiplier
matrix M. With some manipulation Calì et al. (2016) arrive at the Leontief inverse matrix:

                                                                                                            (2)

The multiplier matrix M measures the inputs contained in a unit of final output. This M matrix contains
both direct and indirect inputs. In particular, if assigning the sector indexes i,j to the M matrix, then a
representative element of the M matrix,      , gives the direct and indirect inputs (and thus receipts) of sector
i linked to each unit (for example each dollar) of sector j receipts in the data. This implies real production
activities measured by value of output. For our purposes, it provides a means to trace through these income
flows, the flow of gross activity (and eventually labor value added) from intermediate to final goods and
services, ostensibly across borders as well as sectors. Because linkages will vary by industry, each industry
will be characterized by different multipliers.

Next, Calì et al. (2016) need to calculate a diagonal matrix that measures the labor value added
(compensation of employees) share of total gross output, which can be calculated using data from SAMs.
To focus on labor value added, rather than gross activity, Calì et al. (2016) note first that in terms of gross
output values Z, some share of this involves labor value added within each sector. Calì et al. (2016) define
  as the diagonal matrix indexed over i,j with diagonal elements equal to the compensation of employees’
shares of output Z. These shares can be split between types of workers (e.g. skilled/unskilled).

Calì et al. (2016) then use M and    to provide a breakdown of the flow of labor value added across activities
in the form of the matrix V:

                                                                                                            (3)

Similar to the Leontief inverse matrix itself, the V matrix identifies the inputs of labor value added in each
sector related to a unit of final demand.

Using the V matrix as a multiplier for exports and final outputs, one can obtain the total labor value added
of exports and final outputs, respectively. Calì et al. (2016) multiply V by the diagonal matrix whose non-
zero elements are the vector of final demand. The resulting matrix yields a breakdown of economy-wide
labor value added (both direct and indirect) (the primary component of Gross National Product on a source
basis). Similarly, by multiplying V by the diagonal matrix whose non-zero elements are the national
export vector, Calì et al. (2016) recover the labor value added content of exports X (both direct and indirect):

                                                                                                            (4)

                                                       38
 
                                                                                                       (5)

The G matrix and the H matrix thus give us the set of linkages, both direct and indirect, between value
added across sectors for total domestic demand and export demand, respectively.

To calculate the jobs content of exports, Calì et al. (2016) replace the diagonal matrix of the compensation
of employees in total output 	with the equivalent matrix of employment in output	 , which is obtained by
the number of employees per total output Z. By replacing	 	with in equation (3), Calì et al. (2016) can
compute the matrix            and then derive the counterparts of the G and H matrixes in terms of jobs
contained in output and exports.




                                                    39
 
Table A1: Total labor value added in each $100 of gross exports
                               1995      1997       2001       2004     2007     2011
 ZAF        Skilled                                  9.03       8.11     7.55     7.69
            Unskilled                              31.57      25.14    23.32    24.94
            Total                                  40.60      33.25    30.87    32.63
 BRA        Skilled             6.88      8.55     11.51        8.82     9.30    8.69
            Unskilled         26.82     29.67      32.00      32.39    32.48    32.47
            Total             33.70     38.22      43.51      41.21    41.78    41.16
 RUS        Skilled                       6.83       6.12       4.87     5.15     5.15
            Unskilled                   29.82      27.10      18.71    18.87    19.54
            Total                       36.65      33.22      23.58    24.02    24.69
 IND        Skilled             8.61      5.97       6.83       7.47     7.62     7.04
            Unskilled         32.97     27.82      28.96      25.77    23.81    25.34
            Total             41.58     33.79      35.79      33.24    31.43    32.38
 CHN        Skilled             4.15      5.60       5.89       5.55     5.87     7.43
            Unskilled         22.77     31.43      31.88      27.10    27.92    34.22
            Total             26.92     37.03      37.77      32.65    33.79    41.65
 COL        Skilled             7.20      8.74       7.82       4.30     4.43     4.55
            Unskilled         35.26     35.52      33.97      20.37    20.26    21.87
            Total             42.46     44.26      41.79      24.67    24.69    26.42
 CHL        Skilled             5.28      5.63       6.30       6.44     6.33     6.56
            Unskilled         21.12     22.63      22.48      21.46    20.60    21.79
            Total             26.40     28.26      28.78      27.90    26.93    28.35
 PER        Skilled                       5.50       5.44       8.78     8.39     8.13
            Unskilled                   20.39      19.92      38.16    36.43    37.45
            Total                       25.89      25.36      46.94    44.82    45.58
 THA        Skilled             2.85      3.68       2.91       3.43     4.00     3.51
            Unskilled         15.47     13.93      12.74      13.36    15.11    14.15
            Total             18.32     17.61      15.65      16.79    19.11    17.66
 TUR        Skilled             3.84      5.13       6.78       5.62     5.32     4.73
            Unskilled         17.06     18.57      26.31      19.72    18.94    18.04
            Total             20.90     23.70      33.09      25.34    24.26    22.77
 WLD        Skilled               15        13         13         12       12
            Unskilled             30        27         26         25       24
            Total                 45        41         39         37       35      36
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

Table A2: Capital value added in each $100 of gross exports
               1997        2001        2004     2007        2011
 ZAF                        35.4       42.2     40.4        42.9
 BRA           47.0         36.5       39.2     39.6        42.1
 RUS           39.4         38.1       50.0     50.2        51.2
 IND           42.8         41.7       39.9     38.0        36.7
 CHN           32.1         33.4       33.5     35.2        33.2
 COL           33.8         32.8       50.7     50.4        49.5
 CHL           48.0         46.1       44.1     46.4        46.9
 PER           53.6         54.9       37.7     38.0        36.6
 THA           43.2         37.1       36.3     38.2        35.1
 TUR           49.9         40.6       49.9     48.3        45.3
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.

                                                40
 
                         Figure A1: Direct and indirect jobs per $1 million of gross exports
                                                    2004-2011

                                                                        Direct

                                       80
    Jobs (per $1 mil of gross exports)
          20       40   0    60




                                            1995              2000                2005            2010
                                                                         Year

                                                       ZAF            BRA            RUS          COL
                                                       PER            THA            TUR



                                                                       Indirect
                                  100
    Jobs (per $1 mil of gross exports)
    20     40      60       80




                                            1995              2000                2005            2010
                                                                         Year

                                                       ZAF            BRA            RUS          COL
                                                       PER            THA            TUR


                                                   Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.




                                                                       41
 
    Figure A2: Direct and indirect job content of exports as a share of total employment
                                         2004-2011

                                                                             Indirect

                                             50
          Export jobs in total employment (%)
          10       20        30      40




                                                  1995              2000                2005            2010
                                                                               Year

                                                             ZAF            BRA            RUS          COL
                                                             PER            THA            TUR



                                                                              Total
                                             50
          Export jobs in total employment (%)
          10       20        30      40




                                                  1995              2000                2005            2010
                                                                               Year

                                                             ZAF            BRA            RUS          COL
                                                             PER            THA            TUR


                                                         Source: Authors’ elaboration based on LACEX.




                                                                             42
 
