                                                             WPS8019


Policy Research Working Paper                               8019




             Urbanization and Development
          Is Latin America and the Caribbean Different
                   from the Rest of the World?

                                   Mark Roberts
                                 Brian Blankespoor
                                 Chandan Deuskar
                                 Benjamin Stewart




Latin America and the Caribbean Region
  &
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice Group
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8019


  Abstract
 Two long-established stylized facts in the urban and devel-                         systematic measurement errors arising from differences in
 opment economics literatures are that: (a) a country’s level                        how countries define their urban areas. This paper reex-
 of economic development is strongly positively correlated                           amines whether Latin America and Caribbean countries
 with its level of urbanization; and (b) a country’s level of                        differ from the rest of the world in the basic stylized facts of
 urbanization is strongly negatively correlated with the size                        urbanization, development, and structural transformation.
 of its agricultural sector. However, countries in the Latin                         The analysis makes use of two alternative methodologies
 America and Caribbean region appear to depart significantly                         for the consistent definition of urban areas across countries:
 from the rest of the world in these two basic relationships.                        the Agglomeration Index methodology and a methodology
 Although Latin American countries appear to be signifi-                             based on the identification of dense spatially contiguous
 cantly more urbanized than predicted based on these global                          clusters of population. Both methodologies rely on globally
 relationships, Caribbean countries appear significantly                             gridded population data sets as input. There exist several
 less urbanized. However, analyses involving cross-coun-                             such data sets, and so the paper also assesses the robust-
 try comparisons of urbanization levels are undermined by                            ness of the findings to the choice of input population layer.



  This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, Latin America and the Caribbean Region and the Social,
  Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to
  its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers
  are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at mroberts1@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
           Urbanization and Development:
Is Latin America and the Caribbean Different from the
                 Rest of the World?1
          Mark Roberts, Brian Blankespoor, Chandan Deuskar and Benjamin Stewart2
                                      The World Bank
                                     1818 H Street, NW
                                      Washington, D.C.
                                        20433, USA




Keywords: Latin America and Caribbean, urbanization, development, measurement error
JEL codes: O18, O47, C21




1
  This paper has been prepared as input into the LCR “Cities and Productivity” Flagship Report (P158837), which is a
product of the World Bank’s LCR Chief Economist’s Office working in collaboration with its Social, Urban, Rural and
Resilience (GSURR) Global Practice. The authors are extremely grateful to Daniel Lederman of the LCR Chief
Economist’s Office for early discussions that were influential in the formulation of the original idea for this paper. They
would also like to thank Katie McWilliams, Siobhan Murray and Jane Park for the excellent technical support that they
provided in the preparation of the paper. The paper has also benefitted from feedback received from Lewis Dijsktra and
from participants at an Authors’ workshop for the LCR “Cities and Productivity” Flagship Report that took place in July
2016. Further helpful feedback was received during presentations made as part of the “Unbaked and wired” seminar
series at the World Bank and at the World Bank’s 2016 GSURR Forum. Finally, the work on the inputs to the updated
Agglomeration Index that this paper report on were also supported by the World Bank’s Strategic Research Program on
Transport Policies for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth (P151104).
2
  Mark Roberts, Brian Blankespoor and Benjamin Stewart are all affiliated with the World Bank, while Chandan Deuskar
is affiliated with the Department of City and Regional Planning, School of Design, University of Pennsylvania.
Corresponding author: Mark Roberts (mroberts1@worldbank.org).
1. Introduction

Urbanization, economic development and structural transformation have long been viewed as
inextricably linked processes. In particular, in models of urbanization and economic growth,
technological progress leads to an aggregate re-allocation of labor from agricultural to non-
agricultural activities, which, in turn, drives both urbanization and economic development (see, inter
alia, Henderson and Wang, 2005; Michaels, Rauch and Redding, 2012; Henderson, Storeygard and
Roberts, 2013). Consistent with these models, cross-country data exhibit two key stylized facts: (a)
the existence of a strong positive correlation between a country’s level of development and its level
of urbanization; and (b) the existence of a strong negative correlation between a country’s level of
urbanization and the relative importance of agriculture to its economy (see, inter alia, Davis and
Henderson, 2003; World Bank, 2008; Ellis and Roberts, 2015).

Figure 1: Relationship between: (a) levels of economic development and urbanization; and (b)
levels of urbanization and the contribution of agriculture to national GDP




The existence of these two key stylized facts is illustrated in Figure 1. In this figure, a country’s
level of urbanization is measured by the share of its population living in areas that its national
government officially classifies as urban.3, 4 However, from this figure, it is also clear that countries
in the Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) region depart from the established global relationships
that link urbanization, economic development and structural transformation in important ways.
Thus, while more urbanized LAC countries also generally exhibit higher levels of development,
Latin American countries tend to have significantly lower levels of GDP per capita than one would
predict based on their levels of urbanization. At the same time, they also appear to be “over-
urbanized” given the relative sizes of their agricultural sectors as measured by the share of
agriculture in GDP. Conversely, for the Caribbean countries of Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago
the opposite holds true. Hence, both of these countries have significantly higher levels of GDP per




3
  In common with most studies, these data are taken from the United Nations’ World Urbanization Prospects (2014
revision) database (https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/). This database also provides the source of urban population data for
the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.URB.TOTL.IN.ZS).
4
  The Data Annex provides full details of the data used in this paper.

                                                          2
capita than one would predict based on their urbanization levels at the same time as they appear to
be “under-urbanized” relative to other countries given the (small) sizes of their agricultural sectors.5,6

The fact that many Latin American countries appear to be “over-urbanized” is consistent with a
policy narrative that is emerging regarding the productivity performance of the region’s cities.
According to this narrative, these cities are failing to realize their full potential in terms of fueling
national economic growth due to policy failures that have exacerbated congestion forces, thereby
undermining their productivity performance (McKinsey Global Institute, 2011a, b).7 Such apparent
“over-urbanization” is also consistent with theories of urban bias, whereby policy distortions which
skew the allocation of resources away from agriculture and towards manufacturing, spur higher
urbanization than might have otherwise occurred (see, e.g., Davis and Henderson, 2003, and
references therein). Particularly important in this context may be the trade policy distortions that
were widespread across Latin America during the import substituting industrialization era of the
1960s and 1970s, which, in light of the strong persistence that tends to be inherent in urban systems,
may continue to have residual impacts on levels of urbanization in the region today. Such policies
have been linked in the literature to excessive urban primacy across Latin American countries with
consequent adverse consequences for productivity and growth (Ads and Glaeser, 1995; Krugman
and Elizondo, 1996).8

An alternative hypothesis to urban bias that may explain Latin America’s “over-urbanization”, not
to mention the “under-urbanization” of certain Caribbean countries, is simply that this is an illusion
of the data which is attributable to systematic biases in the measurement of levels of urbanization.
In particular, in common with the vast majority of published research on urbanization and
development, the stylized facts depicted in Figure 1 are based on data which depend on national
definitions of urban areas. However, as is well-known, these definitions vary widely from country
to country. Furthermore, these variations have a strong regional component. Hence, while South
Asian countries have generally tighter criteria for designating areas as urban, countries in LAC tend
to have more relaxed criteria (World Bank, 2008; Ellis and Roberts, 2015). Such systematic biases
in the data give rise to the possibility of “urban myths”, which are artefacts of the data rather than a
reflection of on-the-ground reality (Satterthwaite, 2007).

Given the above, this paper re-examines the basic empirical relationships between urbanization,
development and structural transformation depicted in Figure 1 with a view to addressing the
question of whether LAC countries depart significantly from these relationships. Many methods to
delineate spatial urban areas from data or models exist in the literature. Although most models

5
  The existence of these significant differences between LAC and non-LAC countries is confirmed by the regression
results presented in Section 4.2 (see columns [1] – [3] of Table 2).
6
  Different to the majority of other Latin American countries, the same pattern of significantly higher levels of GDP per
capita and “under-urbanization” also holds for Guyana and Belize, although to a lesser extent than for either Barbados
or Trinidad and Tobago.
7
  These congestion forces arise from a number of sources including congestion of not only local transport infrastructure,
but also of other forms of urban infrastructure and of land and housing markets. Fay and Opal (2000) discuss urbanization
without growth in the context of Africa, while Gollin, Jedwab and Vollrath (2016) examine more specifically
urbanization without industrialization for a global sample of 116 developing countries.
8
  Whether or not policy distortions that favor urban over rural populations stimulate a higher level of urbanization will
depend on how they affect the margin of choice for the representative rural-urban migrant. Hence, policies which, for
example, re-distribute agricultural surpluses to urban elites are unlikely to affect a country’s overall level of urbanization
(Henderson et al., 2013).

                                                              3
typically include population size (Rozenfield et al., 2011; Dijkstra and Poelman, 2014; Aubrecht et
al., 2016), other definitions may include other geospatial information such as land cover (Mertes et
al., 2015), night time lights (Balk et al., 2006; Zhang and Seto, 2011; Brecht, Deichmann and Wang,
2013), travel time (Uchida and Nelson, 2010; Day et al., 2017) and/or commuting flows (Duranton,
2015; Nelson and Rae, 2016; OECD, 2012; Sanchez-Serra, 2016). Specifically, this paper re-
estimates the relationships depicted in Figure 1 using two alternative methods that have been
proposed in the literature for the consistent definition of urban areas across countries which can be
feasibly implemented at a global scale using readily available population and travel time data.9 The
first method – the Agglomeration Index (AI) – was originally proposed by Uchida and Nelson (2010)
and delineates urban areas on the basis of population densities and travel times to large urban
centers.10 Meanwhile, the second method, which, for brevity, we shall refer to as the “cluster
method”, has been developed by Dijkstra and Poelman (2014) and relies on the identification of
dense spatially contiguous clusters of population.11 Having re-estimated the relationships, the paper
identifies whether LAC countries continue to exhibit significant differences of the sort portrayed in
Figure 1. In doing so, we are able to assess the extent to which Latin America’s apparent “over-
urbanization” qualifies as one of Satterthwaite’s urban myths.

In addition to re-examining the key basic stylized facts of urbanization, development and structural
transformation, this paper also makes two additional contributions to the literature. First, by
implementing both the AI and cluster methods to defining urban areas, the paper provides the first
systematic comparison of results between these two methods using a global data set. Secondly,
because both of these methods rely on globally gridded population data sets for their implementation
and there exist several alternative such data sets, the paper also provides the first systematic
investigation as to how the choice of input data affects the results obtained from these methods. In
particular, the paper analyzes how the use of three main gridded population data sets influence the
results obtained from these methods. These data sets are the LandScan 2012 global gridded
population data set that is produced by Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the WorldPop family of
gridded population data sets that are produced by the University of Southampton, UK, and the GHSL
Global Population Grid (GHS-Pop) that has recently been generated by the European Commission’s
Joint Research Center (JRC).12

9
   The requirement that the methods be implementable at a global scale automatically precludes methods that rely on
commuting flow data. Applications of such methods have been restricted to either individual countries (e.g. Duranton,
2015; Nelson and Rae, 2016; Sanchez-Serra, 2016) or small samples of countries (OECD, 2012).
10
   Uchida and Nelson built on earlier work by Chomitz, Buys and Thomas (2005) which identified population density
and remoteness from large metropolitan areas as important dimensions along which to classify an area’s degree of
rurality (and, therefore, implicitly, its degree of urbanization). Chomitz et al. found that many small settlements in LAC
that are officially classified as urban are actually embedded in an agriculturally based countryside. See also the World
Bank’s 2005 LAC Flagship report “Beyond the City: The Rural Contribution to Development” (de Ferranti et al., 2005),
for which the paper by Chomitz et al. was originally prepared as input. This report was one of the first, if not the first,
official World Bank publication to raise the issue of the lack of comparability of official urban population shares across
LAC countries.
11
   Dijkstra and Poelman’s algorithm for identifying urban clusters is closely related to that which Rozenfield et al. (2011)
apply to identify cities in the United States.
12
    Other global gridded population data sets include CIESIN’s GRUMP (Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project)
Population Count Grid (http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/set/grump-v1-population-count) and its Gridded
Population of the World version 4 (GPW v 4) (http://beta.sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/gpw-v4) data sets.
Various institutions and authors have also created gridded population data sets for individual countries or regions. These
include a European population grid for 2006 produced by the Austrian Institute of Technology
(http://www.efgs.info/data/) which covers EU28 and EFTA countries; and population grids for Haiti, Pakistan and

                                                             4
The structure of the remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses how official definitions
of urban areas in LAC countries compare to those in non-LAC countries and introduces both the AI
and cluster methods for the consistent measurement of urbanization. Section 3 describes the data
used to implement both the AI and cluster methods, focusing, in particular, on the input gridded
population data. Section 4 presents the results from re-assessing LAC’s position relative to the basic
stylized facts of urbanization, development and structural transformation when urbanization is
consistently measured. Finally, Section 5 concludes.

2. Measuring Urbanization

2.1. Official definitions of urban areas in LAC versus non-LAC countries13

Most published research on urbanization and development relies on data which utilizes national
definitions to measure cross-country differences in levels of urbanization, and it is this same data
that underpins the stylized facts depicted in Figure 1. These data are usually taken from the United
Nations’ World Urbanization Prospects (WUP) database or, equivalently, the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators (WDI) database (see also footnote 2). As part of its database, the UN
provides supporting documentation on how each of the 232 included countries defines its urban
areas. Table 1 shows that 133 of these countries use one or more of four basic types of criteria to
define their urban areas.14 By far the most commonly used criterion is a minimum population size
threshold (103 countries). The remaining three criteria are less frequently used. Hence, 30 countries
include references to the availability of infrastructure and services (e.g. piped water or schools) or
other “urban” characteristics in their definitions; 16 countries to the structure of the local economy,
mostly referring to the presence or predominance of non-agricultural activity, and 11 countries to a
minimum population density threshold. The remaining 99 countries do not make use of any
explicitly stated criteria. Rather, they either simply list their urban areas by name, or state a
designation of administrative units that constitutes cities.

Compared to the overall sample of WUP countries, a smaller share of the 40 LAC countries covered
by the WUP database use a specific criterion or criteria to define urban areas (i.e. 42 percent of
countries versus 57 percent). LAC countries are also less likely to employ a minimum population
threshold in their definitions of urban than the sample overall (30 percent versus 44 percent). These
differences between the LAC countries and the overall sample are mainly driven by the Caribbean
countries. Conversely, LAC countries are more likely to include reference to the provision of
infrastructure or services in their definition (i.e. 20 percent versus 13 percent). In this case, the
difference between LAC and the global sample is driven by the Latin American countries.15

Rwanda produced by the US Census Bureau as part of its international Demobase project
(http://www.census.gov/population/international/data/mapping/demobase.html).
13
   This sub-section draws, in part, on a previous conference paper by two of the authors (Deuskar and Stewart, 2016).
14
   For all countries (except Austria) urban criteria fall into at least one of these four broadly defined categories. However,
every country’s definition is slightly different, and may include particularities not fully reflected among these four. For
example, the definition for Honduras (see Annex 2), was counted in the ‘population size’ and ‘urban services or
characteristics’ categories, but also has elements that do not fit neatly in either (e.g. “communication by land (road or
train) or regular air or maritime service”). Austria’s definition is unique in that, at least according to the definition listed
in the WUP, it is based on commuting patterns into an urban core, and does not fall into any of these categories.
15
   A complete list of official definitions of urban used by LAC countries is provided in Annex 2 (see Table A2).

                                                               5
The use of more relaxed definitions of urban areas in LAC versus non-LAC countries is most evident
from the minimum population threshold criterion, where this is used. Hence, among the countries
that use this criterion, the mean threshold is 1,958 people for LAC as compared to 4,799 people
globally. This mean difference is not, furthermore, driven by the small island nations of the
Caribbean – the mean population threshold for the Caribbean countries is almost identical to that for
the Latin American countries. The mean difference between LAC and the rest of the world is also
statistically significant at the 10 percent level in a simple one-sided two-sample t test where the
alternative hypothesis is that the mean difference is negative (i.e. the mean for LAC is less than that
for non-LAC countries). Likewise, a Mann-Whitney U test – which may be more appropriate given
the large difference in size between the LAC and non-LAC samples and the absence of normality –
rejects the null hypothesis that the LAC and non-LAC samples come from the same underlying
population. Hence, on average, LAC countries include smaller settlements in their urban population
figures than do non-LAC countries. This may at least partially explain the apparent “over-
urbanization” that we observe in Latin America.16

Table 1: Types of criteria used by countries in their urban definitions, by region
                                       No            Population Size            Pop          Urban           Economic
                                     specific                                  Density     services or        activity
                      Total no.      criteria                                            characteristics
                      countries
                                   n     %       n      %        Mean      n      %      N        %        n        %
                                                                 value
 World                232          99 43% 103 44%                4,799     11 5%           30       13%      16       7%
 LAC                  40           23 58% 12             30%     1,958     0      0%       8        20%      0        0%
    Non-island        20           8    40% 9            45%     1,938     0      0%       7        35%      0        0%
    Caribbean
    islands           20           15 75% 4              20% 2,000         0      0%       1        5%       0        0%
 Rest of the world 169             59 35% 87             51% 5,226         7      4%       21       12%      15       9%
    EAP               36           17 47% 15             42% 5,607         3      8%       6        17%      1        3%
    SSA               48           13 27% 31             65% 5,694         0      0%       7        15%      8        17%
    SAR               7            4    57% 3            43% 5,125         1      14% 2             29%      0        0%
    ECA               54           18 33% 22             41% 4,395         1      2%       3        6%       5        9%
    MNA               21           6    29% 14           67% 5,607         0      0%       3        14%      1        5%
    N. America        3            1    33% 2            67% 1,750         2      67% 0             0%       0        0%
Notes: Criteria are not mutually exclusive, i.e. countries with multiple criteria are listed in more than one of the columns
(Source: authors’ analysis of data from UN, 2014)

2.2. Approaches to the consistent measurement of urbanization

A growing recognition of the problems posed for cross-country analyzes of urbanization and
development by the use of national definitions of urban areas has led to several proposed


16
   The fact that LAC countries tend to count smaller settlements as ‘urban’ may be related to the history of human
settlement in the region. Unlike, for example, Asia and Europe, which experienced more organic urban growth, most of
Latin America’s cities were purposefully and ‘abruptly’ founded by European colonizers (Morse, 1962; World Bank,
2009). Perhaps due to these origins, Latin American countries might consider these settlements to be ‘urban’ regardless
of how small or sparsely populated they are, whereas an Asian village that has expanded and densified over time might
still be considered ‘rural’. However, this is a speculative hypothesis which would need further investigation to
substantiate.

                                                             6
methodologies for the consistent measurement of urbanization across countries.17 In this paper, we
focus on two of these methodologies – the Agglomeration Index (AI) that was originally developed
by Uchida and Nelson (2010), and Dijkstra and Poelman’s (2014) cluster method. The AI
methodology has already featured in several Flagship World Bank publications (World Bank, 2008;
World Bank and IMF, 2013; and Ellis and Roberts, 2015). By contrast, the cluster method, which
was originally developed for application to the European Union, is more recent and its use at the
global level is just beginning to be explored. The two methodologies differ both in terms of their
underlying conceptual approaches to defining urban areas and their data requirements. The decision
to focus on these two methodologies is based on the fact that they can be feasibly implemented to
produce estimates of urban population shares for a large global cross-section of countries. This is a
basic requirement for the (re-)examination of the basic stylized facts of urbanization, development
and structural transformation, and the comparison of LAC with non-LAC countries. Below we
provide a more detailed overview of the two methodologies.

2.2.1. The Agglomeration Index

From a labor market perspective, individual urban areas should ideally be conceptualized and
defined as functional urban areas (FUAs), where a functional urban area captures the spatial extent
over which a city or town’s labor market may be considered integrated. Approaches to delineating
FUAs typically begin with an urban core, defined by size and/or density criteria, and then identify a
‘commuting shed’, i.e. a surrounding area from which workers commute to the core. 18 A good
example of an algorithm to identify FUAs is that used in the construction of the OECD’s
Metropolitan Areas database.19 Hence, this algorithm defines FUAs by first identifying densely
inhabited urban cores using gridded population data, and then adding non-contiguous interconnected
urban cores, as well as other surrounding municipalities, based on commuting patterns (OECD,
2012). More recently, Duranton (2015) has proposed an algorithm to identify FUAs which dispenses
with the need to pre-define an urban core, and instead relies solely on a minimum commuting
threshold. Duranton tests this algorithm on data for Colombia, obtaining good results.

Unfortunately, the commuting data necessary to implement either the OECD’s or Duranton’s
algorithm for identifying FUAs are not available at a global scale. In this context, the AI can be
seen as a methodology which adopts a similar labor market perspective to defining urban areas, but
which instead relies on estimated travel times in combination with data on population density to
allow for a consistent method of measuring urbanization levels that can be feasibly implemented for
a broad cross-section of countries. More specifically, the AI identifies as “urban, agglomerated, or
dense” those areas that meet a certain population density threshold and which are within a given
travel time radius of a “sizeable” settlement, where “sizeable” settlements are identified on the basis



17
   The proposal of new methodologies has also been aided by the increasing availability of high-resolution global gridded
population data sets and data sets on built-up area derived from satellite imagery.
18
   The use of commuting data to identify metropolitan areas in the United States dates back to the 1960s (Berry, Goheen
and Goldstein, 1969). This approach is also similar to the delineation of Labour Market Areas in Europe, or Travel to
Work Areas in the UK, with the main difference being that these other exercises aim to exhaustively divide up an entire
country or region into distinct areas based on commuting patterns, rather than identifying urban areas specifically (UK
Office for National Statistics, 2015; Coombes, Casado-Diaz, Martinez-Bernabeu and Carausu, 2012).
19
   http://www.oecd.org/gov/regional-policy/regionalstatisticsandindicators.htm.

                                                           7
of a population threshold. As with the OECD algorithm for identifying FUAs, the AI typically relies
on gridded population data as input.20

To see more formally how the AI measures a country’s level of urbanization, let index a cell in a
population grid for that country, and and          the population and population density respectively
associated with that cell. Furthermore, let        1, … , index a settlement point within the country
that has an associated population of , where              and denotes the threshold population level
that defines a “sizeable” settlement. Given this, associated with each of these 	settlement points
there will be an agglomeration and grid cell will be classified as belonging to agglomeration
iff        and          , where is a threshold population density level, , is the estimated travel
time from grid cell i to the settlement point j, and is a threshold travel time level.21 Based on this,
a country’s level of urbanization, as measured by the share of its population living in urban areas, is
given by:

                                                 ∑    ∑∈
                                                     ∑
                                                                              [1]


From this, it is clear that there are three key thresholds to which values need to be assigned in the
implementation of the AI methodology: namely, , , and . Following Uchida and Nelson (2010)
and World Bank (2008), it has become standard to set           50,000,      150 people per km2, and
     60 minutes.22 In other words, an area is defined as urban if it has a population density of at
least 150 people per km2 and falls within a 60 minute travel time radius of a settlement which itself
has a population of at least 50,000. A country’s level of urbanization is then given by the sum of
the population living within all such areas.

2.2.2. The cluster method

In contrast to the AI, the cluster method adopts a more spatio-demographic approach to the consistent
cross-country measurement of urbanization. In doing so, it follows a long tradition of using
population size and density thresholds to define urban areas. As noted above, over a hundred
countries use population size to define urban areas, while 11 use population density. The US Census
Bureau began using population size, population density, and contiguity criteria to standardize the
definition of metropolitan areas as far back as the early 20th century (Berry, Goheen and Goldstein,
1969).

More specifically, the cluster method classifies cells in a population grid according to density, and
then groups them into “urban clusters.” Again using the notation to denote the population of a
grid cell and its population density, a grid cell is classified as belonging to an urban cluster


20
   Although, as demonstrated by Day et al. (2017) for Sri Lanka, the approach can also be feasibly implemented using
polygon data which correspond to sub-national administrative units.
21
   In principle, the areas of two or more different agglomerations can overlap so that, in effect, they merge into a single
agglomeration that contains multiple settlement points. In this case, the number of “merged” agglomerations will be
less than J. To avoid double-counting pixels, population should then be summed over the number of merged
agglomerations to arrive at an estimate of the national urban share of the population.
22
   Uchida and Nelson (2010) also report results from other combinations of assumed values for the three thresholds.

                                                            8
if	           and ∑ ∈              , where        denotes a population density threshold and         a
population threshold. In addition, the cell must be spatially contiguous with at least one other cell
within the same cluster. In other words, a spatially contiguous group of grid cells will be classified
as constituting an urban cluster if each of these cells satisfies a certain minimum population density
threshold and the aggregate population of these cells also exceeds some specified threshold value.
Given this, a country’s level of urbanization can then be defined as the share of the overall national
population living in urban clusters. Dijkstra and Poelman (2014) set values of            300 people
per km2 and           5000. Within urban clusters, they also define a sub-set of “high density
clusters”. These high density clusters are defined similarly to urban clusters, but instead use
threshold values of 1,500 people per km2 for population density and 50,000 people for overall
population.23

2.2.3. Comparison between the two approaches

While it is not the intention of this paper to draw any conclusion as to which of the above two
methods is to be preferred, some remarks on their similarities and differences are nevertheless in
order. Hence, it will be noted that both crucially rely on a source of gridded population data for their
implementation. Furthermore, while the AI may well be considered preferable to the cluster method
to the extent that it more closely approximates an attempt to identify FUAs, it suffers the
disadvantage of being more data-intensive. Thus, in addition to gridded population data, the AI also
requires travel time data and a settlement point layer as inputs.

There is also a slight contradiction in how the AI approaches the definition of urban areas insofar as
it implicitly relies on national definitions of urban in identifying the “sizeable” settlements around
which it defines agglomerations. This is because the population data for the settlement points are
invariably derived from national sources.

Finally, while, according to the cluster method, grid cells belonging to a given urban area must be
spatially contiguous, the AI imposes no such restriction. As a corollary, development within a given
agglomeration area in the AI approach can be discontinuous in the sense that urban cells can be
interspersed with non-urban cells. Such a pattern of development may be consistent with the
existence of topographical constraints (e.g. a river) that divide a city into different parts or with
patterns of leapfrog development.24

3. Data

As noted above, both the AI and cluster methods rely on gridded population data for their
implementation. In addition, the AI also requires a settlement point layer and travel time data.


23
   Deuskar and Stewart (2016) analyze the sensitivity of results from the cluster method using a variety of alternative
threshold values. Their analysis is, however, restricted to the use of WorldPop and GHS-Pop gridded population data,
and does not consider Landscan 2012 data.
24
   It is easy to imagine a methodology which combines different aspects of the AI and cluster methods. This
methodology could, for example, follow the cluster approach of identifying high-density clusters and then define
agglomerations around these clusters using criteria of travel time and population density à la the AI. Adopting this
combined methodology would overcome the AI’s weakness of needing an a priori defined layer of settlement points
and associated populations.

                                                          9
3.1 Gridded population data

In their original AI analysis, Uchida and Nelson (2010) constructed estimates of urban population
shares for a global cross-section of countries for the year 2000 using two global gridded population
data sources – CIESIN’s GRUMP (Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project) v 1 and Oak Ridge
National Laboratories’ LandScan population grids.25 Uchida and Nelson’s estimates were then
subsequently updated to the year 2010 as part of the World Bank and IMF’s Global Monitoring
Report 2013 on Rural-Urban Dynamics and the Millennium Development Goals (World Bank and
IMF, 2013). In this update, the same two global gridded population data sources were used except
that the gridded population data instead now referred to the year 2010. In the case of GRUMP, the
2010 population data are based on the projection of data from earlier years.26, 27 Meanwhile, for the
application of the cluster method, Dijkstra and Poelman (2014) limited their attention to the EU-27
countries, and used a mixture of population grids for the year 2006 based on different methods.28
Subsequent to this, Deuskar and Stewart (2016) have also applied the cluster method to a further 53
countries using WorldPop gridded population data.29

In this paper, we use updated estimates of the national share of population living in urban areas
based on the application of both the AI and cluster methods. We generate these estimates using
three different population grids – LandScan 2012, GHS-Pop and WorldPop. All three of these grids
have extensive cross-country coverage and are derived using “top-down” methods which involve
the dasymetric distribution of population data for sub-national administrative units across grid cells.
Where the three methods differ is in the exact weights they use to distribute the population within
administrative areas. Although the exact methods are proprietary, LandScan derives the weights
using a modeling process that relies on “primary geospatial input or ancillary datasets, including
land cover, roads, slope, urban areas, village locations, and high resolution imagery analysis; all
of which are key indicators of population distribution.” LandScan also applies ex post adjustments
to the weights where obvious errors are identified through a manual verification and modification
process.30 WorldPop uses a similar range of input data to derive weights through a “random forest”
modeling approach (Stevens, Gaughan, Linard and Tatem, 2015). Finally, GHS-Pop assigns the
population of a given administrative unit to the built-up area within that unit. The built-up area data
are taken from JRC’s Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL), which is itself derived from satellite
imagery (Freire, MacManus, Pesaresi, Doxsey-Whitfield and Mills, 2016). For all three population

25
   Uchida and Nelson’s (2010) original AI analysis was undertaken as an input into the World Bank’s 2009 World
Development Report (World Bank, 2008).
26
   In updating the AI, the World Bank and IMF used the same settlement point and travel time layers as in Uchida and
Nelson’s (2010) original work, both of which referred to the year 2000. In this sense, the update performed was only
partial.
27
   Ellis and Roberts (2015) also make use of the same 2010 AI estimates.
28
   For Croatia, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Austria, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Switzerland and Norway they used grids
that were constructed based on “bottom-up” methods from geo-coded address locations and population register data.
By contrast, for the remaining EU countries they used a population disaggregation grid created by the European
Commission’s Joint Research Center (JRC) based on administrative area population and CORINE land cover data.
Finally, they used LandScan data for French overseas regions, as well as Madeira and Açores in Portugal (see Dijkstra
and Poelman, 2014, pp 7-8 for more details).
29
   Although WorldPop data sets are available for more countries, Deuskar and Stewart limit themselves to countries for
which the data have been derived using “random forest” modeling methods. These methods are thought to be superior
to earlier methods that were used to generate the population grids for other countries.
30
   See http://web.ornl.gov/sci/landscan/landscan_documentation.shtml for more information.

                                                         10
grids, we use data at a spatial resolution of approximately 1 km.31 While the LandScan and GHS-
Pop data are available for the entire globe, the WorldPop data are limited to 53 countries, including
27 LAC countries. One other key difference is that LandScan provides estimates of ambient
population (i.e. average population over 24 hours), while both GHS-Pop and WorldPop provide
estimates of residential population.32

3.2 Travel time and settlement point data

The travel time data used in the original AI analysis were based on “… estimates of the time required
to travel 1 km over different road and off-road surfaces…” derived from a cost surface that was
constructed from a variety of GIS data layers (Uchida and Nelson, 2010). These layers included
data on road and rail networks, navigable rivers and water bodies, travel delays for crossing
international borders, roughness of terrain and foot based travel for off-road and paths.33 The AI
estimates generated for this paper are based on an updated version of this same cost surface layer
that is taken from Berg, Blankespoor, Li and Selod (2017). This updated layer is derived from more
recent (i.e. circa 2010 versus circa 2000) data on roads, railroads, and land cover.

In contrast to the population and travel time data, we use the same settlement point layer as Uchida
and Nelson (2010) – i.e. GRUMP Settlement Points v 1.34 Because these data relate to the year
2000, it means that the updated AI estimates of national urban population shares generated as part
of this paper are likely to be biased downwards. This will be the case, in particular, to the extent
that there are settlements that were below (i.e. the population threshold used to define a “sizeable”
settlement) in 2000, but whose populations have since grown to exceed this threshold. The new
agglomerations that will have been created as a result of this will be missed by our updated AI
estimates.35

4. Results

In implementing the AI and cluster methods, we use the same parameter values as Uchida and
Nelson (2010) and Dijkstra and Poelman (2014) respectively. Hence, for the AI, we assume
50,000,      150 people per km2, and         60 minutes, while, for the cluster method, we assume
       300 people per km and
                          2
                                       5000. For these parameter values, we generate estimates of
the share of each country’s population that lives in urban areas using each of the three gridded
population data sets described above – i.e. LandScan 2012, GHS-Pop and WorldPop. We also
estimate national urban population shares using the cluster method based solely on the share of
population living in high density clusters, for which = 1,500 people per km2 and = 50,000
people. Hence, overall, we generate a total of nine different sets of “consistent” estimates of national


31
   Both WorldPop and GHS-Pop data are available at a higher spatial resolution (100 m in the case of WorldPop). For
this paper, however, the data were aggregated up to a resolution of 1 km to allow for comparability with the LandScan
data.
32
   GHS-Pop data are available for download from http://ghsl.jrc.ec.europa.eu/ghs_pop.php, while WorldPop can be
downloaded from http://www.worldpop.org.uk/.
33
   See Appendix Table A.1 in Uchida and Nelson (2010) for more details.
34
   http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/set/grump-v1-settlement-points.
35
   Performing a complete update of the AI remains an obvious area for future research.

                                                         11
urban population shares.36 Below, we briefly assess how, compared to the WUP data, these
estimates change our impression of LAC’s level of urbanization vis-à-vis other regions of the world.
Using the AI and cluster urban population share estimates, we then re-examine the basic empirical
relationships between urbanization, development and structural transformation that were discussed
in Section 1 with a view to addressing the question of whether LAC countries depart significantly
from these relationships. Because the WorldPop data are only available for a much more limited
sample of countries, we focus on the results obtained using the LandScan 2012 and GHS-Pop data.
In doing so, we concentrate on a global sample of 146 countries – including 25 LAC countries – for
which we have complete data.37

4.1. Re-assessing LAC’s level of urbanization relative to the rest of the world

Figure 2 shows levels of urbanization for both the world and major regions, including LAC, as
estimated using both the WUP data and the different permutations of methods (AI and cluster) and
input population data sets (LandScan and GHSPop).38 The WUP data show LAC to be far more
urbanized than the world overall. Hence, while, based on national definitions of urban areas, the
share of the population living in urban areas in LAC in 2014 is estimated to be 80 percent, for the
world as a whole it is only estimated to be 53 percent. Furthermore, LAC also appears to be the
most urbanized region in the world after North America. However, for the various consistent sets of
estimates of urban population shares, the picture is very different. In particular, LAC’s level of
urbanization appears much closer to that for the world overall. They also show LAC to be less
urbanized than the Middle East and North Africa region in all six measures, less urbanized than
South Asia in three measures, less urbanized than Europe and Central Asia in two measures, and
East Asia and the Pacific in one measure. In four of the six measures, LAC appears as the fourth
most urbanized among seven regions.




36
   Annex 3 examines the extent to which the regional and global maps of urban areas generated as a side-product of the
analysis correlate with each other. It shows that there is a generally high level of agreement between the maps generated
using the AI and cluster methods and different gridded population data sets. Interestingly, the main differences are
driven less by the method adopted (AI versus cluster) and more by the choice of population layer.
37
   In addition to these 146 countries, estimates of urban population shares were generated for a further 65 countries using
either the AI and/or cluster methods. The urban population share estimates for these countries are reported in Table
A4.2 in Annex 4.
38
   Figure 2 has been constructed using the 146-country sample for which we have complete data. However, it also looks
very similar when instead constructed using the data for all countries for which we are able to generate estimates of
urbanization levels using the AI and cluster methods.

                                                            12
Figure 2: Estimated levels of urbanization using different methods and data sets

                                     100%
Share of population in urban areas




                                     90%
                                     80%
                                     70%
                                     60%
                                     50%
                                     40%
                                     30%
                                     20%
                                     10%
                                      0%
                                            UN   AI - LandScan   AI - GHSPop   EC - LandScan EC - LandScan EC - GHSPop   EC - GHSPop
                                                                                 (All urban   (HD clusters  (All urban    (HD clusters
                                                                                  clusters)       only)      clusters)       only)
                                                 World    LAC     SSA   SAR     ECA   MENA     EAP   N. America
Note: EC refers to the cluster method for the consistent measurement of urbanization. “All urban clusters” refers to the
share of population living in all urban clusters, while “HD clusters” refers to the share of population living just in high-
density clusters.

The conclusion to be drawn from the above is that, when measured consistently, LAC appears far
less urban relative to other regions than we are generally led to believe. This finding is consistent
with the use of more relaxed standards for classifying areas as urban in LAC versus non-LAC
countries (see Section 2). It also confirms findings reported by Uchida and Nelson (2010) and the
World Bank (2008) using the original version of the AI.

4.2. Re-assessing LAC’s position in relation to the basic stylized facts

Tables 2 and 3 show results from two basic sets of regressions. In Table 2, the (natural log) of a
country’s GDP per capita level is regressed on its level of urbanization. Meanwhile, in Table 3, a
country’s level of urbanization is regressed on the share of its national GDP that is generated by
agriculture. In both tables, columns (1) – (3) report results obtained when using the WUP data,
which are based on national definitions, to measure levels of urbanization, while columns (4) – (6)
report the corresponding results when instead using the AI with LandScan 2012 population data as
input.

As can be seen, the tables confirm the results for the WUP data that were depicted visually in Figure
1. Hence, a country’s level of development is significantly positively correlated with its level of
urbanization, while there is a significant negative relationship between a country’s urbanization level
and the relative importance of agriculture to its economy. Furthermore, Latin American (LA) and
Caribbean (C) countries depart significantly from these relationships, but in opposite directions.
This is evident in the opposite signs on the dummy variables for Latin American and Caribbean
countries in column (2) in both tables. On average, Latin American countries have significantly
lower levels of GDP per capita than one would predict based on their levels of urbanization.
Consistent with this, they also appear “over-urbanized” given the contribution that agriculture makes



                                                                               13
to GDP for countries in the region. By contrast, Caribbean countries appear “under-urbanized.”
However, this result is driven by two extreme outliers – Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago.39

When we turn to the results using the AI based on the LandScan 2012 population data, however, the
estimated coefficients on the Latin American and Caribbean dummies are much smaller in
magnitude and statistically insignificant (see, in particular, column (5) in Tables 2 and 3). As a
consequence, Latin American countries, as a group, no longer appear “over-urbanized.” Likewise,
the Caribbean countries no longer appear “under-urbanized.” This can also be seen in Figure 3,
which shows the scatterplots that correspond to the regressions in column (4) of Tables 2 and 3. In
particular, comparing Figure 3 with Figure 1, one can see that the Latin American countries are no
longer systematically positioned below the fitted line, but, rather, are more evenly distributed around
it. Meanwhile, for the Caribbean countries, Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago, no longer have the
appearance of outliers.

Table 2: Regression results for relationship between ln(GDP per capita) and urbanization
                                        WUP data                                     AI – LandScan 2012
                           [1]            [2]                 [3]              [4]           [5]            [6]

Urban pop. share        4.215***         4.338***         4.254***         4.050***         4.102***    4.077***
                         [14.70]          [15.21]          [14.64]          [12.36]          [12.20]     [12.27]
LA_dummy                                 -0.386**                                             -0.049
                                          [-2.090]                                           [-0.237]
C_dummy                                    0.595*                                             -0.267
                                          [1.934]                                            [-0.753]
LAC_dummy                                                   -0.143                                        -0.099
                                                           [-0.853]                                      [-0.537]
Constant                6.742***         6.697***         6.744***         6.685***         6.670***    6.685***
                         [38.22]          [38.67]          [38.20]          [31.48]          [31.01]     [31.40]

n                          146              146              146              146              146         146
R2                        0.600            0.623            0.602            0.515            0.517       0.516
                          0.597            0.616            0.597            0.511            0.507       0.509
Dependent variable: ln(GDP per capita);
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level




39
  This is confirmed when the Caribbean dummy in the column [2] regressions in Tables 3 and 4 is replaced by two
separate dummies – one for Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago, and the other for the remaining Caribbean countries.
In particular, for these regressions, the Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago dummy is statistically significant with the
expected sign, while the dummy for the other Caribbean countries is insignificant.

                                                            14
Table 3: Regression results for relationship between urbanization and the share of national
GDP derived from agriculture
                                        WUP data                                      AI – LandScan 2012
                            [1]           [2]                 [3]              [4]            [5]            [6]

Agric. share            -1.159***        -1.171***        -1.145***        -1.092***        -1.067***     -1.079***
                         [-10.72]         [-10.87]         [-10.44]         [-10.29]         [-9.890]      [-10.03]
LA_dummy                                  0.0779*                                              0.007
                                           [1.965]                                           [0.164]
C_dummy                                   -0.124*                                              0.096
                                          [-1.831]                                           [1.419]
LAC_dummy                                                  0.0308                                           0.027
                                                           [0.848]                                         [0.769]
Constant                0.725***         0.722***         0.718***         0.754***         0.746***      0.748***
                         [37.37]          [34.73]          [33.90]          [39.61]          [35.87]       [35.97]

n                           146              146              146              146                 146       146
R2                         0.444            0.473            0.446            0.424               0.432     0.426
                           0.440            0.462            0.439            0.420               0.420     0.418
Dependent variable: urban share of national population
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level



Figure 3: Relationship between: (a) levels of economic development and urbanization; and (b)
levels of urbanization and the contribution of agriculture to national GDP. Level of
urbanization measured using the Agglomeration Index with LandScan 2012 population data




Qualitatively similar results to those reported above for Latin America are also found using the AI
based on both the GHS-Pop and WorldPop data – i.e. there is no longer any evidence of “over-
urbanization” (see Annex 5 for full results). For the Caribbean countries, on the other hand, there is
some continued evidence of “under-urbanization” in the relationship between GDP per capita and
urbanization using the WorldPop data, but the sample size in this regression is only small (i.e. 40
countries). Likewise, with one exception, the cluster method based on the LandScan and GHS-Pop

                                                            15
data gives broadly similar results (see Annex 6, Table A6.1 – A6.4). The exception is when we
restrict our attention to high-density clusters and use the LandScan data, in which case the Latin
American dummy remains significantly positive (indicating “over-urbanization”) in the regression
of urbanization on the share of the agricultural sector in a country’s GDP. Finally, for the cluster
method using the WorldPop data, Caribbean countries continue to have significantly higher levels
of GDP per capita than predicted given their levels of urbanization (see Annex 6, Table 6.5).
However, again, the sample size for this regression is restricted to only 40 countries. As an
additional observation, it will be noted that the basic stylized relationships between urbanization,
development and structural transformation break down when the cluster method is used in
conjunction with either the GHS-Pop or WorldPop data. Insofar as the basic stylized facts are more
stable across different input population data sets, this suggests that the AI results are more robust
than those for the cluster method. Given that the AI also relies on additional sources of data – in
particular, travel time estimates – this should perhaps come as no surprise.

5. Conclusion
When levels of urbanization are measured based on national definitions of urban areas, countries in
the LAC region are seen to depart significantly from the basic stylized facts of urbanization,
development and structural transformation. Most notably, Latin American countries appear to be
“over-urbanized” relative to their levels of development and the importance of the agricultural sector
to their economies. However, when levels of urbanization are instead measured using a consistent
set of criteria across countries, this apparent “over-urbanization” is revealed to be an “urban myth.”
This finding tends to hold irrespective of whether the Agglomeration Index or a cluster-based
methodology is adopted as the approach for consistently defining urban areas across countries. It,
furthermore, tends to hold irrespective of the choice of gridded population data used as input into
these two methodologies.




                                                 16
References

Ades, A. F., & Glaeser, E. L. (1995). Trade and Circuses: Explaining Urban Giants. The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 110(1), 195-227.
Aubrecht, C., Gunasekera, R., Ungar, J., & Ishizawa, O. (2016). Consistent yet adaptive global
        geospatial identification of urban–rural patterns: The iURBAN model. Remote Sensing of
        Environment, 187, 230-240.
Balk, D., Deichmann, U., Yetman, G., Pozzi, F., Hay, S., & Nelson, A. (2006). Determining global
        population distribution: methods, applications and data. Advances in Parasitology, 62, 119-
        156.
Berg, Blankespoor, Li, & Selod. (2017). Global travel time to major cities, circa 2010.
        Unpublished manuscript under preparation. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Berry, B. J., Goheen, P. G., & Goldstein, H. (1969). Metropolitan area definition: A re-evaluation
        of concept and statistical practice. Washington: U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Brecht, H., Deichmann, U., & Wang, H.G. (2013). A global urban risk index. World Bank Policy
        Research Working Paper No. 6506. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Chomitz, K. M., Buys, P., & Thomas, T. S. (2005). Quantifying the rural-urban gradient in Latin
        America and the Caribbean. World Bank, Development Research Group, Infrastructure and
        Environment Team. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Cohen, J. A. (1960). Coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educ. Psychol. Meas., 20, 37-46.
Coombes, M., Casado-Díaz, J. M., Martínez-Bernabeu, L., & Carausu, F. (2012). Study on
        comparable Labour Market Areas - Final research report.
de Ferranti, Perry, G.E., Foster, W., Lederman, D., & Valdés (2005). Beyond the City: The
        Rural Contribution to Development. World Bank Latin American and Caribbean Studies.
        Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Davis, J., & Henderson, J.V. (2003). Evidence on the Political Economy of the Urbanization
        Process. Journal of Urban Economics, 53(1), 98-125.
Deuskar, C., & Stewart, B. (2016). Measuring Global Urbanization using a Standard Definition of
        Urban Areas: Analysis of Preliminary Results. Washington, DC: presented at World Bank
        Land & Poverty Conference, March 2016.
Day, J., Chen, Y., Ellis, P., & Roberts, M. (2017), A fee, open-source tool for identifying urban
        agglomerations using polygon data. Environment Systems and Decisions, published on-line
        19th January, 2017.
Dijkstra, L., & Poelman, H. (2014). A harmonised definition of cities and rural areas: the new
        degree of urbanization. Regional Working Paper, European Commission, Directorate-
        General for Regional and Urban Policy.
Duranton, G. (2015). A Proposal to Delineate Metropolitan Areas in Colombia. Desarrollo y
        Sociedad, 75, 223-264.
Ellis, P., & Roberts, M. (2015). Leveraging Urbanization in South Asia : Managing Spatial
        Transformation for Prosperity and Livability. World Bank. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Fay, M., & Opal, C. (2000). Urbanization without Growth: A Not So Uncommon Phenomenon.
        World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2412. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Foody, G.M. (2004). Thematic map comparison. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing,
        70(5), 627-633.



                                                17
Freire, S., MacManus, K., Pesaresi, M., Doxsey-Whitfield, E., & Mills, J. (2016). Development
       of new open and free multi-temporal global population grids at 250 m resolution.
       proceedings of 19th AGILE Conference on Geographic Information Science . Helsinki.
Gollin, D., R. Jedwab, & Vollrath, D. (2016). Urbanization with and without industrialization.
       Journal of Economic Growth, 21(1), 35-70.
Henderson, J. V., & Wang, H. G. (2005). Aspects of the rural-urban transformation of countries.
       Journal of Economic Geography, 5(1), 23-42.
Henderson, J.V., Storeygard, A., & Roberts, M. (2013). Is Urbanization in Sub-Saharan Africa
       Different? (World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6481). Retrieved from
       http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2280643.
Krugman, P. & Elizondo, R. L. (1996). Trade policy and the third world metropolis. Journal of
       Development Economics, 49(1), 137-150.
McHugh, M.L. (2012). Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochemia Medica, 22(3), 276-282.
McKinsey Global Institute (2011a). Urban World: Mapping the Economic Power of Cities.
       McKinsey Global Institute.
McKinsey Global Institute (2011b). Building Globally Competitive Cities: The Key to Latin
       American Growth. McKinsey Global Institute.
Mertes, C. M., Schneider, A., Sulla-Menashe, D., Tatem, A. & Tan, B. (2015). Detecting
       change in urban areas at continental scales with MODIS data. Remote Sensing of
       Environment, 158,331-347.
Michaels, G., Rauch, F., & Redding, S. J. (2012). Urbanization and structural transformation. The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 535-586.
Monserud, R.A. & Leemans, R. (1992). Comparing global vegetation maps with the Kappa
       statistic. Ecological Modelling, 62(4), 275-293.
Morse, R. M. (1962). Some Characteristics of Latin American Urban History. The American
       Historical Review, 67(2), 317-338.
Nelson, G.D., & Rae, A. (2016). An economic geography of the United States: from commutes to
       megaregions. PLoS ONE, 11(11), e0166083.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2012). Redefining "urban": A new
       way to measure metropolitan areas. Paris: OECD.
Rozenfeld, H. D., Rybski, D., Gabaix, X., & Makse, H.A. (2011). The area and population of
       cities: New insights from a different perspective on cities. American Economic Review, 101,
       2205-2225.
Sanchez-Serra, D. (2016). Functional Urban Areas in Colombia. OECD Regional Development
       Working Papers, 2016/08. Paris: OECD.
Satterthwaite, D. (2007). The transition to a predominantly urban world and its underpinnings.
       London: International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).
Stevens, F., Gaughan, A., Linard, C., & Tatem, A. (2015). Disaggregating census data for
       population mapping using random forests with remotely-sensed and ancillary data. PloS One,
       10(2).
Uchida, H., & Nelson, A. (2010). Agglomeration Index: Towards a New Measure of Urban
       Concentration, in Beall, J., Basubeb, G-K., & Kanbur, R. (eds), Urbanization and
       Development: Multidisciplinary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
UK Office for National Statistics. (2015). Overview of 2011 Travel to Work Areas. Retrieved from
       http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/geography/beginner-s-guide/other/travel-to-
       work-areas/index.html

                                                18
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. (2014).
      World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision. (CD-ROM Edition).
World Bank (2008). World Development Report, 2009: Reshaping economic geography.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank & IMF (2013). Global Monitoring Report 2013: Rural-Urban Dynamics and the
      Millennium Development Goals. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2015). East Asia's Changing Urban Landscape : Measuring a Decade of Spatial
      Growth.       Washington,       DC:       World       Bank.      Retrieved       from
      https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21159
Zhang, Q., & Seto, K. C. (2011). Mapping urbanization dynamics at regional and global scales
      using multi-temporal DMSP/OLS nighttime light data. Remote Sensing of Environment,
      115(9), 2320-2329.




                                             19
Annex 1: Definitions of samples and variables, and data sources

Definition of samples

Countries were excluded from the main analysis if values of relevant variables were missing. These
variables, which are further explained below, were: the urban population share, GDP per capita,
agricultural share of GDP, and national population density. For measures of urbanization constructed
using the GHSPop and LandScan 2012 data, this resulted in a sample of 146 countries. For measures
involving WorldPop data, the resultant sample consisted of 44 countries.

Definition of variables and data sources

Urban share of population (World Urbanization Prospects - WUP)
The urban share of population based on official national definitions of urban areas is the 2014 figure
from the World Development Indicators (SP.URB.TOTL.IN.ZS, last updated September 2015).
These figures are themselves based on those reported in the United Nations’ World Urbanization
Prospects database (https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/).

GDP per capita
GDP per capita is measured in constant 2011 international dollars using Purchasing Power Parity
exchange rates, taken from the World Development Indicators (NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.KD, last updated
in September 2015). The value for each country is calculated as the mean over all non-missing
observations of the 2012, 2013, and 2014 values.

Agricultural share of GDP
Agricultural share of GDP refers to the value added by forestry, hunting, fishing, cultivation of crops,
and livestock production, as a percentage of the country’s GDP, taken from the World Development
Indicators (NV.AGR.TOTL.ZS, last updated in November 2015). The value for each country is
calculated as the mean over all non-missing observations of the 2010-2014 values.

National population density
The national population density figures used are the 2014 values from the World Development
Indicators (EN.POP.DNST, last updated in December 2015). It refers to “midyear population
divided by land area in square kilometers”.




                                                  20
Annex 2: Official definitions of urban areas used in LAC countries
 Country             Urban definition
 Antigua and         St. John's (capital).
 Barbuda
 Argentina           Localities with 2,000 inhabitants or more.
 Aruba               Oranjestad (capital) and Sant Nicolas.
 Bahamas             For the 1980, 1990 and 2000 censuses, sum of the cities.
 Barbados            Bridgetown (capital).
 Belize              Belize City and all towns.
 Bolivia             Localities with 2,000 inhabitants or more.
 Brazil              Administrative centres of 'municipios' and districts, including suburban
                     zones.
 Cayman Islands      Entire population.
 Chile               Populated centres with defined urban characteristics, such as certain public
                     and municipal services.
 Colombia            Administrative headquarters ('población cabecera') with 2,000 inhabitants
                     or more.
 Costa Rica          Administrative centres of cantons, including adjacent areas with clear urban
                     characteristics such as streets, urban services and electricity.
 Cuba                Places with 2,000 inhabitants or more, and places with fewer inhabitants
                     but with paved streets, street lighting, piped water, sewage, a medical centre
                     and educational facilities.
 Curaçao             Willemstad (capital).
 Dominica            Cities and villages with 1,000 inhabitants or more.
 Dominican           Administrative centres of communes and municipal districts.
 Republic
 Ecuador             Capitals of provinces and cantons.
 El Salvador         For 1971, areas where authorities of the municipality reside, as determined
                     by those authorities. For 2007, the head of the municipality, where the
                     primary civil, religious and military authorities reside, and those areas
                     having a continuous cluster of at least 500 dwellings, with street lighting
                     service, basic education schools, regular transportation service, paved or
                     cobbled streets, and telephone services.
 Grenada             Parishes of St. George's Town (capital) and St. George.
 Guatemala           The 'municipio' of Guatemala Department and officially recognized centres
                     of other departments and municipalities. The urban population for 1981 is
                     officially adjusted to include the urbanized suburbs bordering the
                     'municipio' of Guatemala in a way consistent with the previous census.
 Guyana              City of Georgetown (capital), and four other towns.
 Haiti               Administrative centres of communes.
 Honduras            Populated centres with 2,000 inhabitants or more that also meet the
                     following criteria: piped water service; communication by land (road or
                     train) or regular air or maritime service; complete primary school (six


                                               21
 Country                  Urban definition
                          grades); postal service or telegraph; and at least one of the following:
                          electrical light, sewer system, or a health centre.
 Jamaica                  Kingston metropolitan area and selected main towns.
 Mexico                   Localities with 2,500 inhabitants or more.
 Nicaragua                Department, region and municipality headquarters, and population centers
                          of 1,000 inhabitants or more, with some features such as: streets, electricity
                          service, commercial and / or industrial establishments, etc.
 Panama                   Localities with 1,500 inhabitants or more, with all or most of the following
                          urban characteristics: electricity, water-supply and sewerage systems,
                          paved roads and access to commercial establishments, secondary schools
                          and social and recreational centres. Some places with most of the
                          mentioned features were defined as urban, even if they did not fulfilled the
                          population requirement.
 Paraguay                 Administrative centres of the official districts.
 Peru                     Populated centres with 100 dwellings or more grouped contiguously and
                          administrative centres of districts.
 Puerto Rico              Densely settled territory that meets minimum population density
                          requirements and with 2,500 inhabitants or more. A change in the definition
                          for the 2000 census from place-based to density-based affects the
                          comparability of estimates before and after this date.
 Saint Kitts & Nevis      Basseterre (capital) and Charlestown.
 Saint Lucia              No official definition available. In the present publication, the urban
                          agglomeration of the city of Castries, its suburban and three towns (Gros
                          Islet, Soufrière, and Vieux Fort).
 Saint Vincent &          No official definition available.
 Grenadines
 Sint Maarten             Entire population.
 (Dutch part)
 Suriname                 The district of Paramaribo (capital) and Wanica district.
 Trinidad & Tobago        Port-of-Spain (capital), Arima borough and San Fernando town.
 Turks & Caicos           The islands of Grand Turk and Providenciales.
 Islands
 US Virgin Islands        For the 2000 and 2010 censuses, densely settled territory that meets
                          minimum population density requirements and with 2,500 inhabitants or
                          more. For the 1950 and 1960 censuses, the proportion urban was adjusted
                          for consistency with the new definition.
 Uruguay                  Cities officially designated as such.
 Venezuela, RB            Places with 2,500 inhabitants or more.
Source: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2014). World Urbanization
Prospects: The 2014 Revision, CD-ROM Edition.




                                                       22
Annex 3: Comparison of urban extent maps

In this annex, we present a comparison of the maps of urban areas generated as a side-product of the
analysis of this paper. In particular, we perform pairwise comparisons of the maps generated using
both the Agglomeration Index and cluster methods based on the three different gridded population
data sets – LandScan 2012, GHSPop and WorldPop. We perform the comparisons both at the global
level and for LAC as a region. To perform the comparisons, we make use of Cohen’s kappa statistic
(Cohen, 1960), which assesses the degree of agreement between two maps taking into account the
degree of agreement which is expected to occur by chance (Monserud and Leemans, 1992; Foody,
2004).

For each pairwise comparison of maps, Cohen’s Kappa statistic is calculated as follows:
                                                          	
                                                      	

Where    is the relative observed agreement between the compared maps, and                           is the expected
agreement occurring by chance.

Cohen’s kappa has a theoretical range of -1 to +1, with 1 indicating perfect agreement. In his original
paper, Cohen provided guidelines on the interpretation of the statistic. According to these
guidelines,       0 indicates no agreement, 0	         0.20 slight agreement, 0.20           0.40 fair
agreement, 0.40           0.60 moderate agreement, 0.60             0.80 substantial agreement, and
     0.80 almost perfect agreement. It is important to note, however, that the interpretation of the
kappa statistic remains a matter of debate of the literature with alternative guidelines having been
published (McHugh, 2012).

Results

A total of 6 pairwise comparisons were performed at the global level and 15 for the LAC region.40
The number of comparisons for LAC is greater than for the globe because while WorldPop data is
available for LAC, it is not available for the entire globe. Table A3.1 reports the estimated Kappa
statistics from the pairwise comparisons. As will be seen, the statistics range from a minimum of
0.535 to a maximum of 0.761 with 7 of the pairwise comparisons for LAC falling in the range that
Kappa categorized as representing “substantial” agreement and the remaining 8 in the range that he
classified as showing “moderate” agreement. For the global statistics, 3 fall in the range of
“substantial” agreement and the remaining 3 in the range of “moderate agreement.” Levels of
agreement tend to be slightly higher for LAC than for the globe overall. Interestingly, the highest
Kappa statistics are obtained when comparing between the AI and cluster methods using the same
input gridded population data set. Hence, the highest estimated Kappa statistics for both LAC and
the globe are obtained by comparing the maps generated using the AI and cluster methods using
LandScan 2012 data as input. This suggests that the spatial form of the urban areas resulting from
different urbanization measures is more sensitive to the input population distribution data than the
urban definition method.


40
     Comparisons were not performed involving the cluster method using only high-density clusters.

                                                           23
Table A3.1: Kappa statistics for pairwise map comparisons
 Definition 1            Definition 2             LAC        Global
 AI - LandScan           AI - GHSPop              0.700      0.646
 AI – Landscan           AI – WorldPop            0.569        -
 AI – Landscan           CL – Landscan            0.761      0.707
 AI – Landscan           CL – GHS Pop             0.597      0.589
 AI – Landscan           CL – WorldPop            0.569        -
 AI – GHS Pop            AI – WorldPop            0.603        -
 AI – GHS Pop            CL – Landscan            0.632      0.557
 AI – GHS Pop            CL – GHS Pop             0.712      0.692
 AI – GHS Pop            CL – WorldPop            0.594        -
 AI – WorldPop           CL – Landscan            0.560        -
 AI – WorldPop           CL – GHS Pop             0.563        -
 AI – WorldPop           CL – WorldPop            0.706        -
 CL – Landscan           CL – GHS Pop             0.612      0.591
 CL – WorldPop           CL – GHS Pop             0.535        -
 CL – WorldPop           CL – Landscan            0.548        -
Notes: AI = Agglomeration Index; CL = cluster method.

As a visualization of the degree of agreement between the different maps, Figure A3.1 shows the
maps overlaid on one another for the Bogota area of Colombia with color coding according to the
number of maps between which there is agreement. The figure shows that all maps agree on the
classification of the core urban areas of major cities with the number of maps showing agreement
becoming progressively less as one move towards the periphery of these cities. There is also less
agreement for smaller settlements.
Figure A3.1: Visual comparisons of degree of agreement between different maps




                                                        24
Annex 4: Estimates of national urban population shares using different methods
Table A4.1: 146 countries used in the regression analyses
                                                              Urban share (%)
Region           Country         GDP pc               AI                        Cluster-based
                                           LScan    GHSPop    WPop      LScan     GHSPop        WPop
 ECA Luxembourg                   89,002    83.74     83.37              57.98       68.53
 EAP Singapore                    77,436    99.08     98.16              99.29       99.94
 MNA Kuwait                       75,746    98.64     98.78              96.69       97.30
 EAP Brunei Darussalam            72,204    79.30     82.20              81.68       82.06
 ECA Norway                       63,654    52.56     53.06              58.53       58.58
 MNA United Arab Emirates         60,903    93.68     97.57              92.59       97.06
 ECA Switzerland                  54,778    74.57     75.20              73.65       78.35
 NAC United States                51,316    80.34     77.78              75.14       73.07
 MNA Saudi Arabia                 49,110    88.01     82.08              89.67       91.70       66.26
 ECA Ireland                      45,316    54.06     57.87              52.38       55.32
 ECA Netherlands                  45,262    92.24     93.11              83.09       83.92
 ECA Austria                      44,060    70.76     69.11              60.84       59.45
 ECA Sweden                       43,580    68.31     72.08              60.34       69.59
 ECA Germany                      43,096    87.04     86.33              70.01       72.73
 ECA Denmark                      42,709    69.38     73.52              59.04       64.16
 NAC Canada                       42,298    72.92     74.75              74.39       75.83
 ECA Belgium                      40,726    91.08     91.08              75.51       80.25
 ECA Iceland                      40,707    63.87     63.90              73.92       74.38
 MNA Oman                         40,011    74.93     73.92              75.60       82.60       51.71
 ECA Finland                      38,949    66.22     70.88              57.76       68.39
 ECA United Kingdom               37,019    88.02     92.02              81.04       86.09
 EAP Japan                        35,412    94.64     95.60              87.89       92.16
 ECA Italy                        33,906    83.38     86.06              72.65       76.24
 EAP New Zealand                  33,083    78.26     77.31              73.43       73.43
 EAP Korea, Rep.                  32,738    95.46     96.70              90.44       93.42
 ECA Spain                        31,974    82.44     84.86              76.28       79.17
 ECA Cyprus                       30,488    81.40     83.05              70.23       71.74
 LAC Trinidad and Tobago          29,155    86.85     88.28     78.87    79.41       87.94       71.07
 ECA Czech Republic               28,384    79.76     80.98              56.52       62.20
 ECA Slovenia                     27,703    61.43     61.30              47.35       53.00



                                             25
                                                        Urban share (%)
Region           Country   GDP pc               AI                        Cluster-based
                                     LScan    GHSPop    WPop      LScan     GHSPop        WPop
ECA Portugal                25,895    73.98     74.75              79.44       70.33
ECA Slovak Republic         25,846    74.88     74.65              47.20       55.49
ECA Estonia                 25,293    53.35     58.88              61.59       64.13
ECA Lithuania               24,717    64.12     71.20              53.57       78.47
ECA Greece                  24,551    67.17     67.96              66.92       68.28
ECA Russian Federation      23,384    70.72     75.43              67.83       80.00
ECA Poland                  23,279    81.33     84.45              61.39       65.60
 EAP Malaysia               22,890    80.98     82.30              80.23       82.50
ECA Hungary                 22,874    83.39     84.65              57.59       63.57
LAC Bahamas, The            22,572    69.19     70.87              76.74       76.59
ECA Kazakhstan              22,356    57.42     65.75              65.47       83.17
LAC Chile                   21,641    80.10     83.94     61.82    79.38       87.21       55.15
ECA Latvia                  21,586    63.70     69.29              58.93       73.57
ECA Croatia                 20,097    60.10     62.31              55.01       60.22
LAC Cuba                    19,706    74.56     89.22     58.62    59.44       82.52       44.44
LAC Uruguay                 19,226    68.59     74.06     64.54    79.44       86.85       61.43
LAC Panama                  18,973    63.07     62.48     52.70    65.55       68.86       42.95
ECA Turkey                  18,484    73.49     84.44              63.43       81.95
ECA Romania                 18,084    71.16     74.86              47.31       58.55
 SSA Gabon                  17,809    55.09     55.05              66.43       71.68
LAC Venezuela, RB           17,381    82.34     84.63     52.26    81.77       88.35       40.55
 SSA Mauritius              17,176    92.52     93.84              86.40       90.57
ECA Belarus                 17,114    74.00     85.00              67.97       82.30
MNA Lebanon                 16,586   100.00     94.01              82.40       89.87
ECA Azerbaijan              16,397    57.94     63.48              59.42       79.14
LAC Mexico                  16,201    78.57     82.77     74.82    73.15       80.65       66.64
ECA Bulgaria                15,729    76.58     77.75              60.93       59.74
LAC Suriname                15,577    73.13     73.82     57.34    65.75       65.96       45.47
LAC Brazil                  15,095    70.75     71.73     63.47    79.14       79.93       57.48
 SSA Botswana               14,788    52.40     60.25              48.94       70.98
ECA Montenegro              14,075    44.79     49.34              60.70       75.48
LAC Costa Rica              13,907    66.35     66.58     64.47    68.95       75.64       58.31



                                       26
                                                          Urban share (%)
Region           Country     GDP pc               AI                        Cluster-based
                                       LScan    GHSPop    WPop      LScan     GHSPop        WPop
LAC Barbados                  13,755    95.36     97.40              83.51       84.55
 EAP Thailand                 13,744    54.01     63.86     48.46    46.88       70.51       36.95
ECA Turkmenistan              13,592    59.10     78.84              58.72       87.72
MNA Algeria                   13,296    70.04     80.25     75.33    66.97       85.85       69.69
ECA Serbia                    12,704    77.70     79.94              57.60       65.74
 SSA South Africa             12,425    58.46     65.83              58.89       77.43
LAC Colombia                  12,296    70.01     73.70     60.65    71.25       84.78       60.24
LAC Dominican Republic        12,037    81.07     88.02     73.37    73.00       87.58       59.44
ECA Macedonia, FYR            11,905    75.01     78.57              68.10       76.25
 EAP China                    11,810    63.34     69.21              71.66       88.20       65.19
MNA Jordan                    11,414    93.75     87.81              86.82       91.96
LAC Peru                      11,204    62.18     64.84     40.45    63.51       77.88       40.24
MNA Tunisia                   10,688    73.84     89.19              63.34       86.93
 EAP Mongolia                 10,654    49.75     54.75              63.37       70.21
LAC Ecuador                   10,567    67.66     74.58     61.72    65.68       82.39       56.46
MNA Egypt, Arab Rep.          10,054    97.20     97.53              96.32       98.08
ECA Albania                    9,977    67.02     75.98              56.14       70.02
 EAP Indonesia                 9,664    64.29     66.72     64.45    81.69       90.33       71.55
 SAR Sri Lanka                 9,442    57.86     56.89     54.83    80.03       80.41       76.21
ECA Bosnia and Herzegovina     9,366    51.24     61.65              54.54       75.64
 SSA Namibia                   9,087    18.07     18.64     17.65    41.43       41.07       31.27
LAC Jamaica                    8,564    74.63     74.11     67.15    74.74       81.30       59.52
ECA Ukraine                    8,308    70.73     77.38              63.75       70.41
LAC Paraguay                   8,013    52.63     64.18     49.70    56.92       80.51       40.03
LAC Belize                     7,948    42.71     43.28     52.78    50.62       59.74       11.86
LAC El Salvador                7,833    82.03     90.15     75.29    68.74       84.89       53.18
 EAP Fiji                      7,518    21.52     21.31              35.52       49.43
ECA Armenia                    7,487    77.99     78.16              71.91       81.58
 SAR Bhutan                    7,262     3.70     13.34      0.91    26.60       31.55       11.55
LAC Guatemala                  6,976    53.13     55.53     47.07    63.89       85.20       52.48
ECA Georgia                    6,955    60.85     67.79              59.91       68.41
MNA Morocco                    6,841    67.46     75.60     65.18    58.36       79.68       58.28



                                         27
                                                          Urban share (%)
Region             Country   GDP pc               AI                        Cluster-based
                                       LScan    GHSPop    WPop      LScan     GHSPop        WPop
 SSA Angola                    6,796    26.55     43.86              37.07       81.10
LAC Guyana                     6,631    45.47     48.05     43.00    59.08       64.86       54.06
 EAP Philippines               6,363    61.65     60.60     59.80    77.69       79.47       75.23
 SSA Cabo Verde                6,163    57.23     31.69              66.85       89.54
LAC Bolivia                    6,067    57.74     58.64     30.02    61.27       76.42       33.88
 SSA Swaziland                 5,983    34.00     42.68              28.73       46.43
 SSA Congo, Rep.               5,807    58.67     56.07              66.95       76.42
 SSA Nigeria                   5,466    55.46     65.12              60.30       86.96
 SAR India                     5,146    67.33     76.14              72.47       91.36
 EAP Vietnam                   5,136    68.08     73.10     69.35    74.45       92.06       75.60
ECA Uzbekistan                 5,009    82.57     92.46              76.00       91.11
 EAP Lao PDR                   4,792    21.80     25.19     16.70    26.17       76.17       12.52
LAC Nicaragua                  4,538    53.00     53.86     41.00    52.75       76.35       44.16
 SAR Pakistan                  4,493    70.92     72.20              79.17       91.34
ECA Moldova                    4,482    62.76     65.93              48.53       60.33
LAC Honduras                   4,299    55.75     57.82     40.26    52.08       54.85       36.46
 SSA Sudan                     3,844    43.72     47.20              40.98       88.41
 SSA Ghana                     3,798    53.62     66.28              45.63       78.85
 SSA Zambia                    3,616    35.56     45.56              35.55       77.35
 SSA Mauritania                3,605    33.93     40.72     25.62    41.07       78.75       19.00
ECA Kyrgyz Republic            3,053    51.63     56.95              61.27       87.16
 SSA São Tomé and Príncipe     3,046    77.31     78.42              73.47       80.32
 EAP Cambodia                  2,953    53.79     56.13              41.38       72.29       44.11
 SSA Côte d'Ivoire             2,936    58.80     60.99              50.47       61.78
 SAR Bangladesh                2,846    62.76     70.44     65.51    97.50       97.20       90.19
 SSA Cameroon                  2,748    53.85     67.61              48.77       81.80
 SSA Kenya                     2,745    47.34     46.39     51.89    58.59       73.29       72.55
ECA Tajikistan                 2,457    37.79     39.65              70.15       90.10
 SSA Lesotho                   2,442    31.87     29.42              39.56       58.20
 SSA Tanzania                  2,381    32.90     42.06     37.60    33.43       72.78       27.28
 SAR Nepal                     2,182    32.32     36.49     31.96    68.90       72.90       61.51
 SSA Senegal                   2,174    54.36     73.52     53.60    44.93       87.36       45.28



                                         28
                                                                       Urban share (%)
Region             Country              GDP pc                 AI                          Cluster-based
                                                   LScan     GHSPop    WPop        LScan     GHSPop        WPop
  EAP Timor-Leste                          2,102     15.93     14.92                36.08       50.88
  SSA Chad                                 2,016     17.47     25.95                25.88       85.55
  SAR Afghanistan                          1,877     42.17     43.91                50.79       81.56
  SSA Sierra Leone                         1,776     32.26     42.39                30.15       63.80
  SSA Benin                                1,733     59.63     69.86                54.73       82.77
  SSA Zimbabwe                             1,677     35.14     45.09                31.44       71.59
  SSA Burkina Faso                         1,562     30.44     48.32                20.40       73.97
  SSA Rwanda                               1,528     33.50     36.43       35.18    85.53       88.98       93.13
  SSA Mali                                 1,490     29.04     39.73       31.36    29.16       67.65       29.92
  SSA Madagascar                           1,371     26.21     28.65                26.09       67.64
  SSA Guinea-Bissau                        1,331     34.03     42.73                31.28       72.61
  SSA Ethiopia                             1,329     17.75     22.73                37.79       87.87
  SSA Togo                                 1,327     55.17     71.10                50.90       82.70
  SSA Guinea                               1,182     31.59     41.82                28.00       64.23
  SSA Mozambique                           1,040     27.65     35.51                28.03       80.81
  SSA Niger                                 878      27.52     40.19                23.27       79.46
  SSA Malawi                                766      30.70     29.57       31.34    52.21       57.44       48.70
  SSA Burundi                               726      43.29     47.92                76.87       86.97
  SSA Central African Republic              684      27.02     28.80                33.81       65.83
 SSA Congo, Dem. Rep.                     675       36.73      42.64                49.68       73.99
Note: Latin American & Caribbean (LAC) countries are shown in bold font.

Table A4.2: 65 countries excluded from the regression analyses (due to missing values)
                                                                       Urban share (%)
Region             Country              GDP pc                 AI                          Cluster-based
                                                   LScan     GHSPop    WPop        LScan     GHSPop        WPop
 MNA Qatar                              136,171      91.22     86.18                92.04       95.83
  EAP Macao SAR, China                  131,590                99.96                83.71       99.68
  EAP Hong Kong SAR, China               51,518      99.59     99.83                97.45       99.53
 NAC Bermuda                             51,403                                                 75.57
  EAP Australia                          42,860      76.19     78.35                            81.10
 MNA Bahrain                             41,847      98.67     99.80                94.93       99.03
  ECA France                             37,248      81.18     81.70                            63.57



                                                      29
                                                                Urban share (%)
Region            Country          GDP pc               AI                        Cluster-based
                                             LScan    GHSPop    WPop      LScan     GHSPop        WPop
LAC Puerto Rico                     33,699    90.15     90.35              82.86       83.89       77.29
 SSA Equatorial Guinea              31,255    34.79     46.46              50.20       61.45
MNA Israel                          30,875    94.03     90.63              91.33       92.97
MNA Malta                           28,546                                 95.45       95.09
 SSA Seychelles                     24,509                                             63.22
LAC St. Kitts and Nevis             20,759                                             62.16
LAC Antigua and Barbuda             20,576                                             74.71       63.46
MNA Libya                           18,997    84.69     87.29              82.20       84.82
MNA Iran, Islamic Rep.              15,791    76.09     80.80              73.41       85.67
MNA Iraq                            14,487    79.10     83.95              77.56       91.37
 EAP Palau                          13,587                                             40.23
 SAR Maldives                       13,130    37.91     76.50                          60.79
LAC Grenada                         11,238                                             61.94
LAC Dominica                        10,122                                             47.51
LAC St. Lucia                       10,113                                 56.15       77.23
LAC St. Vincent & the Grenadines    10,105                                             66.67
ECA Kosovo                           8,601    77.50     87.14                          75.89
 EAP Tonga                           4,966                                             73.22
 EAP Marshall Islands                3,715                                             68.53
MNA Yemen, Rep.                      3,636    35.49     36.37              60.08       85.23
 EAP Tuvalu                          3,508
 EAP Micronesia, Fed. Sts.           3,352                                             21.24
MNA Djibouti                         2,937    61.09     58.13              73.56       83.95
 EAP Vanuatu                         2,895                                             26.99
 EAP Papua New Guinea                2,521     7.12      6.92              25.36       75.29
 SSA South Sudan                     2,087    14.43                        14.72       89.88
 EAP Solomon Islands                 2,034    16.43     17.12              20.16       16.84
 EAP Kiribati                        1,694                                             53.52
 SSA Uganda                          1,672    43.57     48.66              59.20       84.77       46.41
LAC Haiti                            1,622    51.88     57.86     56.44    60.79       88.78       63.64
 SSA Gambia, The                     1,567    51.34     59.48     55.57    48.64       76.58       51.85
 SSA Eritrea                         1,468    35.22     29.11              39.89       86.75



                                               30
                                                                       Urban share (%)
Region              Country             GDP pc                 AI                          Cluster-based
                                                   LScan     GHSPop    WPop        LScan     GHSPop        WPop
  SSA Comoros                              1,415                                    77.71       85.15
  SSA Liberia                               797      36.55     40.81                34.77       54.62
 LAC Aruba                                                                                      93.60
  ECA Andorra                                                                                   75.17
 LAC Argentina                                       74.08     81.52       73.68    75.90       89.57       62.38
  EAP American Samoa                                                                            68.53
 LAC Curacao                                         94.08                                      89.07
 LAC Cayman Islands                                                                             89.43
  ECA Faeroe Islands                                                                            29.86
  ECA Greenland                                                                                 38.77
  EAP Guam                                                                          74.78       82.92
  ECA Isle of Man                                                                               69.02
  ECA Liechtenstein                                                                             82.13
  ECA Monaco                                        100.00    100.00                            99.27
  EAP Myanmar                                        49.78     57.46                55.49       83.67       40.98
  EAP Northern Mariana Islands                                                                  76.02
  EAP New Caledonia                                  54.81     68.04                45.45       64.61
  EAP Korea, Dem. Rep.                               62.63     64.77                69.49       87.34
  EAP French Polynesia                                                              60.56       41.34
  ECA San Marino                                      3.57                                      87.98
  SSA Somalia                                        23.26     27.54                33.30       74.43
 LAC Sint Maarten (Dutch part)                                                                  94.82
 MNA Syrian Arab Republic                            75.46     85.35                72.26       79.78
 LAC Turks and Caicos Islands                                                                   61.27
  EAP Taiwan, China                                  96.88     97.74                            95.47
 LAC Virgin Islands (U.S.)                                                                      75.46
Note: Latin American & Caribbean (LAC) countries are shown in bold font.




                                                      31
Annex 5: AI Regression Results for GHS-Pop and WorldPop Data
Table A5.1: Regression results for relationship between ln(GDP per capita) and urbanization
                                        AI – GHS Pop                                     AI – World Pop
                              [1]           [2]                  [3]            [4]            [5]          [6]

Urban pop. share          3.923***        3.971***          3.938***         2.902***        2.040***     2.075***
                           [10.67]         [10.51]           [10.57]          [4.187]         [3.118]      [3.348]
LA_dummy                                    0.001                                            0.809***
                                           [0.006]                                            [3.859]
C_dummy                                    -0.246                                             0.875**
                                          [-0.644]                                            [2.374]
LAC_dummy                                                     -0.055                                      0.817***
                                                             [-0.280]                                      [4.041]
Constant                  6.601***        6.580***          6.601***         7.362***        7.362***     7.346***
                           [26.23]         [25.73]           [26.14]          [19.38]         [21.91]      [22.90]

n                            146             146               146              40                 40       40
R2                          0.441           0.443             0.442            0.316              0.526    0.525
                            0.438           0.431             0.434            0.298              0.486    0.500
Dependent variable: ln(GDP per capita)
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level

Table A5.2: Regression results for relationship between urbanization and the share of national
GDP derived from agriculture
                                        AI – GHS Pop                                     AI – World Pop
                              [1]            [2]                 [3]            [4]            [5]           [6]

Agric. share              -0.952***       -0.924***         -0.939***       -0.976***         -0.986***   -1.055***
                           [-8.847]        [-8.471]          [-8.607]        [4.657]           [-3.596]    [-3.884]
LA_dummy                                     0.001                                              -0.035
                                            [0.015]                                            [-0.632]
C_dummy                                      0.112                                               0.064
                                            [1.633]                                             [0.735]
LAC_dummy                                                     0.027                                        -0.025
                                                             [0.735]                                      [-0.464]
Constant                  0.777***         0.769***         0.771***         0.666***         0.677***    0.692***
                           [40.27]          [36.56]          [36.58]          [17.94]          [10.12]     [10.39]

n                            146              146              146              40                 40        40
R2                          0.352            0.364            0.355            0.363              0.396     0.367
                            0.348            0.351            0.346            0.347              0.346     0.333
Dependent variable: urban share of national population
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level




                                                            32
Annex 6: Cluster Method Regression Results
Table A6.1: Regression results for relationship between ln(GDP per capita) and urbanization
                              Cluster – LandScan (HDC only)                           Cluster – LandScan
                               [1]          [2]       [3]                       [4]           [5]        [6]

Urban pop. share            3.604***        3.750***        3.761***        3.789***        3.807***    3.816***
                             [7.040]         [6.996]         [7.032]         [8.262]         [8.091]     [8.167]
LA_dummy                                      -0.317                                          -0.100
                                             [-1.210]                                        [-0.407]
C_dummy                                        0.014                                           0.017
                                             [0.031]                                         [0.041]
LAC_dummy                                                     -0.239                                      -0.072
                                                             [-1.014]                                    [-0.330]
Constant                    7.924***        7.914***        7.910***        6.842***        6.844***    6.838***
                             [40.39]         [40.17]         [40.24]         [23.35]         [23.11]     [23.24]

n                              146             146             146             146             146         146
R2                            0.256           0.264           0.261           0.322           0.322       0.322
                              0.251           0.248           0.251           0.317           0.308       0.313
Dependent variable: ln(GDP per capita)
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level



Table A6.2: Regression results for relationship between urbanization and the share of national
GDP derived from agriculture
                              Cluster – LandScan (HDC only)                           Cluster – LandScan
                               [1]          [2]       [3]                       [4]           [5]        [6]

Agric. share                -0.629***       -0.584***       -0.582***      -0.740***       -0.714***    -0.719***
                             [-6.439]         [-6.028]       [-6.059]       [-7.350]        [-6.973]     [-7.068]
LA_dummy                                     0.100***                                         0.036
                                              [2.808]                                       [0.966]
C_dummy                                         0.089                                         0.073
                                              [1.465]                                       [1.133]
LAC_dummy                                                   0.098***                                      0.045
                                                             [3.062]                                     [1.333]
Constant                    0.427***        0.404***        0.404***        0.710***        0.698***    0.699***
                             [24.35]         [21.64]         [21.75]         [39.27]         [35.38]     [35.58]

n                              146             146             146             146             146         146
R2                            0.224           0.271           0.271            273            0.283       0.282
                              0.218           0.256           0.261           0.268           0.268       0.272
Dependent variable: urban share of national population
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level




                                                            33
Table A6.3: Regression results for relationship between ln(GDP per capita) and urbanization
                               Cluster – GHS Pop (HDC only)                            Cluster – GHS Pop
                                [1]         [2]        [3]                      [1]            [2]       [3]

Urban pop. share            1.727***        1.674***        1.684***          0.396           0.277     0.335
                             [3.010]         [2.877]         [2.900]         [0.485]         [0.336]   [0.409]
LA_dummy                                      0.047                                           0.136
                                             [0.164]                                         [0.461]
C_dummy                                       0.440                                           0.547
                                             [0.903]                                         [1.089]
LAC_dummy                                                     0.141                                      0.233
                                                             [0.548]                                    [0.888]
Constant                    8.437***        8.435***        8.431***        8.867***        8.917***   8.873***
                             [32.29]         [32.12]         [32.17]         [14.07]         [14.05]    [14.07]

n                              146             146             146              146            146        146
R2                            0.059           0.065           0.061            0.002          0.011      0.007
                              0.053           0.045           0.048           -0.005         -0.010     -0.007
Dependent variable: ln(GDP per capita)
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level



Table A6.4: Regression results for relationship between urbanization and the share of national
GDP derived from agriculture
                               Cluster – GHS Pop (HDC only)                            Cluster – GHS Pop
                                [1]         [2]        [3]                      [4]            [5]       [6]

Agric. share                 -0.275**       -0.252**        -0.253**          0.011           0.034     0.025
                              [-2.532]       [-2.279]        [-2.303]        [0.141]         [0.411]   [0.303]
LA_dummy                                       0.046                                          0.012
                                             [1.118]                                         [0.414]
C_dummy                                        0.051                                          0.080
                                             [0.740]                                         [1.551]
LAC_dummy                                                     0.047                                      0.028
                                                             [1.289]                                    [1.042]
Constant                    0.459***        0.448***        0.448***        0.761***        0.753***   0.755***
                             [23.54]         [21.00]         [21.13]         [52.71]         [47.83]    [47.94]

n                              146             146             146              146            146        146
R2                            0.043           0.054           0.054            0.000          0.017      0.008
                              0.036           0.034           0.040           -0.007         -0.003     -0.006
Dependent variable: urban share of national population
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level




                                                            34
Table A6.5: Regression results for relationship between ln(GDP per capita) and urbanization
                              Cluster – World Pop (HDC only)                          Cluster – World Pop
                                [1]           [2]       [3]                    [5]             [6]        [7]

Urban pop. share             2.831**           2.043**       2.032**          0.244           0.480      0.555
                             [2.636]           [2.303]       [2.286]         [0.320]         [0.782]    [0.916]
LA_dummy                                      0.877***                                      0.999***
                                               [4.031]                                       [4.359]
C_dummy                                        1.259**                                      1.330***
                                               [3.537]                                       [3.532]
LAC_dummy                                                    0.947***                                   1.062***
                                                              [4.550]                                    [4.899]
Constant                     8.149***         7.833***       7.835***      8.751***         8.044***    8.002***
                              [25.94]          [26.58]        [26.67]       [20.43]          [21.43]     [21.56]

n                               40               40               40           40              40         40
R2                             0.155            0.475            0.458        0.003           0.408      0.395
                               0.132            0.431            0.429       -0.024           0.358      0.362
Dependent variable: ln(GDP per capita)
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level

Table A6.6: Regression results for relationship between urbanization and the share of national
GDP derived from agriculture
                              Cluster – World Pop (HDC only)                        Cluster – World Pop
                                [1]           [2]       [3]                     [5]          [6]        [7]

Agric. share                -0.542***        -0.684***      -0.655***         -0.241          -0.547     -0.588
                             [-3.253]         [-3.105]       -3.055]         [-0.845]        [-1.480]   [-1.635]
LA_dummy                                       -0.033                                         -0.117
                                              [-0.744]                                       [-1.587]
C_dummy                                        -0.073                                         -0.059
                                              [-1.049]                                       [-0.504]
LAC_dummy                                                      -0.036                                    -0.112
                                                              [-0.843]                                  [-1.541]
Constant                     0.338***         0.381***       0.374***       0.567***        0.671***    0.679***
                              [11.44]          [7.084]        [7.125]        [11.23]         [7.439]     [7.717]

n                               40               40               40            40             40         40
R2                             0.218            0.242            0.233         0.018          0.086      0.078
                               0.197            0.179            0.191        -0.007          0.010      0.028
Dependent variable: urban share of national population
Notes: t-statistics in brackets. *** Significant at 1 % level; ** at 5 % level; * at 10 % level




                                                            35
