                                                   WPS8002


Policy Research Working Paper                     8002




        Do Foreign Investors Underperform?
      An Empirical Decomposition into Style and Flows

                                 Alvaro Pedraza
                                  Fredy Pulga
                                  Jose Vasquez




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8002


  Abstract
 This paper studies the trading behavior and performance                            higher transaction costs on days when they trade multi-
 of foreign investors with different management styles.                             ple stocks in the same direction, buy (sell) the same stock
 The analysis uses a comprehensive Colombian data with                              multiple times, and make large trades near the daily clos-
 complete transaction records and unique investor identi-                           ing time. Meanwhile, foreign active funds trade at more
 fication, and finds that the aggregate under-performance                           favorable prices and display higher risk-adjusted returns
 of foreign investors is attributable to foreign passive                            than any other investor group, including domestic funds
 funds, that is, those that replicate a benchmark index.                            with similar active management. The findings highlight the
 These funds pay higher prices to increase the speed of                             potential costs of index investing in developing countries
 their trades to accommodate daily flows proportionally                             or in securities with low trading activity (small stocks).
 to their index before market closing. Passive funds face




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at apedrazamorales@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
 Do Foreign Investors Underperform? An Empirical

                  Decomposition into Style and Flows

                      Alvaro Pedraza∗               Fredy Pulga†             Jose Vasquez‡§




       JEL Classiﬁcation: G12, G14, G23

Keywords: Foreign investors, index funds, performance, transactional data.




   ∗
     Corresponding author: World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington D.C. 20433, USA. Tel: +1 202 779
4158. E-mail address: apedrazamorales@worldbank.org.
   †
     Universidad de la Sabana, Km 7 Autopista Norte, Bogota, Colombia.
   ‡
     World Bank and School of Economics, Navarra University, Garcia de Paredes 55 28023, Madrid, Spain.
   §
     We have beneﬁted from the comments of Sushant Acharya, Pablo Cuba, Aart Kraay, Pete Kyle, Soledad Martinez,
Claudia Ruiz, and Giorgo Sertsios. We thank Adriana Cardenas and other members of the Colombian Stock Exchange
Research Committee for providing the data and for multiple discussions. We are also grateful for funding received for
this project from the Strategic Research Program. The views expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors.
They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World
Bank and its aﬃliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent.
1    Introduction

      “Passive investing has become investors default, driving billions into funds that track

      indexes. It’s transforming Wall Street, corporate boardrooms and the life of the neigh-

      borhood broker.” (Wall Street Journal, October 17, 2016)


    The relative performance of foreign versus domestic investors has been of long-standing interest

to ﬁnancial economists. Whether foreign individuals or more sophisticated foreign money managers

under-perform local investors is often attributed to an information advantage of one group over the

other. For instance, domestic investors might have an edge due to cultural aﬃnity and familiarity

with local conditions (e.g. Chan et al., 2005; Portes and Rey, 2005; Leuz et al., 2010). In fact,

the international ﬁnance literature has often used the view that distance reduces the quality of

information to explain home bias, the volatility of capital ﬂows, and herding (Brennan and Cao,

1997; Lewis, 1999; Karolyi and Stulz, 2003). Conversely, foreign investors might have an advantage

if they are more experienced or if they acquire private information from their presence in multiple

markets (Froot and Ramadorai, 2008; Albuquerque et al., 2009). Average performance, however,

does not only depend on skills in identifying investment opportunities, but also on various constraints

faced by fund managers. For example, on the manager’s discretion to accommodate ﬂows if the

fund is actively or passively managed (index funds).

    In this paper we study an issue that is fundamental to understanding the behavior of global

investors in equity markets —the eﬀects of management style on performance. Namely, how do

trading strategies and portfolio returns of foreign funds diﬀer from domestic funds with similar

style of active management? Answering this question would be naturally useful to individual and

institutional investors with international portfolios. Moreover, the issue is particularly relevant

for at least two reasons. First, cross-border portfolio investments are increasingly important in

global markets. Since 2001, the share of equity holdings by foreign investors grew from 19 percent

of the world’s stock market capitalization to more than 35 percent by the end of 2015 (IMF,

2016). Second, much of this recent growth has been in explicit index funds (Cremers et al., 2016).

Notwithstanding their popularity among investors, little is known about how managers of these

funds trade to accommodate net ﬂows, and how their performance compares to local funds with



                                                  1
passive management.

    While the eﬀect of distance on performance has been extensively studied in the literature, the role

that active management plays on the investment strategies of foreign asset managers has received

little attention. A growing number of empirical studies use complete transaction records within

a country, and compare foreign-managed versus domestic-managed funds. Some of these studies

provide support in favor of the superior skills of domestic investors (Hau, 2001; Choe et al., 2005;

   r´
Dvoˇak, 2005), others document that foreign investors outperform locals (Grinblatt and Keloharju,

2000; Seasholes, 2004; Barber et al., 2009), and some ﬁnd no diﬀerences in performance (Seasholes

and Zhu, 2010). Despite using comprehensive transaction level data, most of these studies do not

distinguish within each group (foreign or domestic), whether one investor is making all the poorly-

performing trades or if the trades are performed by diﬀerent investors.1 In other words, these studies

do not account for within group heterogeneity that might explain portfolio returns, and what they

estimate is an average performance gap between locals and foreigners.

    We investigate the issue of style and distance using a unique transaction data set from the

Colombian Stock Exchange. The advantage and novel aspect of the data is that for all the transac-

tions in the market between January 2, 2006, and January 29, 2016, we have an investor identiﬁer

on both sides of the transaction which allows us to track each fund or individual over time. Given

the panel structure of the data, we are not only able to compare average performance between

foreign and domestic investors, but we can also study the extent to which performance is related

to investor/fund characteristics, such as style and fund ﬂows. Despite the vast segment of the lit-

erature that focuses on investors who are separated by borders, to the best of our knowledge, we

are the ﬁrst to use information on active management together with complete transaction history

to analyze the relative skill and performance of foreign versus local investors.

    We ﬁnd that on average, foreign investors trade at unfavorable prices relative to domestic in-

vestors. The average disadvantage relative to domestic institutions is 8 basis points for stock

purchases and 7 basis points for sales. These estimates are quantitatively similar to those reported

by Agarwal et al. (2009) in Indonesia over an 8 year period, and smaller but in the same order of
   1
     This is typically a consequence of data restrictions in order to guarantee the anonymity of each trader. The
exceptions are Hau (2001) and Seasholes and Zhu (2010). Hau (2001) uses data on a group of professional traders but
does not study the role of active versus passive management. Seasholes and Zhu (2010) on the other hand focuses on
individual investors.




                                                        2
magnitude to the ﬁndings of Choe et al. (2005) for the Republic of Korea between 1996 and 1998.

   The comprehensiveness of our data set allows us to go beyond just the documentation of ag-

gregate trading losses and make several contributions relative to prior research. We begin by

documenting that the disadvantage of foreign investors in our sample is attributed to passively-

managed foreign funds, that is, those whose strategy consist of replicating the return on an index

by buying and holding all (or almost all) index stocks in the oﬃcial index proportions. In addition

to paying higher prices for stock purchases and receiving less when they sell, these funds display

inferior risk-adjusted returns than foreign active funds. Our evidence suggests that managers of

foreign passive funds are paying a price for a trading style that diﬀers from the trading style of

other investors. In particular, worst trades are on days when they are trying to accommodate large

ﬂows in similar proportions to their benchmark index by (i) trading multiple stocks in the same

direction, (ii) buying (selling) the same stock multiple times, and (iii) making large trades at the

end of the trading session.

   In addition to comparing performance across foreign investors with diﬀerent styles of manage-

ment, we also compare the performance of foreign versus local investors by level of active manage-

ment. We ﬁnd that the yearly returns of passive foreign funds are between 1.19 to 1.90 percentage

points smaller than domestic funds with similar passive strategies. This suggests that index invest-

ing by itself cannot explain the under-performance of foreign investors.

   In order to understand outstanding characteristics which may be driving performance, we ana-

lyze the timing of ﬂows across funds. The key ﬁnding is that daily net ﬂows of passive funds are

strongly correlated in the cross-section. Speciﬁcally, we show that managers of passive funds trade

more intensively on days when other passive funds are trading in the same direction. Furthermore,

the large imbalance of daily ﬂows by foreign passive funds appears to be generating a signiﬁcant

price pressure on the stocks that they trade. We show that trades by this group are correlated with

same-day returns, which suggests that foreign passive funds are paying a price for accommodating

their daily ﬂows.

   Importantly, both components —passive portfolio management and correlated ﬂows – are nec-

essary conditions to explain the magnitude of the under-performance of foreign investors. If ﬂow

imbalances by passive funds are large enough, in order to trade stocks in similar index proportions,

managers pay higher transaction costs to cling to their benchmark before the end of the trading


                                                 3
session, that is, they pay a price to increase the speed of their trades to comply with their invest-

ment style. Meanwhile, other investors with more discretion over their ﬂows appear to time their

transactions to take advantage of the common order ﬂow by passive funds.

       Our results need to be interpreted in the context of the market microstructure of the Colombian

stock market. For example, average trade size, market impact, and bid-ask spreads constraint the

speed at which managers can execute their trades. Depending on the liquidity of the underlying

asset, managers with private information would optimally split their trades in multiple transactions,

perhaps even across several days (Kyle, 1985; Kyle and Obizhaeva, 2016). Passive fund managers

with little discretion over ﬂows, however, have a natural time limit to execute their trades, namely,

the end of the day. Consequently, managers end up paying higher transaction costs in order to meet

their “deadline” and generate lower returns.

       Our evidence is related to an extensive empirical literature that studies the relative value of active

versus passive management. Numerous papers document a poor track record for active funds, with

average returns for investors signiﬁcantly below those of passive benchmarks (e.g. Wermers, 2000;

                         astor and Stambaugh, 2002; Avramov and Wermers, 2006). More recently,
Bollen and Busse, 2001; P´

Cremers and Petajisto (2009), using a new measure of active management (Active Share), ﬁnd that

managers with more active trading strategies exhibit relatively more skill than less active managers.

We also use Active Share to asses the level of active management of the funds in our sample. We ﬁnd

that Active Share predicts fund performance among foreign funds. More importantly, we contribute

to the literature by examining in intra-day trading patterns by level of active management and by

documenting the potential costs of passive investing.

       In our paper, instead of trying to identify informational advantages of local versus foreign

investors,2 we document a particular type of disadvantage —the cost of index investing in a small

equity market. We would expect for similar ﬁndings in other developing countries, or in small

(illiquid) stocks in developed countries. Overall, our results challenge the conventional wisdom that

passive funds are, unconditionally, the best alternative for investors. While this could be the case

for U.S. households investing in their home country (French, 2008), it is possible that for global

strategies, index investing might deliver disappointing results.
   2
    Other examples in this literature rely on lower frequency data, e.g. monthly or quarterly holdings. Most recently,
Ferreira et al. (2015) use a sample of 32 countries to compare the performance of institutional investors in stocks of
their home country to the performance of money managers located in other countries.


                                                          4
    Finally, we should point out that our decomposition of performance in terms of style and ﬂows

does not rule out informational advantages across investors. For instance, unsophisticated individual

investors seeking exposure to global markets might optimally self-select into index funds. In fact,

the positive relation between ﬂows across passive funds suggests that investors of these funds might

be less informed, and perhaps more likely to purchase or redeem shares in their index funds at the

same time. On the other hand, active foreign investors in our sample generate yearly returns that

are 3.66 to 4.28 percentage points greater than active funds managed domestically. These results

are consistent with an advantage for this group, perhaps because they are more skilled or have

access to valuable information form their presence in several markets (Albuquerque et al., 2009).

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we provide some background on

the Colombian institutional setting and describe the data. In section 3 we document the general

trading patterns across diﬀerent investor types and styles. We study the relation between distance,

style, and performance in Section 4 and analyze the role of ﬂows on performance in Section 5. We

conclude in Section 6.



2     Background and Data

2.1   The Colombian Stock Exchange (CSE)

Our data span the time between January 2, 2006, and January 29, 2016. During this period, the CSE

implemented several changes in order to meet international standards. Before February, 2009, the

market operated as a continuous trading system from 8:00 to 13:00 (local time) on weekdays where

participants were only allowed to place limit orders. After February 9, 2009, a new trading platform

was launched, allowing market and stop orders. In addition, a batch auction was introduced during

the last ﬁve minutes of each trading day. During this interval, trades are collected and the system

estimates an adjudication price at the maximum volume allocated among the tenders, with the

auction closing randomly in +/- 60 seconds around the daily closing time. The auction price is also

the daily closing price for each stock. Starting January 3, 2011, the trading session was extended

to run from 8:30 to 15:00 with other rules remaining the same. Finally, on February 6, 2012, the

market synchronized its daily trading session with the New York Stock Exchange, from 9:30 NYT



                                                 5
to 16:00 NYT.3

    Trades are submitted via authorized brokers registered at the exchange and buy and sell orders

meet via the Automated Trading System. Short-sells were allowed during our entire period of study,

however, investors were required to close any short position by the end of each trading day.4 There

are no individual or aggregate ownership limits on foreign investors, and they are allowed to either

reinvest or transfer earnings such as dividends, coupons or capital gains with little restrictions.

Since the Central Bank has discretionary control on net currency ﬂows, including those to equity

instruments, foreign investors are required to report their initial investments and any subsequent

transactions that involve any currency exchange.


2.2    Data

The database, which includes all transactions in the period, was provided by the CSE. The data

disclose the date and time of each transaction, a stock identiﬁer, order type (buy or sell), transaction

price, number of shares, and broker ID. The key novel aspect of the data, and most importantly

for our analysis, is that every transaction record has a unique investor ID number that allows us

to track all the transactions for each investor throughout the entire sample period. In addition,

the transaction records also disclose whether an investor is foreign or domestic. Domestic investors

are further classiﬁed into individuals or institutions. Institutions can be broadly categorized into

corporations, pension funds, mutual funds, banks, insurance companies, and brokerage ﬁrms trading

on their own accounts. It is important to point out that our database does not allow us to distinguish

whether a foreign investor is an individual or an institutional investor. Based on this, for the rest

of the paper we sometimes refer to foreign investors interchangeably as funds.5

    There were over 13 million transactions during the 10-year period. Table 1-Panel A presents the

share of trading volume attributable to diﬀerent investor types and the number of investors by type

over two sub-samples: 2006-2010 and 2011-2016. Domestic institutions dominate the Colombian
   3
     For non-liquid stocks, an opening auction starts 15 minutes earlier, but trading at this time represents less than
0.01 percent of the daily traded value.
   4
     Other rules include a suspension mechanism on each stock based on volatility relative to a “base price” published
on a daily basis. When a stock price changes more than 10% relative to its reference price, the exchange suspends
trading in that stock temporarily for 30 minutes. In addition, when the representative stock index (COLCAP)
decreases more than 10% during a trading session, all transactions are suspended until the next trading day.
   5
     Informal conversations with registered brokers suggest that most (and in several cases all) of their foreign clients
are institutions.




                                                           6
stock market accounting for just over half of the total value traded in both periods. Corporations,

pension funds, mutual funds, and brokerage ﬁrms account for 98 percent of this volume over the

entire sample, with banks, insurance companies and other institutions representing a small fraction

of the trading activity of domestic institutions. Consistent with international trends, there is a

growing presence of foreign investors over time. The number of foreign investors nearly doubled

from 1,440 to 2,830,6 and the share of total traded value by these group increased from 3.8% in the

ﬁrst half of the sample to 19.1% in the second half. Figures 1 and 2 plot the time series of the share

of traded value and share of market capitalization respectively by investor type. These ﬁgures also

highlight the increasing importance of foreign investors in recent years.

       According to Table 1-Panel B, the average number of trades by domestic institutions and foreign

investors are 317 and 316 respectively. The distribution of trades amongst diﬀerent institutions,

however, is quite heterogeneous, with brokerage ﬁrms and mutual funds performing the largest

number of trades on average. We restrict our analysis by considering only those investors who

traded at least a 100 times over the 10 year period.7

       We collect stock and market data from Bloomberg, Datastream and the Superintendencia Fi-

nanciera de Colombia (Colombian Financial Superintendency, SFC). We obtain stocks returns,

share price, trading volume, and bid-ask spread from Bloomberg and book value of equity, shares

outstanding, and aggregate institutional ownership from Datastream and the SFC. The number of

traded stocks ﬂuctuated between 62 and 71 during our sample period.8

       In Table 2, we present basic descriptive statistics relating to the stock market during our sample

period. According to the table, the performance of the Colombian market closely mimicked that

of the Latin American region. The table is also indicative of increased participation by foreign

investors in the CSE. Despite the large amount of outﬂows by foreigners during 2014 and 2015,

accumulated foreign net ﬂows are positive over the entire sample period.
   6
     The corresponding numbers for domestic institutions were 6,834 and 10,344 respectively.
   7
     We are aware that this cut might bias the sample to those investors who have been active in the market for a
longer period. We performed our analysis by alternatively reducing the threshold to 50 trades and also for a higher
threshold of 200 trades. These changes do not aﬀect any our ﬁndings.
   8
     In calculating these numbers, we treat ordinary and preferred shares issued by the same ﬁrm as diﬀerent stocks.




                                                         7
2.3       Portfolio Construction

In order to construct our preferred measures of investor characteristics and styles, we use information

on portfolio holdings of market participants over the sample. A limitation of our data set is that

we do not directly observe these portfolios. However, we can build a proxy for actual holdings since

we observe all transactions that were undertaken by each investor over the entire sample. Notice

that if we were to observe portfolios at the beginning of the sample period, then our proxy would

be exactly equal to the portfolios at each point in time for each investor. We begin by imposing a

zero initial holding condition for each investor the ﬁrst date that she appears in the data set. We

accumulate daily stock holdings by investor over time. In order to account for the short-sell ban,

we take the investor-stock most negative daily position in the entire time series and add that value

to the zero initial holdings. This adjustment ensures that no investor holds a negative position in

any stock at the end of any trading day. We make appropriate adjustments for stock splits and

initial public oﬀering dates.

        Despite our portfolio measure being a proxy, we are conﬁdent that it captures a signiﬁcant

amount of actual holdings. This is especially true for those investors who ﬁrst entered the Colombian

stock market after January 2, 2006, since the assumption that these investors had zero holdings at

the start of the sample is exact. Since many of the foreign investors entered the Colombian stock

market during our sample period, the portfolios of these investors are likely to be more accurate.

Furthermore, since we have 10 years of data, provided that portfolio turnover is large enough, errors

in our measure from diﬀerences in initial conditions would diminish very quickly over time in the

sample.9



3        Investor/Fund Style

3.1       Active versus passive management

Our data set does not allow us to observe investor/fund names or funds’ prospectus, i.e. we do

not have information on a fund self-declared investment strategy, and thus, we cannot distinguish

directly between index funds and active funds. In broad terms, passive management of a portfolio
    9
    For instance, Cremers and Pareek (2015) ﬁnd that the average turnover for an all-equity U.S. mutual funds is 85
percent annually. This would imply that the average fund would trade their entire portfolio in 1.2 years.


                                                        8
consists of replicating the return on an index with a strategy of buying and holding all (or almost

all) index stocks in the oﬃcial index proportions. Active management, in turn, can be deﬁned as

deviations from passive management.

       We infer active or passive management strategies by computing the Active Share (Cremers and

Petajisto, 2009) for each investor or fund. The measure represents the share of portfolio holdings

that diﬀers from a benchmark index holdings and is calculated as:

                                                        N
                                                    1
                                Active Sharei,t   =           |wi,s,t − windex,s,t |                              (1)
                                                    2
                                                        s=1


where wi,s,t and windex,s,t are the portfolio weights of stock s in fund i and the benchmark index at

time t, respectively, and the sum is taken over the universe of stocks. We compute this measure

by investor/fund at a daily frequency. For the benchmark index, we use the two most popular

Colombian equity indices that track the overall market performance - COLCAP, which is a value

weighted index, and IGBC, which is a liquidity and value weighted index. For each investor, we

compute (1) using each of these indices separately and then set the investor’s Active Share to be

the minimum of the two values.

       Using Active Share to characterize management style has an advantage over using self-declared

fund style which may not accurately reﬂect actual investment behavior. For example, Cremers et al.

(2016) ﬁnd that 20% of worldwide mutual fund assets are managed by “closet indexers” - investors

who declared themselves as active, but in reality, tracked their respective benchmarks closely as

passive investors would have.

       Table 3 reports the share of assets under management (AUM) by investors with an Active

Share below 60 percent. We call this group passive investors.10 Consistent with global trends on

institutional money management, the share of total assets managed by passive domestic institutions

and passive foreign investors increased in the second half of the sample period, from 53.5 percent

to 71.7 percent for domestic institutions and from 29.4 percent to 64.8 percent for foreign investors.

Among domestic institutions, mutual funds and in particular pension funds largely fall under the

category of passively managed. According to Pedraza (2015), Colombian pension funds face a
  10
    This 60 percent threshold has been commonly used in the literature to classify portfolio management as active
or passive (see for example Cremers et al. (2016)). While we use this threshold in this section to present descriptive
statistics, throughout the paper we sort foreign investors by quartile of Active Share or use the continuous measure.



                                                          9
ﬁnancial penalty if they fail to generate a minimum return relative to a peer- and market-based

benchmark. Hence, it is not surprising that the portfolios of these funds replicate to a large extent

the market index. Figure 3 shows the monthly time series of the share of AUM by investor type.

The ﬁgure displays the upward trend of passively managed funds by domestic institutions and the

sharp rise of foreign passive funds after 2008.11

       Given the unique nature of our transaction database with investor ID, we document how passive

and active investors trade during the day. Table 4 summarizes the intra-day proﬁle of traded value

when we divide the day into eight time intervals.12 Panel A in the table reports the proportion of the

traded value by each group relative to the total traded value in the interval. Excluding the closing

batch, domestic institutions account for more than half of the value traded during each period, with

foreign investors increasing their relative importance in the afternoons. In the closing batch, foreign

investors represent 39.9 percent of the interval, with passive funds accounting for most of those

trades (30.9 percent of the interval). Panel B in the table reports the proportion of traded value

in each interval relative to the total daily value traded by investor group. Domestic institutions

and individuals execute most of their trades in the early hours of the day. On the contrary, passive

foreign funds trade on average 39.8 percent of their daily traded value in the closing batch. While

this behavior is more pronounced for the latter years in the sample, passively-managed foreign funds

were consistently very active in the last ﬁve minutes of the trading session since the closing batch

auction was introduced in 2009 (Table 4-Panel C).

       Trading at or near closing prices might be an eﬃcient strategy for open-end funds. For example,

mutual funds are “forwarded priced,” which means that while investors can place orders to buy or

sell shares throughout the day, these orders will be executed at the same price, i.e. the end-of-day

net asset value of the fund. A fund manager that trades at closing prices mitigates the timing risk

due to non-simultaneous purchases or sales of the fund shares and the underlying portfolio. In this

scenario, the price that new shareholders pay for shares that are created coincides with the value of

the underlying securities of the fund. Conversely, the price that old shareholders receive for their
  11
      According to Factset Institutional Equity Ownership Database, the percentage of assets managed by foreign
owned self-declared index funds grew from 0.1 percent in the ﬁrst quarter of 2006 percent to 33.6 percent in the last
quarter of 2015. Our time series should capture “closet-indexers” as well as self-declared index funds.
   12
      The sample includes the period between February 6, 2012, and January 29, 2016 when the CSE synchronized
its operations with the NYSE. The table is quantitatively similar if we include the period from February 9, 2011, to
February 6, 2012, when the market traded from 8:30 to 15:00 hours and if we match the trading session.




                                                         10
redemptions matches the value of the underlying securities in the fund. Interestingly, only foreign

passive funds display such intensive trading at the end of the trading session. For example, foreign

active funds only trade 13 percent of their daily traded value in the closing batch and domestic

mutual funds with passive management style (i.e. those with Active Share below 60) trade only 14

percent of their daily traded value at the closing batch (Figure 4).


3.2   Measures of trading activity

In addition to measuring the investor/fund management style with Active Share, we employ other

common proxies of trading activity. We measure the Fund Turnover Ratio as the minimum of

aggregate sales and aggregate purchases of stocks, divided by the average of the net asset value

of the fund. We calculate the Fund Turnover Ratio at yearly frequencies for each investor/fund

in the database. We also use equity ﬂows normalized by the total AUM at the beginning of each

month. For each investor/fund we report the diﬀerent number of stocks held in the portfolio and

the diﬀerent number of stocks traded during each period.

   Table 5 reports mean and median values for our variables of interest by investor group. The

average foreign investor manages a portfolio of 20.7 billion pesos (6.5 million USD) with yearly

turnover of 0.9, has monthly net ﬂows of 2.8 percent relative to the AUM (0.14 percent at daily

frequency), holds 9.3 diﬀerent stocks, and trades more than 3 stocks every month. Among domestic

institutions, pension funds manage the largest equity portfolios, have the lowest turnover ratio and

hold more than 24 diﬀerent stocks.

   Table 6 reports mean values of the relevant variables by investor type and sorted by Active

Share. Groups are constructed using the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile from the distribution of

Active Share among foreign investors. We then use these cuts to sort domestic individuals and

institutions. According to the table, investors in the lowest group of Active Share, manage more

assets on average, display the lowest turnover, and hold more stocks in their portfolios. In addition,

investors and funds in the low Active Share group trade the most number of stocks on average. For

example, foreign investors in the lowest group of Active Share trade over 5 stocks each month.




                                                 11
4     Investor Performance

In order to test whether foreign investors are at a disadvantage, we use two common measures of

performance. In addition to documenting aggregate diﬀerences between local and foreign investors,

we study diﬀerences by level of active management and other investor/fund characteristics that

correlate with performance.


4.1    Average trading price

Our ﬁrst measure of performance is the Value-Weighted-Average-Price (VWAP). The VWAP for

each stock s, on day d by investor i is measured as:

                                                           Bi,s,d
                                         VWAP i,s,d =             × 100                                     (2)
                                                           As,d

where Bi,s,d is the volume-weighted average price for all purchases and sales separately for each

investor i, and As,d is the volume-weighted average price for all trades. This price ratio is computed

for buys and sells separately and captures how much more a particular investor paid (received)

relative to the average price of the day when she buys (sells).

    The VWAP measure oﬀers at least two advantages. First, it captures short-term market timing

ability and does not require the deﬁnition of an asset pricing model. Second, since the measure

has been used by Choe et al. (2005) and Agarwal et al. (2009), we can directly compare our

results to those in these studies and extend previous ﬁndings by decomposing performance into

management styles and other investor/fund characteristics.13 One limitation to the VWAP, however,

is that by comparing trading among investors at intra-day frequencies, the measure fails to capture

performance at longer horizons. More precisely, the measure does not identify whether a purchase

that was initially executed at a price above the average daily price turns out to be proﬁtable during

the investor’s holding period. Moreover, if a trade was part of a strategy by the investor which

involves several stocks, the individual trade might be deemed as inferior but the overall strategy

could be successful. In order to consider total portfolio performance, we also measure risk-adjusted
  13
     Most recently, Agudelo et al. (2015) use the VWAP measure to compare performance between diﬀerent groups of
investors in Colombia. The authors, however, do not have investor ID and thus cannot study performance by style
which is the main focus of our paper.



                                                      12
returns by investor/fund in the following section.

       Averages of VWAP by investor type are presented in Table 7-Panel A. Foreign investors pay 4

basis points (bp) more than the average daily price when they buy stocks, while domestic institutions

and domestic individuals pay 4 and 8 bp less than the average price respectively. The 8 and

12 bp diﬀerences between foreign and both domestic institutions and individuals are statistically

signiﬁcant. For sells, foreign investors receive 7 bp less than domestic institutions and 8 bp relative

to domestic individuals. These results indicate that on a round-trip trade, foreign investors face

greater transactions costs on the order of 15 bp compared with domestic institutions and 20 bp

with respect to domestic individuals.14 Furthermore, an investor who trades six times per year

would contemplate a drag on performance in excess of 1 percent of her total traded value. Given

the yearly average buying value of foreign investors of 4.3 trillion COP (1.4 billion USD) and their

yearly selling value of 3.4 trillion COP (1.06 billion USD), their under-performance is equivalent

to paying 6.2 billion COP (2.0 million USD) every year on transaction costs. The documented

disadvantage is quantitatively similar to that reported by Agarwal et al. (2009) in Indonesia over

an 8 year period, and smaller but in the same order of magnitude to the one reported by Choe et

al. (2005) for Korea between 1996 and 1998.

       In Panel B of Table 7, we report the average prices paid by foreigners sorted by level of Active

Share. Foreign investors in the lowest quartile of Active Share pay the highest price for purchases

while receiving the lowest price for their sells. On the contrary, foreign investors in the upper 50th

percentile of the Active Share distribution do not trade at prices signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the

average price of the day, with daily purchases and sells insigniﬁcantly diﬀerent from 100.

       Given the distinct patterns of intra-day trading activity between passive and active foreign

investors documented in the previous section, we report average transaction prices by trading inter-

val. Table 7-Panel C reports the average trading price of passive and active foreigners based on the

execution time of each trade. We distinguish between transactions executed in the closing batch

and those that are executed during the continuous trading session.15 According to the table, for-

eign passive investors signiﬁcantly trade at worst prices in both intervals. However, these investors
  14
      The results are similar if we disaggregate the sample into trades of diﬀerent sizes (results not shown in the
table). For smaller trades, foreign investors’ under-performance relative to individuals is smaller but still statistically
signiﬁcant.
   15
      Panel C only includes trades after February 9, 2009.




                                                            13
pay signiﬁcantly higher prices during the closing batch (the diﬀerence is 9 bps with t-statistic of

11.68). In other words, passively-managed foreign funds pay more precisely when they trade more

intensively.

       Actively-managed foreign funds also pay higher prices for purchases at the closing batch. Con-

versely, these investors trade at fair prices during the continuous trading session when most of their

operations are executed (VWAP for purchases and sells are indistinguishable from 100 during this

time). It is possible that foreign passive funds trade after prices have move against them due to

momentum strategies. Alternatively, the diﬀerence in transaction prices across groups might result

from price pressure exerted by passively-managed foreign funds in the stocks that they trade. We

come back to these explanations in Section 5 where we study the relation between market returns

and ﬂows disaggregated by investor type and by management style.

       So far, we document that foreign investors trade at worse prices relative to both domestic

institutions and domestic individuals. Among foreign investors, those with low Active Share and

with more transactions later in the day trade at more unfavorable prices. One limitation to the non-

parametric analysis above is that it does not account for diﬀerences in stock-ﬁrm characteristics. For

example, whether greater transaction costs are concentrated in smaller and less liquid stocks. To

account for these diﬀerences, we use linear regression analysis to further investigate the disadvantage

of foreign institutions. We follow Choe et al. (2005) and control for ﬁrm size, book-to-market ratio,

stock and market returns, and stock liquidity. More importantly for our analysis, since we track

each investor throughout the sample, we introduce our measure of active management, Active Share,

and include other controls for investor trading activity, i.e. Fund Turnover Ratio, daily net ﬂows,

and the number of diﬀerent stocks traded in each day. To capture any residual diﬀerences resulting

from trades coming later in the day, we control for the share of the traded value in each stock

executed by the investor in the closing batch. Appendix A presents the list of variables used in the

regression analysis with their corresponding deﬁnition and source. Table 8 reports the correlations

between fund/investor variables.

       Our dependent variable is ∆VWAPi,s,d , deﬁned as the diﬀerence in the daily (d) average price

that foreign investor i pays (for purchases) on stock j (VWAPi,d,j ), relative to the average price

paid by all domestic institutions (VWAPd,j ) in the same stock.16 We estimate the ∆V W AP for
  16
       We also perform similar estimation relative to domestic individuals. The results are qualitatively similar and are


                                                            14
purchases and sells separately using the following model:



                               ∆VWAPi,s,d = γYs,d + δMd + βXi,s,d + εi,s,d                                    (3)

    Ys,d is the vector of stock-ﬁrm characteristics, Md contains market variables, and Xi,s,d is the

vector with information on investor/fund style. Tables 9 and 10 present regression estimates. Table

9 includes stock ﬁxed-eﬀects and t-statistics are calculated from standard errors clustered at the

fund level. Following Petersen (2009), Table 10 accounts for serial correlation parametrically by

including time dummies, in addition to controlling for stock ﬁxed-eﬀects and cluster in the fund

dimension.17 The disadvantage of this methodology is that it omits any variable with market

information, e.g. market daily returns.

    The ﬁrst four regressions in Tables 9 and 10 (columns 1 to 4), compare average purchases

between foreign and domestic institutions, and the last four regressions (columns 5 to 8) compare

average sells. According to Table 9, foreign investors trade at more favorable prices on days of low

market volatility. The coeﬃcients for opening-to-close stock returns are positive and statistically

signiﬁcant in all speciﬁcations, which implies that foreign investors pay higher prices relative to

domestic institutions on stocks with positive daily returns and receive less when they sell stocks with

negative same-day returns. In regressions (5) through (8) the coeﬃcient for stock price sensitivity,

which proxies for stock liquidity, is negative and statistically signiﬁcant. This ﬁnding suggests that

foreign investors are at a disadvantage when selling stocks with lower liquidity. Also, the evidence

indicates that foreign investors sell larger stocks at better prices (Table 10).

    We now turn to the investor/fund variables. We ﬁnd that the disadvantage of foreign investors

is more pronounced for passively-managed funds and for those with low turnover. Coeﬃcients for

Active Share and turnover are negative for purchases and positive for sells in all the regressions. In

columns (2) and (3) we include the number of diﬀerent stocks that the fund is buying during the

day, and columns (6) and (7) include the number of diﬀerent stocks that the fund is selling. The

results indicate that foreign funds trade at worse prices on days when they are trading multiple

stocks in the same direction. Moreover, foreign investors make the worst trades on days in which a
available upon request.
  17
     Note that while the Fama-MacBeth approach (Fama and MacBeth, 1973) would eﬃciently correct for serial
correlation in the error term, one would still need to account for the stock and fund cross-sectional correlation.




                                                       15
large portion of their traded value is executed at the closing batch.18

       While some of the results would suggest that foreign investors do worse on stocks with greater

information asymmetries, we ﬁnd strong evidence that style plays a key role in explaining perfor-

mance. In particular, the disadvantage of foreign investors is concentrated among passive funds. It

appears that these funds are paying a price for a trading style that diﬀers from the trading style of

other investors.


4.2      Risk-Adjusted Returns

We use our estimates of monthly equity holdings and the observed net ﬂows to calculate the monthly
                                                               V Fi,t −N Fi,t
gross rate of returns for each fund, i.e. 1 + Ri,t =             V Fi,t−1 .     We use the cross-sectional variation

to see how returns vary between domestic and foreign funds, and between actively-managed versus

passively-managed funds. We adjust for heterogeneity in risk taking and in style by introducing

various performance benchmarks that account for the possibility that funds load diﬀerently on

small-cap stocks, value stock, and price momentum strategies. To be precise, we adjust monthly

fund returns in three diﬀerent ways: (i) We calculate market-adjusted returns by subtracting the

returns of a market index, (ii) we adjust returns using the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)

and (iii) the Carhart four-factor model (Carhart, 1997).

       The portfolios that make up our performance benchmarks are the return on the market index in

excess of the one-month Colombian T-bill rate (MARKET),19 the returns to the Fama and French

(1993) SMB (small stocks minus large stocks) and HML (high book-to-market stocks minus low

book-to-market stocks) portfolios, and the returns-to-price momentum portfolio WML (winners

minus losers, constructed based on a twelve-month formation period and a one-month holding

period).

       Since we are interested in the relationship between management style and performance, we sort

domestic and foreign funds at the beginning of each month into four groups of Active Share. We

then track these eight portfolios for one month and use the entire time series of their monthly
  18
     In the estimation results in columns (4) and (8), we exclude the variable “Number of Stocks”. The correlation
between the number of diﬀerent stocks traded during a day and the proportion of the daily trades performed in the
closing batch is 0.53 for purchases and 0.56 for sales. In other words, foreign investors trading multiple stocks in the
same direction during a day are more likely to trade more intensively at the closing batch.
  19
     We use two other measures for the risk-free rate, the monthly return on US T-Bills in Colombian pesos and the
Colombian deposit rate. Our results are unchanged when using these proxies for the risk-free rate. We omit these
results for brevity.


                                                          16
returns to calculate the loadings to the various factors for each of these portfolios. For every month

in the sample period, each fund inherits the loading of one of these eight portfolios that it belongs

to. In other words, if a foreign fund stays in the same group of Active Share throughout its life, its

loading remain the same, but if it moves from one Active Share group to another during a certain

month, it inherits a new set of loadings which we use to adjust its next month’s performance.

       Table 11 reports the average market-adjusted returns and the loadings of the domestic and

foreign funds sorted by group of Active Share. We see that funds with higher Active Share tend to

have lower loadings on MARKET. For instance, while both foreign and domestic funds in the lowest

Active Share group have a market loading of 0.95 (according to the CAPM), the corresponding

loadings in the highest group of Active Share are 0.66 for foreign funds and 0.45 for domestic

funds. The negative relationship between Active Share and the market loading results almost by

construction, since funds with low Active Share are precisely those with similar holdings relative to

the market index.

       According to Table 11-Panel A, passively-managed foreign funds display lower market-adjusted

returns and smaller alphas than actively-managed foreign funds. For example, while foreign funds in

Group 4 report an alpha of 0.69% in the four-factor model, the corresponding alpha of foreign funds

in the lowest Active Share group is 0.21%. In other words, actively-managed foreign funds appear

to deliver higher risk-adjusted returns relative to foreign funds with passive management strategies.

For domestic investors (Table 11-Panel B), there is no apparent relation between performance and

Active Share.

       The lower risk-adjusted returns of passively-managed foreign funds complements our earlier

ﬁnding that passively-managed foreign funds buy (sell) stocks at higher (lower) prices. The result

is not straightforward since trading at unfavorable prices within a day is not necessarily equivalent

to poor performance in longer horizons. For instance, while the Spearman correlation between

market-adjusted returns and VWAP is negative for purchases and positive for sales suggesting that

investors trading at better prices tend to deliver higher returns, the correlations are only -18% and

8% respectively.20

       A potential concern to our current ﬁndings is that Active Share might be correlated with other
  20
    To calculate this correlation, we construct a monthly measure of VWAP by investor taking the value-weighted
average of the daily VWAP across stocks.




                                                      17
fund characteristics that are driving performance. For example, fund size might erode performance

because of trading costs associated with liquidity and price impact (Chen et al., 2004). Since passive

funds are larger (see Table 6), the reported under-performance of passively-managed foreign funds

might be a consequence of their size rather than their management style. To deal with the correlation

between Active Share with other fund characteristics, we analyze the eﬀect of past Active Share on

performance in a regression framework proposed by Fama and MacBeth (1973), where we control

for the eﬀects of other fund characteristics on performance. We use the following speciﬁcation

                                          3                      3
 ADJRETi,t = µ + β Foreigni +                 φa Groupa
                                                      i,t−1 +         δa Groupa
                                                                              i,t−1 × Foreigni + γXi,t−1 + εi,t
                                        a=1                     a=1
                                                                                          for i = 1, ..., N   (4)


       where ADJRETi,t is the return of fund i in month t adjusted by various performance benchmarks

and Xi,t−1 is a set of control variables that includes fund size, turnover, and net ﬂows. F oreign

is a dummy variable equal to 1 for foreign investors and zero otherwise. Groupa
                                                                              i,t−1 is a dummy

variable set to one if investor i at time t − 1 belongs to the Active Share group Groupa . We take the

estimates from these cross-sectional monthly regression and follow Fama and MacBeth (1973) in

taking their time series means and standard deviations to form our overall estimates. An advantage

of equation (4) is that we can directly compare diﬀerences in performance within an investor type

(domestic or foreign) and across levels of active management. Furthermore, we can test for a given

level of active management, the diﬀerences in performance by investor location.

       Table 12 presents the estimation results. Among foreign funds, those that are actively managed

outperform funds with passive strategies. The diﬀerence in risk-adjusted returns is both statistically

and economically signiﬁcant. Using the most conservative estimates, namely, those from the four-

factor model, actively-managed foreign funds outperform passive funds by 1.70 percent per year

(0.14 percent per month). Although these are gross returns, i.e. they do not take into account

management fees, the diﬀerence is above 0.8 percent, which is the average expense ratio that U.S.

active funds charge in excess of passive funds.21 We do not ﬁnd any diﬀerences in risk-adjusted

returns between the top and bottom groups of Active Share for domestic institutional investors.
  21
    According to Thomson Reuters Lipper, the average expense ratio of actively managed equity funds in the U.S. is
1.4 percent, while the average expense ratio of passive funds is 0.6 percent.




                                                       18
    Interestingly, when we compare foreign versus domestic funds within the same group of active

management, we ﬁnd that foreign funds in the highest level of Active Share display higher risk-

adjusted returns relative to their domestic counterparts. More precisely, according to the four-factor

model, foreign active funds’ rate of returns are greater than those of domestic active funds by 3.66

percent per year. While we do not test directly for stories of informational advantages, it is possible

that the group of active foreign investors may be more experienced on average. On the contrary, we

ﬁnd that passively-managed foreign funds exhibit lower risk-adjusted returns than domestic passive

funds (-1.19 percent per year).

    To summarize, the under-performance of foreign investors in the Colombian stock market is

attributable to passively-managed funds. These funds trade at worse prices and deliver lower risk-

adjusted returns relative to active funds. While the under-performance can be explained in part by

mechanical strategies such as buying and selling multiple stocks in the portfolio at the same time near

closing prices, the fact that domestic passively-managed funds have superior performance suggests

that there are other fund characteristics other than passive management that might explain the

under-performance of foreign funds. In the next section we study outstanding diﬀerences among

foreign and domestic institutions. In particular, we focus on fund ﬂows and discuss evidence of

feedback trading.



5     Correlated Flows and Momentum Trading

In this section, we document diﬀerences in net ﬂows across investor types and across funds with

diﬀerent degrees of active management. We also study whether investors’ demands are correlated

to contemporaneous returns, and whether investors display momentum behavior.


5.1   Cross-sectional Correlation in Equity Flows

We are interested in testing whether investors’ demands by management style are correlated in the

cross-section. To examine this question we use the dollar ratio measure of excess demand calculated

for each investor following Lakonishok et al. (1992). For a given day d, Dratioi,d is deﬁned as:

                                                S
                                                s=1 buysi,s,d   − sellsi,s,d
                                  Dratioi,d =   S
                                                                                                   (5)
                                                s=1 buysi,s,d   + sellsi,s,d

                                                   19
    where buysi,s,d are total purchases on stock s by fund i, and sellsi,s,d are total daily sells.

    We begin the analysis by estimating, for each investor, a time-series regression of the investor

daily excess demand (Dratioi,d ) on the excess demand by all investors in the same group of active

management (Dratio−i 22
                  d ):




                   Dratioi,d = αi + βi Dratio− i
                                             d + εi,d                               for d = 1, ..., D                  (6)

    Estimation of equation (6) includes days in which fund i is active. The empirical strategy follows

the same logic as the Fama-Macbeth methodology for each investor i. Here we run N time series

regressions and calculate the mean and standard error of the β coeﬃcient for each group of Active

Share, and separately for domestic and foreign investors. The average β captures the extent to

which daily ﬂows are correlated across investors in the same group. We standardized both the

dependent and independent variable such that both have zero mean and unit variance.23

    The results are reported in the ﬁrst column of Table 13. We ﬁnd strong evidence that demands

by passively-managed foreign funds are correlated in the cross-section. The coeﬃcient associated

with the contemporaneous demand of the foreign funds in the lowest Active Share group is 0.14 and

diﬀers signiﬁcantly from zero at the 1 percent level. Because the data are standardized, this suggests

that a one standard deviation increase in the same day demand by other passive funds is associated

with a 14 percent standard deviation greater demand of a passive fund. Since the regression only

has one independent variable, the coeﬃcient can also be directly interpreted as the cross-sectional

correlation between daily equity demands among passive foreign funds. For foreign investors in the

highest group of Active Share, the cross-sectional correlation between daily demands is negative

but indistinguishable from zero (-0.01 with a t-statistic of 0.71). For domestic passive funds, the

daily correlation across demands is positive at 2 percent, but signiﬁcantly smaller than for foreign

investors in the same group of Active Share.

    It is possible that the daily cross-sectional correlation across demands by passive funds may result

from momentum strategies, if a large fraction of passive funds follow market returns.24 To evaluate
   22
      To avoid spurious correlation between the two variables, specially for large funds, we exclude fund i from the
calculation of Dratio−   i
                       d .
   23
      In our speciﬁcations with multiple independent variables this will allow us to directly compare estimated coeﬃ-
cients.
   24
      There is extensive empirical evidence suggesting that institutional investors are momentum traders (e.g. Grinblatt
et al., 1995; Wermers, 2000; Sias, 2004). That is, institutional investors systematically sell stocks with negative returns



                                                            20
the role of momentum trading in the relation between investor demands, we add lag standardized

market returns to equation (6).

    Average coeﬃcients for each group of active management are reported in model (2) of Table

13. We ﬁnd that passively-managed foreign funds engage in momentum trading. For example, the

coeﬃcient associated with standardized lag market returns is 0.03 and is statistically signiﬁcant at

the 5 percent level. Momentum trading, however, accounts for little of the cross-sectional correlation

in demands. That is, adding lag market returns to the regressions has only a small impact on the

average coeﬃcient associated with excess demand by the peer group of active management, e.g. the

average coeﬃcient reported in the ﬁrst column changes from 0.14 to 0.13. Since all the variables

are standardized, the coeﬃcients associated with demand by the peer group and lag market returns

are directly comparable —the average coeﬃcient of contemporaneous demand by the peer group is

over four times greater than the average coeﬃcient associated with lag returns.

    In addition to the lag returns of the Colombian stock market we add standardized lag U.S.

market returns. This controls for the potential relation between market performance abroad and

cross-border net ﬂows at daily frequencies (Griﬃn et al. (2004) ﬁrst documented this relation for a

group of emerging markets). Our baseline ﬁndings are robust to including this control. Results are

presented in models (3) and (4) of Table 13.

    The main take away from models (2) to (4) in Table 13 is that the cross-sectional correlation

between contemporaneous demands changes little after accounting for domestic lag market returns

and U.S lag returns. In other words, momentum trading does not appear to be the primary source

of the strong correlation across demands of passively-managed foreign funds.


5.2    Momentum Trading Using Stock-Level Information

The discussion of momentum investment strategies in the previous section relies on daily ﬂows by

investor and aggregate market returns. It is possible, however, that momentum strategies may be

more pronounced when we disaggregate the data at the investor-stock daily level. For example, the

estimated coeﬃcients capturing momentum strategies reported earlier might be biased downwards

for investors with stock holdings signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the market index. For these investors,

daily market returns could be very diﬀerent from their own returns, and the resulting correlation
and buy stocks with positive returns.


                                                 21
between lag returns and ﬂows would be small.

   In order to consider investor-stock information, we calculate the momentum measure of Grinblatt

et al. (1995) using daily trades on individual stocks as follows:

                                         D   S
                                     1             Qi,s,d − Qi,s,d−1
                            Mi,k =                                     Rs,d−k                       (7)
                                     T                   Qi,s,d
                                         d=1 s=1


where Qi,s,d are holdings by fund i of stock s at day d, Qi,s,d is deﬁned as (Qi,s,d + Qi,s,d−1 )/2, and

Rs,d−k is the return of stock s from d − k − 1 to d − k − 1. When k = 1, the measure captures

the lagged response of trades to returns (“lag-1 momentum” or L1M). When k = 0, this measure

captures the contemporaneous relation between trades and returns (“lag-0 momentum” or L0M).

We calculate L1M and L0M by averaging across investors in the same group of Active Share.

   Panel A of Table 14 documents the results for L1M . We ﬁnd that the average one-day-lagged

momentum measure for passively-managed foreign funds is 3 percent per day, which is consistent

with the 3 percent estimate for the correlation of aggregate ﬂows and lag market returns reported

in the previous section. Since these funds hold similar stocks to the market index, estimates of

momentum strategies using market returns are quite similar to the measure of momentum investing

using stock-level data. This provides further validity to our ﬁnding that the cross-sectional correla-

tion in ﬂows among passively-managed foreign funds is not driven by momentum strategies, since

we are controlling for the correct measure of momentum.

   In the previous section we found no evidence of momentum trading by actively-managed foreign

funds, however, Table 14-Panel A documents that funds in this group buy and sell in the direction

of one-day lag returns. More precisely, the average of L1M for foreign active funds is 7 percent and

statistically signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. The contrast in ﬁndings among the two methodologies

(i.e. aggregate versus stock-level) is expected, since funds in this group are precisely those with

holdings signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the market index. For this group, using aggregate ﬂows and

market returns does not appear to be the appropriate strategy to capture momentum investing. The

important ﬁnding here is that even if foreign active investors indeed follow momentum strategies, the

coeﬃcient for the cross-sectional correlation between daily equity demands estimated at -1 percent

in Table 13 would be an upper-bound for the actual correlation between ﬂows. In other words, the

evidence indicates that while active foreign funds are momentum investors on the stocks that they


                                                    22
trade, daily fund demands are not positively correlated in the cross-section. This would be the case

if active funds trade diﬀerent stocks each day. Finally, Panel A shows that domestic institutions

are contrarians regardless of their level of active management —they buy and sell stocks in the

opposite direction of lag returns.

    Table 14-Panel A presents the contemporaneous correlation between daily stock returns and

ﬂows. We ﬁnd that purchases and sells by passively-managed foreign funds are systematically

related to stock returns in the same day. The average of L0M for this group is 0.18 (t-statistic of

7.01), which is six times greater than the correlation between ﬂows and lag returns. According to

the table, about 77.8 percent of passive foreign funds buy and sell in the direction of the same-day

returns. Active foreign funds, on the other hand, do not appear to trade in the direction of daily

stock returns, while domestic institutions trade in the opposite direction of returns.

    Overall, the evidence is consistent with ﬂows by passively-managed foreign funds driving price

changes. The two related stylized facts are that demands by these funds are positively related in

the cross-section and their trades are largely correlated with same-day returns. This suggests that

foreign passive funds are paying a price for accommodating their excess demands within a day.



6    Conclusions

In this paper, we examine the performance of investors separated by borders with diﬀerent manage-

ment styles. We ﬁnd that the aggregate under-performance of foreign investors in the Colombian

Stock Market is largely attributable to the behavior of foreign funds that replicate the market index,

i.e. passively-managed funds. These funds pay higher prices for stocks purchases, receive less when

they sell, and display inferior risk-adjusted returns relative to other investors. In particular, worse

trades are on days when these funds are (i) trading multiple stocks in the same direction, (ii) buy-

ing (selling) the same stock multiple times, and (iii) making large trades at the end of the trading

session. In other words, the worst trades by passive funds appear to be on days when managers are

trying to accommodate large ﬂows in similar proportions to their benchmark index.

    Market microstructure characteristics —such as average trade size, market impact, and bid-ask

spreads, constrain the speed at which managers can execute their trades. If ﬂow imbalances by index

funds are large enough, in order to trade stocks in similar index proportions, managers pay higher


                                                  23
transaction costs to meet the end-of-day “deadline,” that is, they pay a price to increase the speed of

their trades to comply with their investment style. Meanwhile, other investors with more discretion

over their ﬂows appear to time their transactions to take advantage of the common order ﬂow by

passive funds. In our sample, even foreign active funds —which are known to under-perform passive

strategies, execute better trades and display higher risk-adjusted returns than passive foreign funds.

   We anticipate that similar ﬁndings are likely in other developing countries, or in small (illiquid)

stocks in developed markets. In such cases, the costs of mechanical trading strategies to accommo-

date ﬂows might outweigh the potential beneﬁts of passive investing.


References
Agarwal, Sumit, Sheri Faircloth, Chunlin Liu, and S Ghon Rhee, “Why do foreign investors
 underperform domestic investors in trading activities? Evidence from Indonesia,” Journal of
 Financial Markets, 2009, 12 (1), 32–53.
Agudelo, Diego, James Byder, and Paula Yepes, “Who Knows Better in an Emerging Mar-
 ket? Performance of Institutions, Foreigners and Individuals.,” Center for Research in Economics
 and Finance (CIEF), Working Papers, 2015, (15-25).
Albuquerque, Rui, Gregory H Bauer, and Martin Schneider, “Global private information
 in international equity markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2009, 94 (1), 18–46.
Avramov, Doron and Russ Wermers, “Investing in mutual funds when returns are predictable,”
 Journal of Financial Economics, 2006, 81 (2), 339–377.
Barber, Brad M, Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean, “Just how much do
 individual investors lose by trading?,” Review of Financial studies, 2009, 22 (2), 609–632.
Bollen, Nicolas PB and Jeﬀrey A Busse, “On the timing ability of mutual fund managers,”
 The Journal of Finance, 2001, 56 (3), 1075–1094.
Brennan, Michael J and H Henry Cao, “International portfolio investment ﬂows,” The Journal
 of Finance, 1997, 52 (5), 1851–1880.
Carhart, Mark M, “On persistence in mutual fund performance,” The Journal of ﬁnance, 1997,
 52 (1), 57–82.
Chalmers, John MR, Roger M Edelen, and Gregory B Kadlec, “On the perils of ﬁnancial
 intermediaries setting security prices: the mutual fund wild card option,” The Journal of Finance,
 2001, 56 (6), 2209–2236.
Chan, Kalok, Vicentiu Covrig, and Lilian Ng, “What determines the domestic bias and
 foreign bias? Evidence from mutual fund equity allocations worldwide,” The Journal of Finance,
 2005, 60 (3), 1495–1534.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeﬀrey D Kubik, “Does fund size erode
 mutual fund performance? The role of liquidity and organization,” The American Economic
 Review, 2004, 94 (5), 1276–1302.

                                                  24
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and Ren´           e M Stulz, “Do domestic investors have an edge?
 The trading experience of foreign investors in Korea,” Review of ﬁnancial studies, 2005, 18 (3),
 795–829.

Cremers, KJ Martijn and Antti Petajisto, “How active is your fund manager? A new measure
 that predicts performance,” Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (9), 3329–3365.

Cremers, Martijn and Ankur Pareek, “Patient capital outperformance: The investment skill
 of high active share managers who trade infrequently,” Journal of Financial Economics (JFE),
 Forthcoming, 2015.

  , Miguel A Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Laura Starks, “Indexing and active fund manage-
  ment: International evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2016, 120 (3), 539–560.

Dvoˇ ak, Tom´
    r´       aˇs, “Do domestic investors have an information advantage? Evidence from Indone-
 sia,” The Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (2), 817–839.

Fama, Eugene F and James D MacBeth, “Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,”
  Journal of political economy, 1973, 81 (3), 607–636.

   and Kenneth R French, “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal
  of ﬁnancial economics, 1993, 33 (1), 3–56.

Ferreira, Miguel A, Pedro P Matos, Jo˜    ao Pedro Pereira, and Pedro Pires, “Do Locals
  Know Better? A Comparison of the Performance of Local and Foreign Institutional Investors,”
  A Comparison of the Performance of Local and Foreign Institutional Investors (May 19, 2015),
  2015.

French, Kenneth R, “Presidential address: The cost of active investing,” The Journal of Finance,
  2008, 63 (4), 1537–1573.

Froot, Kenneth A and Tarun Ramadorai, “Institutional portfolio ﬂows and international
  investments,” Review of Financial Studies, 2008, 21 (2), 937–971.

Greene, Jason T and Charles W Hodges, “The dilution impact of daily fund ﬂows on open-end
 mutual funds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2002, 65 (1), 131–158.

Griﬃn, John M, Federico Nardari, and Rene M Stulz, “Are daily cross-border equity ﬂows
 pushed or pulled?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2004, 86 (3), 641–657.

Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, “The investment behavior and performance of various
 investor types: a study of Finland’s unique data set,” Journal of ﬁnancial economics, 2000, 55
 (1), 43–67.

  , Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, “Momentum investment strategies, portfolio per-
  formance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior,” The American economic review, 1995,
  pp. 1088–1105.

Hau, Harald, “Location matters: An examination of trading proﬁts,” The Journal of Finance,
 2001, 56 (5), 1959–1983.

IMF, “Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey,” http://cpis.imf.org, 2016.



                                               25
Karolyi, G Andrew and Ren´     e M Stulz, “Are ﬁnancial assets priced locally or globally?,”
 Handbook of the Economics of Finance, 2003, 1, 975–1020.

Kyle, Albert S, “Continuous auctions and insider trading,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econo-
 metric Society, 1985, pp. 1315–1335.

  and Anna A Obizhaeva, “Market microstructure invariance: Empirical hypotheses,” Econo-
  metrica, 2016, 84 (4), 1345–1404.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, “The impact of institutional
  trading on stock prices,” Journal of ﬁnancial economics, 1992, 32 (1), 23–43.

Leuz, Christian, Karl V Lins, and Francis E Warnock, “Do foreigners invest less in poorly
  governed ﬁrms?,” Review of Financial Studies, 2010, 23 (3), 3245–3285.

Lewis, Karen K, “Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption,” Journal of economic
  literature, 1999, 37 (2), 571–608.

 astor, L’uboˇ
P´            s and Robert F Stambaugh, “Mutual fund performance and seemingly unrelated
 assets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2002, 63 (3), 315–349.

Pedraza, Alvaro, “Strategic interactions and portfolio choice in money management: Theory and
 evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2015, 47 (8), 1531–1569.

Petersen, Mitchell A, “Estimating standard errors in ﬁnance panel data sets: Comparing ap-
 proaches,” Review of ﬁnancial studies, 2009, 22 (1), 435–480.

Portes, Richard and Helene Rey, “The determinants of cross-border equity ﬂows,” Journal of
 international Economics, 2005, 65 (2), 269–296.

Seasholes, Mark S., “Re-examining information asymmetries in emerging stock markets,” Tech-
  nical Report 2004.

Seasholes, Mark S and Ning Zhu, “Individual investors and local bias,” The Journal of Finance,
  2010, 65 (5), 1987–2010.

Sias, Richard W, “Institutional herding,” Review of ﬁnancial studies, 2004, 17 (1), 165–206.

Wermers, Russ, “Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock-picking talent,
 style, transactions costs, and expenses,” The Journal of Finance, 2000, 55 (4), 1655–1703.




                                              26
7    Appendix: Tables

                                            Table 1
                             Traded Value and Number of Investors

 Panel A presents the share of total traded value and number of investors by each investor type in
the database. Share of traded value is calculated relative to the total amount traded in the period.
Number of investors which made at least one transaction during the period. Panel B displays
distribution statistics of the number of trades by investor type.

                          Panel A. Traded value and number of investors
                                   % of Total Value                     Number of Investors
     Investor Type              2006-2010    2011-2016            2006-2010          2011-2016
     Domestic Individuals          46              27              265,395            340,644
     Domestic Institutions         50              54               6,823             10,339
        Corporations               16              13               6,270              9,327
        Pension Funds              13              12                32                  50
        Mutual Funds                6               6                268                421
        Brokerage Firms            14              21                 51                 50
        Others                     2                2                202                491
     Foreign                        4              19               1,440              2,830
                     Panel B. Distribution of number of trades by investor type
     Investor Type            Average p5 p25 p50           p75      p95       p99             Max
     Domestic Individuals         14    1     1           1        3       37       187     57,913
     Domestic Institutions       317    1     2            8     42       536     421,236   421,236
        Corporations             110    1     2           7       39      405      1,843    39,976
        Pension Funds           8,320   8    313        1,839   8,986   44,119    51,056    51,056
        Mutual Funds            1,048   1     3           15     216     4,233    62,654    15,256
        Brokerage Firms        24,965   2    32          345    7,936   135,067   421,236   421,236
        Others                   161    1     1            5     31       383      2,786     23,209
     Foreign                     316    1     2          11       81     1,090     4,922     92,774




                                                   27
                                          Table 2
                Descriptive statistics for the Colombian Stock Exchange

 The table displays yearly market stock returns. For Colombia, returns are calculated using the
COLCAP, a value weighted index. The MSCI Latin America index captures large cap and mid
cap ﬁrms across ﬁve countries: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. On December 2015,
the country weight of Colombia in the index was 3.15%. Market capitalization (market cap) is the
end-of-year total stock market value. Foreign ﬂows and number of stocks are from the CSE dataset.

             MSCI Latin    Colombian Stock      Market Cap       Foreign Flows      Number of
      Year    America          Market          ($ billion cop)   ($ billion cop)     stocks
      2006       43.2%           16.0%              11,161             642              68
      2007       50.4%           -4.3%              10,694             275              67
      2008      -51.4%          -34.7%               7,561             631              66
      2009      103.8%           42.8%              11,602             943              62
      2010       14.7%           28.9%              15,497             122              63
      2011      -19.4%          -20.2%              12,666             -13              71
      2012        8.7%           15.0%              14,716             -44              72
      2013      -13.4%          -11.9%              13,071             479              70
      2014      -12.3%          -11.6%              11,635            -370              66
      2015      -31.0%          -30.8%               8,547           -1390              65




                                          Table 3
                                      Passive investors

 This table reports the share of assets under management and proportion of passive investors by
investor type. Passive investors/funds are deﬁned as those with an Active Share measure below 60
percent. Sample includes investors with at least 100 trades.

                                % assets managed by passive         % number of passive
        Investor Type           2006-2010       2011-2016          2006-2010       2011-2016
        Domestic Individuals       35.1             21.9              25.8           12.2
        Domestic Institutions      53.5             71.7              32.3           26.2
           Corporations            13.7             15.2              27.9           20.5
           Pension Funds           97.9             99.0              81.9           89.5
           Mutual Funds            92.7             80.7              70.3           49.7
           Brokerage Firms         45.7             74.0              31.2           40.2
           Others                  15.8             28.3              31.4           30.1
        Foreign                    29.4             64.8              29.4           37.8




                                               28
                                      Table 4
    Average proportion (%) of intra-day trading volume for each type of investor

 This table reports the average proportions (%) of intra-day traded values for each of three classes of
investors and classiﬁed by level of Active Share. Passive (active) investors is deﬁned as those with
Active Share below (above) 60%. The proportions are relative to the total trading value for the
interval (Panel A) and relative to the total traded value of the day by each group (Panel B). The
sample in Panels A and B include the period from February 9, 2012, to January 30, 2016, when the
Colombian Stock Exchange synchronized its trading session with the New York Stock Exchange.

                         Domestic Individuals     Domestic Institutions        Foreign
  Trading intervals      Passive    Active        Passive    Active        Passive Active      All
                         Panel A. Relative to the trade value of the interval
  9:30-10:30               6.3        30.0         29.9        20.9          5.3       7.5    100.0
  10:30-11:30              6.0        26.1         32.8        19.5          6.9       8.8    100.0
  11:30-12:30              5.8        24.0         34.0        19.5          7.7       8.9    100.0
  12:30-13:30              5.6        23.7         33.6        19.4          8.4       9.2    100.0
  13:30-14:30              4.9        22.9         31.4        19.6         10.3      10.8    100.0
  14:30-15:30              5.5        23.6         29.8        18.6         12.0      10.6    100.0
  15:30-15:55              6.0        24.8         30.2        19.0         10.7       9.2    100.0
  Closing batch            5.4        20.9         23.2        10.7         30.9       9.0    100.0
               Panel B. Relative to the traded    value of the day by investor group
  9:30-10:30            21.6         22.5          17.8         21.5         9.7     15.3      18.2
  10:30-11:30           17.2         17.0          18.6         16.9        10.5     17.6      16.9
  11:30-12:30           14.8         14.5          17.9         15.7         9.6     15.9      15.6
  12:30-13:30           11.3         11.4          13.8         12.6         8.9     12.0      12.3
  13:30-14:30            6.7          7.1           7.8          8.1         6.2      9.0       7.6
  14:30-15:30            9.1          9.0           8.1          9.3         8.6      9.8       8.8
  15:30-15:55            7.9          7.5           7.1          7.5         6.7      7.4       7.3
  Closing batch         11.4         11.0           9.0          8.4        39.8     13.0      13.3
                  Panel C. Foreign passive funds traded value in the closing batch
                          2009       2010         2011       2012          2013    2014        2015
  Relative to interval     7.7         12.8        22.1         27.7        34.5      41.3     39.6
  Relative to day          28.2        32.5        36.3         34.9        43.0      39.3     41.2




                                                  29
                                          Table 5
                           Descriptive statistics by investor type

 This table reports mean and median values for the variables by each investor group. Assets are in
billion pesos. Number of stocks denotes the diﬀerent number of stocks held by each investor/fund
by month. Stocks traded are the diﬀerent number of stocks traded by each investor/fund during a
month. Daily net ﬂows are normalized by the value of the investor’s portfolio at the beginning of
the month.


 Investor Type           Active Share    Assets    Turnover   No. stocks   Stocks traded   Net ﬂows
                                        Panel A. Mean values
 Domestic Individuals        76.2          0.9     2.1           10.4           2.1         -0.09
 Domestic Institutions       71.3         22.3     1.3           12.1           2.9         -0.06
    Corporations             73.6          7.4     1.3           10.9           2.4         -0.06
    Pension Funds            44.1        480.6     0.5           24.2           6.5          0.16
    Mutual Funds             57.8         12.3     1.7           16.0           5.1         -0.04
    Brokerage Firms          68.8         69.1     2.7           22.1           6.9         -0.08
    Others                   70.2         25.1     1.1           13.4           2.8         -0.06
 Foreign                     68.7         20.7     0.9            9.3           3.2          0.14
 Total                       75.2          4.9     1.9           10.6           2.2         -0.07
                                        Panel B. Median values
 Domestic Individuals        77.8          0.1      0.6        10.0             2.0         -0.10
 Domestic Institutions       72.5          0.9      0.3        11.0             2.0         -0.08
    Corporations             74.7          0.7      0.3        10.0             2.0         -0.08
    Pension Funds            41.0         81.5      0.3        25.0             5.0          0.02
    Mutual Funds             54.9          2.1      0.6        17.0             3.0         -0.12
    Brokerage Firms          70.5          5.3      0.8        23.8             4.0         -0.03
    Others                   71.4          2.9      0.2        14.0             2.0         -0.09
 Foreign                     72.9          2.6      0.2         9.0             2.0         -0.02
 Total                       77.0          0.2      0.5        10.0             2.0         -0.09




                                                  30
                                          Table 6
                       Fund characteristics by level of Active Share

 This table reports mean values for the variables by each investor and grouped by four intervals
of Active Share. The intervals are deﬁned based on the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile of Active
Share of foreign investors. Number of stocks denotes the diﬀerent number of stocks held by each in-
vestor/fund by month. Stocks traded are the diﬀerent number of stocks traded by each investor/fund
during a month. Monthly net ﬂows are normalized by the value of the investor’s portfolio in the
previous month. Percentage of investors in groups is the proportion of each investor type in the
interval relative to the total number of investors in each type.

                                       Group 1             Group 2         Group 3         Group 4
         Active Share Range            [0 - 52.4]        (52.4 - 76.6]   (76.6 - 91.9]   (91.9 - 100.0]
      Foreign
         Assets ($ billion cop)          44.8                11.8            7.4             16.0
         Fund turnover ratio              0.4                 0.9            1.3              1.2
         Number of Stocks                15.0                 9.8             6.7             4.2
         Stocks traded                    5.9                 3.1             1.9             1.5
         Net ﬂows                         0.3                 0.1            0.0              0.0
         % of investors in the group     25.1                24.9            25.1            24.9
         % of total number of trades     48.1                18.2            21.2            12.4
      Domestic Institutions
         Assets ($ billion cop)          97.8                 7.6            16.2            12.6
         Fund turnover ratio              1.1                 1.2            1.6             1.4
         Number of Stocks                20.0                13.3             9.1             6.0
         Stocks traded                    5.6                 2.9             2.1             1.7
         Net ﬂows                         0.0                 0.0            -0.1            -0.1
         % of investors in the group     11.9                39.3            29.2            19.6
         % of total number of trades     37.2                40.7            16.3             5.8
      Domestic Individuals
         Assets ($ billion cop)           1.8                 1.0             1.0            0.3
         Fund turnover ratio              0.7                 1.4             2.6            3.5
         Number of Stocks                16.1                11.6             9.5             8.3
         Stocks traded                    3.1                 2.1             1.9             1.9
         Net ﬂows                         0.0                -0.1            -0.1            -0.1
         % of investors in the group      3.7                37.8            35.8            22.7
         % of total number of trades      8.2                41.8            33.3            16.8




                                                    31
                                                        Table 7
           Value-Weighted-Average-Price (VWAP) by investor type, by Active Share, and for diﬀerent time intervals


                                                                      Panel A. VWAP by investor type
                                    Individuals        Corporations          Pension Funds   Mutual Funds          Brokerage Firms      All Institutions    Foreign
                                        (1)                (2)                    (3)              (4)                   (5)                  (6)             (7)
     Buy: All trades
         Average of mean VWAP          99.92               99.95                 99.90             99.98                  99.99              99.96          100.04
         (t-statistics: H0 = 100)     (39.96)             (14.82)               (12.38)            (3.75)                 (2.81)            (13.03)         (9.22)
         Diﬀerence: Foreign - (i)       0.11                0.08                  0.14              0.06                   0.05               0.08
         (t-statistics: H0 = 0)       (13.54)             (13.82)               (17.27)            (8.26)                 (7.94)            (10.27)
     Sell: All trades
         Average of mean VWAP         100.06              100.05                100.08             100.06                 100.04            100.05           99.98
         (t-statistics: H0 = 100)     (50.04)             (8.74)                (13.50)            (12.49)                (8.40)            (15.06)          (3.97)
         Diﬀerence: Foreign - (i)      -0.08               -0.07                 -0.09              -0.07                  -0.06              -0.07
         (t-statistics: H0 = 0)       (13.24)             (5.86)                (12.93)            (11.91)                (8.89)             (7.69)
                                                     Panel B. VWAP of foreign investors sorted by level of Active Share




32
                                                            Q1                   Q2                  Q3                     Q4                    Q1-Q4
     Buy
         Average of mean VWAP                             100.09                 100.02            99.99                  100.01                    0.09
          t-statistics                                    (20.78)                (3.05)            (0.57)                 (0.45)                  (7.869)
     Sell
         Average of mean VWAP                              99.94                 99.99             100.00                 100.01                   -0.06
          t-statistics                                    (10.13)                (0.97)            (0.37)                 (0.64)                  (6.22)
                                                  Panel C. VWAP of passive and active foreign investors by trading interval
                                                                           Passive                                                    Active
                                                   (1) Continuous trading (2) Closing batch       (2) - (1)     (3) Continuous trading (4) Closing batch    (4) - (3)
     Buy
         Average of mean VWAP                             100.02                 100.16             0.15                   99.99            100.11            0.12
         t-statistics                                     (2.998)               (21.782)          (15.503)                (2.334)           (9.772)         (10.966)
     Sell
         Average of mean VWAP                              99.97                 99.91              -0.06                 100.00             99.95           -0.06
         t-statistics                                     (3.991)               (9.018)            (5.053)                (0.541)           (4.076)         (4.479)
                                                                      Table 8
                                                   Correlation matrix between fund-level variables
                                Active Share   Diﬀ. Stocks (buys)   Diﬀ. Stocks (sells)   Trading Int. (buys)   Trading Int. (sells)   Fund Turnover   Net Flows
     Active Share                   1.00             -0.40                 -0.44                 -0.48                 -0.47                0.32         0.05
     Diﬀerent Stocks (buys)                           1.00                  0.54                 0.38                  0.17                -0.30          0.07




33
     Diﬀerent Stocks (sells)                                                1.00                 0.25                  0.35                -0.29          0.03
     Trading Interval (buys)                                                                      1.00                  0.43               -0.30         -0.08
     Trading Interval (sells)                                                                                          1.00                -0.30         -0.12
     Fund Turnover                                                                                                                          1.00         -0.09
     Net Flows                                                                                                                                            1.00
                                   Table 9
 VWAP spreads between foreign and domestic institutions: Investor style correlates

 This table reports the estimates of daily Value-Weighted-Average-Price (VWAP) of foreign investors
relative to domestic institutions. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is the VWAP for
purchases. VWAP for sells is reported in columns (5)-(8). Each model include stock ﬁxed-eﬀects
and t-statistics, presented in parenthesis, are calculated from standard errors clustered at the fund
level. Note: ***/**/* indicate that the coeﬃcient estimates are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at
the 1%/5%/10% level.

                                        Buys                                                Sells
 Variables            (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)          (6)                (7)         (8)
 Firm-stock variables
 lsize             0.052***     0.038**      0.031*       0.016        0.001       0.014          0.029**          0.026
                    (2.996)     (2.291)     (1.813)      (0.787)     (0.059)      (1.009)         (2.102)        (1.498)
 BMratio              0.019       0.005       0.004       0.015       -0.013        0.003           0.002         -0.026
                    (1.072)     (0.253)     (0.211)      (0.682)     (-0.722)     (0.166)         (0.079)        (-1.122)
 ctc5             -0.387***    -0.380***   -0.419***   -0.482***      -0.084       -0.118          -0.132        -0.162*
                   (-4.528)     (-4.390)    (-4.619)    (-4.924)     (-1.049)     (-1.469)        (-1.568)       (-1.914)
 cto                  0.323       0.372      0.404       0.658*       0.685*       0.688*          0.837*          0.381
                    (0.861)     (0.993)     (1.026)      (1.716)     (1.655)      (1.654)         (1.863)        (0.874)
 otc               8.235***    8.273***    8.675***     9.493***    8.375***     8.368***        8.820***       9.454***
                    (8.257)     (8.271)     (8.223)      (8.390)     (7.301)      (7.268)         (7.278)        (7.250)
 avgps               -8.298      -8.193      -7.710       3.779    -18.254***   -16.429***      -15.701***     -19.274***
                   (-0.725)     (-0.734)    (-0.698)     (1.157)     (-3.634)     (-3.817)        (-3.686)       (-6.213)
 Market variables
 colret              -0.442      -0.528      -0.575      -0.217    -1.392**     -1.555***       -1.686***      -1.447**
                   (-1.334)     (-1.551)    (-1.614)    (-0.548)   (-2.453)      (-2.861)        (-2.930)      (-2.220)
 mkt25            -0.031***    -0.034***   -0.034***   -0.032***   0.030***      0.029***        0.029***      0.031***
                   (-5.476)     (-5.891)    (-5.798)    (-5.721)    (4.376)       (4.387)         (4.277)       (4.497)
 Investor variables
 Active Share     -0.185***    -0.116***   -0.108***   -0.095***   0.112***      0.048**          0.033**      0.121***
                   (-6.727)     (-3.558)    (-3.618)    (-3.871)    (4.796)      (2.300)          (2.205)       (5.430)
 Diﬀerent Stocks               0.006***    0.006***                             -0.006***       -0.005***
                                (4.726)      (4.877)                             (-4.781)        (-4.649)
 Turnover                                  -0.010***   -0.010**                                   0.007**       0.009**
                                            (-3.060)   (-2.557)                                   (2.505)       (2.213)
 Net Flows                                  0.015***   0.018***                                  -0.004**       -0.002*
                                            (-2.624)   (-2.597)                                  (-2.175)       (-1.978)
 Trading Interval                                      0.099***                                                -0.035***
                                                       (10.907)                                                 (2.937)
 Constant           -1.378**   -1.014**     -0.786      -0.359       -0.190       -0.519            -0.969**    -0.967*
                    (-2.560)   (-1.985)    (-1.507)    (-0.570)     (-0.434)     (-1.237)           (-2.312)    (-1.826)


 Observations       104,321    104,321     101,178       95,873      71,471       71,471             69,034      64,906
 R-squared           0.051      0.053       0.057        0.067       0.052         0.054              0.058       0.064
 FE                   stock      stock       stock        stock       stock        stock              stock       stock
 Cluster            Investor   Investor    Investor     Investor    Investor     Investor           Investor    Investor




                                                       34
                                  Table 10
 VWAP spreads between foreign and domestic institutions: Investor style correlates

 This table reports the estimates of daily Value-Weighted-Average-Price (VWAP) of foreign investors
relative to domestic institutions. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is the VWAP for
purchases. VWAP for sells is reported in columns (5)-(8). Each model include time and stock
ﬁxed-eﬀects and t-statistics, presented in parenthesis, are calculated from standard errors clustered
at the fund level. Note: ***/**/* indicate that the coeﬃcient estimates are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from zero at the 1%/5%/10% level.

                                        Buys                                                Sells
 Variables            (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)          (6)                (7)         (8)
 Firm-stock variables
 lsize               0.010        0.016       0.014        0.010     0.050***     0.045***        0.045***       0.044**
                    (0.459)     (0.718)     (0.657)      (0.466)      (3.045)      (2.834)         (2.810)       (2.477)
 BMratio             -0.020      -0.020      -0.016       -0.013      0.044**      0.043**         0.038*         0.024
                   (-1.019)     (-0.980)    (-0.757)    (-0.661)      (2.401)      (2.367)         (1.913)       (1.111)
 ctc5             -0.516***    -0.494***   -0.543***   -0.551***    -0.384***    -0.380***       -0.383***      -0.388***
                   (-4.915)     (-4.872)    (-5.123)    (-5.025)     (-4.342)     (-4.297)        (-4.129)       (-4.022)
 cto               1.312***    1.352***    1.441***     1.460***     1.354***    1.347***         1.541***       1.324**
                    (2.940)     (3.021)     (3.071)      (3.121)      (2.678)      (2.663)         (2.834)       (2.454)
 otc               8.127***    8.159***    8.528***     8.487***     8.266***    8.275***         8.727***      9.107***
                    (8.304)     (8.307)     (8.189)      (8.165)      (7.182)      (7.169)         (7.136)       (7.098)
 avgps              -10.197     -10.363     -10.153       -9.536   -19.286***   -18.294***      -18.037***     -20.192***
                   (-1.151)     (-1.180)    (-1.164)    (-1.059)     (-4.299)     (-4.155)        (-4.124)       (-4.898)
 Investor variables
 ActiveShare      -0.173***    -0.105***   -0.093***   -0.121***   0.097***     0.055***         0.043**       0.108***
                   (-7.509)     (-3.647)    (-3.556)    (-5.892)    (4.730)      (2.666)         (2.029)        (5.260)
 Diﬀerent Stocks               0.006***    0.006***                             -0.004***       -0.004***
                                (4.979)     (5.343)                              (-3.698)        (-3.520)
 Turnover                                  -0.009***   -0.009***                                 0.007**        0.010**
                                            (-2.974)    (-2.950)                                 (2.347)        (2.463)
 Net Flows                                  0.013**      0.014*                                  -0.003*        -0.001*
                                            (-2.282)    (-1.962)                                 (-1.819)       (1.772)
 Trading Interval                                       0.079***                                               -0.030***
                                                         (8.659)                                                (2.793)
 Constant            -0.100     -0.331      -0.299        -0.229   -1.658***    -1.507***       -1.485***      -1.487***
                    (-0.153)   (-0.508)    (-0.464)     (-0.359)    (-3.435)     (-3.226)        (-3.186)       (-2.857)
 Observations       104,321    104,321     101,178      101,178      71,471       71,471             69,034      64,906
 R-squared           0.126      0.127       0.133        0.133        0.137        0.138              0.144       0.137
 FE                    day        day         day          day         day          day                day         day
                      stock      stock       stock        stock       stock        stock              stock       stock
 Cluster            Investor   Investor    Investor     Investor    Investor     Investor           Investor    Investor




                                                       35
                                           Table 11
                                    Performance benchmarks

 This table reports the loadings of the portfolios sorted by Active Share an investor type on various
factors. Panel A reports loadings for domestic institutional investors and Panel B for foreign
investors. MARKET is the return of the Colombian market index in excess of the one-month
Colombian T-bill rate. SMB is the return on a portfolio of small stocks minus large stocks. HML is
the return on a portfolio long on high book-to-market stocks and short low book-to-market stocks.
WML is the return on a portfolio long on stocks that are past-12-month winners and short on those
that are past-12-month losers.
                    Market-adj            CAPM                      Carhart 4-Factor
 Active Share       (average)     alpha    MARKET      alpha      MARKET SMB HML             WML
                                     Panel A. Foreign Investors
 Group   1 (low)      0.23%       0.23%      0.95      0.21%        0.92     -0.07   -0.10    0.02
 Group   2            0.30%       0.40%      0.92      0.38%        0.88     -0.13   -0.05   -0.01
 Group   3            0.33%       0.69%      0.85      0.61%        0.76     -0.34    0.03    0.01
 Group   4 (high)     0.64%       0.80%      0.66      0.69%        0.52     -0.50    0.00   0.00
                              Panel B. Domestic Institutional Investors
 Group   1 (low)      0.38%       0.50%      0.95      0.45%        0.90     -0.18    0.01    0.02
 Group   2            0.33%       0.32%      0.88      0.26%        0.82     -0.20   -0.05   0.05
 Group   3            0.31%       0.90%      0.87      0.85%        0.79     -0.26    0.02   -0.04
 Group   4 (high)     0.34%       0.53%      0.45      0.49%        0.46      0.03   -0.07    0.17




                                                 36
                                        Table 12
                 Regression of fund performance on lagged Active Share

 This table reports the estimates of monthly fund returns regressed on fund characteristics lagged
one month. Monthly returns are adjusted using the market model, the CAPM, and the 4-factor
model. The dependent variable is ADJRET . Foreign is a dummy variable equal to one for foreign
investors. Group i is a dummy variable equal to one if the fund is in Group i of Active Share
in t − 1. All speciﬁcations include year-ﬁxed eﬀects. The t-statistics, presented in parenthesis,
are calculated from standard errors clustered at the fund level. Note: ***/**/* indicate that the
coeﬃcient estimates are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at the 1%/5%/10% level.

                                                    Market-adj    CAPM        4-Factor
                                   Panel A. Regression Results
           Foreign                                   0.347***    0.338***     0.295***
                                                       (3.784)     (3.805)     (3.381)
           Group 1                                      0.008      0.149**    0.131**
                                                       (0.130)     (2.546)     (2.233)
           Group 2                                      -0.017     0.127**      0.110*
                                                      (-0.295)     (2.227)     (1.935)
           Group 3                                      -0.051      0.093        0.099
                                                      (-0.819)     (1.519)     (1.606)
           Foreign x Group 1                         -0.425***   -0.347***   -0.273***
                                                      (-4.448)    (-3.728)    (-2.985)
           Foreign x Group 2                         -0.323***   -0.282***    -0.208**
                                                      (-3.188)    (-2.848)    (-2.141)
           Foreign x Group 3                          -0.236**     -0.213*     -0.215*
                                                      (-2.052)    (-1.891)    (-1.932)
           Fund Size                                 0.019***     0.017***   0.019***
                                                       (2.870)     (2.677)     (3.056)
           Fund Turnover                              0.019**      0.017**    0.018**
                                                       (2.499)     (2.264)     (2.348)
           Net Flows                                   -0.033*    -0.037**    -0.037**
                                                      (-1.776)    (-1.981)    (-1.992)
           Constant                                     -0.082     -0.230*    -0.329**
                                                      (-0.596)    (-1.700)    (-2.432)
           No. of Observations                        159,357      159,357     159,357
                  Panel B. Diﬀerences in performance by Active Share and type
           Foreign Group 4 - Foreign Group 1          0.42***     0.20***      0.14**
                                                       (5.44)       (2.65)     (2.02)
           Domestic Group 4 - Domestic Group 1          0.02         0.01       0.01
                                                       (0.44)       (0.65)     (0.96)
           Foreign Group 4 - Domestic Group 4         0.35***      0.34***    0.30***
                                                       (3.78)       (3.80)     (3.38)
           Foreign Group 1 - Domestic Group 1        -0.14***     -0.16***    -0.10***
                                                       (5.60)       (6.34)     (4.13)



                                               37
                                                                       Table 13
                                                          Correlated demands by investor style

                                                                                                 i
     The table presents estimated coeﬃcients of the linear regression Dratioi,d = αi + βi Dratio−
                                                                                                d + εi,d (model 1), where Dratioi,d is excess
                                                                      S
                                                                      s=1   buysi,s,d −sellsi,s,d               i
     demand of fund i on each day deﬁned as Dratioi,d =               S                             and Dratio−
                                                                                                              d is the excess demand by all investors in the same
                                                                      s=1   buysi,s,d +sellsi,s,d
     group of active management. Coeﬃcients are averaged across investor time series regressions for each group of Active Share. Models 2,
     3, and 4 include lag market returns for the Colombian stock market and lag U.S. stock returns (calculated from the S&P500 index).
                      (1)                  (2)                               (3)                                      (4)                       Number      Number of
                    Dratio−i    Dratio−i    Lag Returns   Dratio−i          Lag U.S. returns        Dratio−i   Lag Returns   Lag U.S. returns   of Funds   Observations
      Foreign Investors
         Group 1     0.14***    0.13***       0.03**       0.13***                 0.00              0.13***     0.04**             -.02          190         20,863
                      (7.87)     (7.02)       (2.17)        (7.22)                (0.03)              (6.61)     (2.05)            (0.9)




38
         Group 2       0.03*    0.03***        0.02         0.04**                 0.03              0.05***       0.03             0.01          185         18,108
                       (1.9)     (2.62)       (1.24)        (2.19)                (1.17)              (2.78)     (1.52)           (0.43)
         Group 3     0.04***    0.04***       0.04**       0.04***                 0.01              0.04***     0.04**            -0.01          198         15,105
                      (2.89)      (2.7)       (2.27)        (2.77)                 -0.7               (2.82)      (2.2)           (0.65)
         Group 4       -0.01      -0.01        0.00          -0.01                 0.03                -0.01      -0.02             0.03          185         11,768
                      (0.71)      -0.56       (0.19)         -0.82                (1.52)               -0.81      -0.82           (1.58)
      Domestic Investors
         Group 1      0.02**    0.02***      -0.03***       0.02***              -0.02**             0.02***     -0.02**           -0.01          247        107,748
                      (2.46)      (2.9)       (2.86)         (2.84)               (2.47)              (3.23)       (2.2)          (1.23)
         Group 2     -0.03***   -0.03***     -0.04***      -0.03***             -0.02***            -0.03***    -0.04***           -0.01          813        135,573
                      (4.99)     (5.04)       (6.37)         (5.05)               (3.51)              (5.34)      (5.25)          (1.51)
         Group 3      0.02**      0.01*      -0.04***        0.01*              -0.03***               0.01     -0.04***           -0.01          591         62,024
                      (2.55)     (1.68)       (5.24)         (1.93)               (3.48)               (1.6)      (3.81)          (1.22)
         Group 4        0.00       0.00      -0.03***         0.00                 -0.02               0.00      -0.02**            -.01          357         29,780
                      (0.31)     (0.25)       (2.68)          (0.5)               (1.44)              (0.38)      (2.05)          (1.15)
                                             Table 14
                                          Momentum trading

The L0M is the contemporaneous correlation between trades and stock returns. The L1M measure
momentum investing based based on lag-daily stock returns.
              Sorted by Active Share      Group 1   Group 2   Group 3   Group 4   G1 - G4
                                     Panel A. Lag-1 Momentum (L1M)
              Foreign Investors
                 Average (3)               0.03        0.03    0.08       0.07     -0.03
                 (t-statistics: H0 = 0)   (1.99)     (1.23)  (2.86)      (2.51)   (1.05)
                 Percentage positive        62.8       60.2   64.3        57.3
                 Number of Funds            207        206     207        206
              Domestic Institutions
                 Average (4)               -0.05      -0.17   -0.20       -0.12    0.07
                 (t-statistics: H0 = 0)   (3.25)    (12.32)  (8.69)      (4.42)   (1.98)
                 Percentage positive        38.9       32.3   31.8        39.8
                 Number of Funds            247        818     600         394

                 Average (3) - (4)          0.08      0.20      0.28      0.19
                 (t-statistics: H0 = 0)    (3.66)    (6.65)    (6.59)    (4.42)
                                     Panel B. Lag-0 Momentum (L0M)
              Foreign Investors
                 Average (1)               0.18        0.03    0.02       0.03     0.15
                 (t-statistics: H0 = 0)   (7.01)     (0.97)  (0.59)      (0.89)   (3.81)
                 Percentage positive        77.8       56.3   65.7        58.3
                 Number of Funds            207        206     207        206
              Domestic Institutions
                 Average (2)               -0.12      -0.36   -0.46       -0.35    0.23
                 (t-statistics: H0 = 0)   (6.04)    (16.82)  (14.6)      (8.35)   (4.13)
                 Percentage positive        36.8       27.3   23.8         34
                 Number of Funds            247        818     600         394

                 Average (1) - (2)          0.30      0.40      0.48      0.37
                 (t-statistics: H0 = 0)    (9.37)    (8.54)    (8.24)    (6.08)




                                                    39
8      Appendix B: Figures



                  .8
                  .6
                  .4
                  .2




                   2006m1         2008m1         2010m1              2012m1       2014m1          2016m1

                                      Foreign                             Domestic Institutions
                                      Domestic Individuals


    Figure 1. Percentage of monthly traded value by investor type relative to the total traded value of the month.
                  .12




                                                                                                    .9
                                                                                                    .88
                  .1
                  .08




                                                                                                    .86
                  .06




                                                                                                    .84
                  .04




                                                                                                    .82
                  .02




                                                                                                    .8




                         2008q3         2010q1              2011q3         2013q1          2014q3

                                    Foreign                              Domestic Individuals
                                    Domestic Institutions


Figure 2. Percentage of stock ownership by investor type. Foreign (solid line) and domestic individual (light solid)
ownership in the left axis. Domestic institutions in the right axis (dashed line).




                                                            40
                10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                0




                            2006m1                        2008m1                2010m1           2012m1              2014m1               2016m1

                                                                 Foreign Investor                            Domestic Individual
                                                                 Domestic Institutions


Figure 3. Proportion (%) of assets under management by passive investors in each type. Passive investors are
deﬁned as those with Active Share below 60%




        45

        40

        35

        30

        25

        20

        15

        10

         5

         0
              9:30-10:30                         10:30-11:30      11:30-12:30    12:30-13:30   13:30-14:30    14:30-15:30   15:30-15:55     Closing batch


                                                               Foreign             Pension Funds                 Mutual Funds

Figure 4. Proportion (%) of traded value in the interval relative to the trading value of the day. Investors are
foreign, domestic pension funds and mutual funds with Active Share below 60% (passive).




                                                                                          41
A        Variable Deﬁnitions

Variable                 Deﬁnition                                                                Source

Investor/Fund information

Active Sharei,t          As deﬁned by Cremers and Petajisto (2009).                               CSE

Trading Intervali,s,t    Proportion of trades in stock s executed in the closing batch.           CSE

Diﬀerent Stocksi,s,t     Number of stocks traded during the day in the same direction of s.       CSE

Fund Turnover Ratioi,t   Minimum between yearly purchases and sells normalized by the average     CSE
                         of the fund’s assets.

Net Flowsi,t             Daily fund net ﬂows normalized by assets managed in t-1.                 CSE

Stock-Firm Characteristics
lsizes,t              Firm size computed as the log of total assets at the end of the quarter.    SFC, Datastream

B/Ms,t                   Book-to-market ratio, computed as the total net assets, divided by the   SFC, Datastream
                         total market value of equity at the end of the quarter.

ctc5s,t                  Close to close return of last ﬁve trading days.                          Bloomberg

otcs,t                   Open to close daily return.                                              Bloomberg

ctos,t                   Overnight returns between t-1 and t.                                     Bloomberg

P Ss,t                   Price sensitivity, deﬁned as ln(ph /pl )/V olume where ph and pl         Datastream
                         are the highest and lowest price in each trading day.

Market data
mkt25t                   Indicator variable equal to one if the daily volatility of the COLCAP    Bloomberg
                         is under the percentile 25 for the whole sample.

colrett                  Daily market returns.                                                    Bloomberg




                                                       42
