                                                 WPS8192


Policy Research Working Paper                  8192




              Could the Debate Be Over?
       Errors in Farmer-Reported Production and Their
        Implications for the Inverse Scale-Productivity
                    Relationship in Uganda

                         Sydney Gourlay
                           Talip Kilic
                          David Lobell




Development Economics
Development Data Group
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8192


  Abstract
 Based on a two-round household panel survey conducted                              heterogeneity, and edge effects at the plot level; a rich set
 in Eastern Uganda, this study shows that the analysis of                           of plot, household, and plot manager attributes; as well
 the inverse scale-productivity relationship is highly sen-                         as time-invariant household- and parcel-level unobserved
 sitive to how plot-level maize production, hence yield                             heterogeneity in select specifications that exploit the panel
 (production divided by GPS-based plot area), is measured.                          nature of the data. The core finding is driven by persistent
 Although farmer-reported production-based plot-level                               overestimation of farmer-reported maize production and
 maize yield regressions consistently lend support to the                           yield vis-à-vis their crop cutting–based counterparts, par-
 inverse scale-productivity relationship, the comparable                            ticularly in the lower half of the plot area distribution.
 regressions estimated with maize yields based on sub-plot                          Although the results contribute to a larger, and renewed,
 crop cutting, full-plot crop cutting, and remote sensing                           body of literature questioning the inverse scale-productiv-
 point toward constant returns to scale, at the mean as                             ity relationship based on omitted explanatory variables or
 well as throughout the distributions of objective measures                         alternative formulations of the agricultural productivity
 of maize yield. In deriving the much-debated coefficient                           measure, the paper is among the first documenting how
 for GPS-based plot area, the maize yield regressions con-                          the inverse relationship could be a statistical artifact, driven
 trol for objective measures of soil fertility, maize genetic                       by errors in farmer-reported survey data on crop production.




  This paper is a product of the Development Data Group, Development Economics. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at sgourlay@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                        Could the Debate Be Over?

                  Errors in Farmer-Reported Production and Their Implications
                    for the Inverse Scale-Productivity Relationship in Uganda

                           Sydney Gourlay‡, Talip Kilic†, and David Lobell#1




JEL Codes: C23, C83, Q12.
Keywords: Maize, Yield Measurement, Plot Area Measurement, Inverse Scale-Productivity
Relationship, Crop Cutting, Remote Sensing, Household Surveys, Uganda, Sub-Saharan Africa.




1
  The senior authorship is shared between Sydney Gourlay and Talip Kilic. ‡ Corresponding author. Ph.D. Candidate,
Department of Economics, The American University, Washington, DC, and Survey Specialist, Living Standards
Measurement Study (LSMS), Survey Unit, Development Data Group, World Bank. sgourlay@worldbank.org † Senior
Economist, Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS), Survey Unit, Development Data Group, World Bank,
Rome, Italy. tkilic@worldbank.org. # Professor, Center on Food Security and the Environment, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA. dlobell@stanford.edu. The authors would like to thank for their comments (in alphabetical order) Leigh
Anderson, Leah Bevis, Sam Desiere, Nancy McCarthy, the participants of (i) the USAID Uganda Agriculture Market
Systems Workshop (March 2017, Kampala, Uganda), (ii) the World Bank Land and Poverty Conference (March 2017,
Washington, DC), (iii) the Centre for the Study of African Economies (CSAE) conference (March 2017, Oxford, UK);
(iv) the FAO Agricultural Development Economics Seminar and the IFAD Research and Impact Assessment Seminar
(April 2017, Rome, Italy), (v) the University of Copenhagen Development Economics Seminar (May 2017,
Copenhagen, Denmark), and (vi) the XV EAAE Congress (August 2017, Parma, Italy).
    1. Introduction

Worldwide, 475 million farms, constituting 84 percent of a total of 570 million farms, are estimated
to be less than 2 hectares (Lowder et al., 2016), and (smallholder) agricultural activities constitute
an integral part of livelihoods in rural areas that are home to nearly 70 percent of the population in
low-income countries. 2 In Africa specifically, the average share of rural household income
stemming from agriculture could be up to 69 percent (Davis et al., 2017), and research has
consistently documented higher rates of expected poverty reduction associated with agricultural
vis-à-vis nonagricultural growth (see Dorosh and Thurlow, 2016 and the studies cited therein).

The importance of agriculture for development is recognized in the formulation of the Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) Targets 2.3 and 2.4, which require doubling of agricultural productivity
and incomes of small-scale food producers, and ensuring sustainable food production systems and
implementing resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production. Both
targets are associated with indicators 3 that rely on crop production and land area information
sourced from household or farm surveys, and the documented effects of measurement on accurate
measurement and analysis of land productivity underscore the need for high-quality survey data
for cross-country monitoring, broader economic research, and policy formulation (Carletto et al.,
2013, 2015; Kilic et al. 2017a; 2017b).

An often observed yet insufficiently explained puzzle in smallholder agriculture is that of the
inverse relationship between scale (in terms of farm or plot size) and (land) productivity
(henceforth referred to as the IR). The existence of the IR could have a direct bearing on policy
formulation as it, for instance, relates to reforms targeting land and non-land input markets; land
redistribution programs; and identification of beneficiary target universe for agricultural
development programs. If the IR does indeed exist, and is not an artifact of measurement error in
the data, that would suggest governments might encourage redistribution of land, favoring smaller
allotments – even if the operational implications of such recommendation are not clear.
Alternatively, the existence of the IR could simply temper concerns around plots becoming smaller
or, more broadly, “small” plots, often managed by females and poorer farmers (Kilic et al., 2015a;
2015b).

The body of literature on the IR is rich, and yet inconclusive. In the African context, Larson et al.
(2014) revisit the IR debate with a focus on maize, using data from a wide array of household and
farm surveys conducted from 1999 to 2009 across the continent, and provide support to the
existence of the IR both at farm- and plot-levels. Following Eastwood et al. (2010), it has been
suggested that the IR may be explained by (i) lower supervision costs on smaller holdings and


2
 The statistic is for 2016, the most recent year available through http://data.worldbank.org.
3
 The final list of SDG indicators can be found in Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Sustainable Development Goal
Indicators (2016).


                                                                                                             2
plots (Feder, 1985); (ii) missing or incomplete factor markets (Barrett, 1996; Eswaran and Kotwal,
1986); (iii) omitted variables, in particular, controls for farmer ability and land quality (Assuncao
and Braido, 2007; Assuncao and Ghatak, 2007; Benjamin, 1995; Bhalla and Roy, 1988; Lamb,
2003), and (iv) errors in land area measurement (Lamb, 2003).

Working backwards, on hypothesis (iv), Carletto et al. (2013) in a Uganda-specific study, and
Carletto et al. (2015) in a cross-country study focused on Sub-Saharan Africa, document that land
areas, on average, are over-reported by farmers, but that the IR persists even after objective, GPS-
based land area measures are used in empirical analyses.4 On hypothesis (iii), Nkonya et al. (2004)
and Barrett et al. (2010) show that controlling for objectively-measured soil quality based on
laboratory analyses does not explain the IR at the plot-level. On hypothesis (ii), Ali and Deininger
(2015) show that at the farm-level, the IR can be explained by using a productivity measure that
nets out the labor input valued at market wages. 5 A more recent hypothesis not reviewed by
Eastwood et al. (2010) suggests that land productivity may be greater along the edge of plots as
labor may be concentrated in those visible areas (Bevis and Barrett, 2017). Smaller plots have a
greater ratio of visible edge area to less-visible interior area, which if edges are indeed more
productive, may explain the often-observed IR. Bevis and Barrett (2017) provide support for this
hypothesis in the context of Uganda.

In debating the IR, however, the question of potential measurement error in production figures has
rarely been examined. This is a profound oversight considering that the studies quoted above all
measure agricultural productivity based on farmer-reported production. This is likely attributable
(at least in part) to the fact that data on objectively-measured agricultural production via crop
cutting is rarely available in large-scale household survey operations due to resource constraints.
Yet, severe systematic biases have been found in other farmer-estimated data, such as plot area
(see Carletto et al., Forthcoming, and the studies cited therein). Farmer-reported production
estimates are exceptionally complicated. The use of non-standard production units, various
conditions and states of crop harvests, and the reporting of permanent crop harvests, for starters,
threaten the quality of farmer-estimated production. Additionally, humans often exhibit an
inclination to round off numbers, as shown for land area measurement in Carletto et al. (2015),
which may bias production estimates.

Using unique panel data from a methodological study on maize productivity in Eastern Uganda
that includes self-reported, as well as highly-supervised crop-cutting and remotely-sensed
production and yield estimates, this study aims to determine whether the IR can be explained by
measurement error in self-reported production estimates. The yield measures, irrespective of the
approach to production measurement, are anchored in GPS-based plot area measurement. Overall,

4
  Kilic et al. (2017b) demonstrate that IR persists at the plot-level in the context of Tanzania and Uganda even after
accounting for selection bias in missing GPS-based plot area measurements through the use of multiple imputation.
5
  Desiere and Jolliffe (2017) aptly argue that the missing/incomplete factor market hypothesis apply strictly to
exploration of IR at the farm-level, as opposed to within-farm plot-level.


                                                                                                                    3
we provide unambiguous support for the sensitivity of the plot-level IR to the choice of the method
by which maize production and yield are computed. While farmer-reported production-based
maize yield regressions consistently imply diminishing returns to GPS-based plot area, the
comparable regressions estimated with maize yields based on sub-plot crop cutting, full-plot crop
cutting, and high-resolution satellite imagery-based remote sensing point towards constant returns
to scale.

In view of the aforementioned hypotheses put forth for the IR, it is important to note that the results
are robust to the inclusion of objective measures of soil fertility, maize genetic heterogeneity and
edge effects at the plot-level; a rich set of plot, household and plot manager attributes; as well as
household and parcel fixed effects in select specifications that exploit the panel nature of the data.
In other words, irrespective of the exhaustive list of controls and panel estimation, the IR exists
while using farmer-reported maize production, and ceases to do so when maize yield is anchored
in objective measurement methods. In fact, the IR persists throughout the distribution of plot-level
maize yields that are based on farmer-reported production, while constant returns to scale prevails
across the productivity distribution when one uses objective yield measures.

Our core finding is driven by persistent over-estimation of farmer-reported maize production and
yield vis-à-vis their crop cutting-based counterparts, particularly in the lower half of the plot area
distribution. Though our findings contribute to a larger (and renewed) body of literature
questioning the inverse scale-productivity relationship based on omitted explanatory variables or
alternative formulations of the agricultural productivity measures, the analysis, together with
Desiere and Jolliffe (2017), is the first documenting how the IR could be a statistical artifact, driven
by errors in self-reported survey data on crop production.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the conceptual basis for errors in farmer-
reported crop production and their potential implications for the IR. Section 3 provides relevant
background on the Ugandan context. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 lays out the empirical
strategy. Section 6 presents the results. Section 7 concludes.


   2. Conceptual Basis for Potential Errors in Farmer-Reported Crop Production

The quality of farmer-reported estimates of production is degraded by a myriad of issues,
summarized in Table 1. Human performance and behavior are subject to a number of constraints,
one of them being finite memory. Recall bias can, therefore, pose a serious threat to the quality of
farmer-reported estimates of production. This is especially relevant if there is partial green harvest
(for immediate consumption or sale) or if permanent or extended-harvest crops, such as cassava,




                                                                                                      4
are grown.6 In these situations, aggregating all of the production from the previous completed
agricultural season becomes a taxing mental exercise.

Also, inherent in human behavior is the inclination to round off values. For instance, recent
research has illustrated the persistence of rounding in plot area estimates and the ensuing effects
on data quality (Carletto et al., 2015; Forthcoming). The same problem is likely present in the
estimation of production. Rounding of production estimates may pose a bigger problem on plots
with lower production, such as smaller plots, as the rounding error relative to true production is
likely greater on these plots. Suppose, for the sake of example, that farmer A, with true production
of 1.5 bags, reports that he produced 2 bags. Farmer B has a true production of 11.5 bags, but he
reports 12 bags of production. Farmer A overstates his production by 33.3 percent, while farmer
B only overstates by 4.3 percent.

Further, depending on the context and farmer characteristics, intentional bias may be at play.
Farmers may be inclined to understate production if they perceive an incentive to do so. Perceived
incentives may come in the form of eligibility for various assistance programs or a possible threat
of taxation, for example. Social desirability bias may lead farmers to overstate their production in
order to appear successful.

Setting the challenges with human behavior aside, aggregating farmer-reported production data
for analysis poses several challenges, as summarized by Oseni et al. (2017). First, farmers
frequently utilize non-standard measurement units for the quantification of production. These units
vary across countries, and often exhibit within-country variation across space and time. Even if
the questionnaire instrument permits the use of non-standard measurement units for recording
production quantities, for standard analyses, these values must either be monetized or converted
into kilogram (kg) equivalent terms. In the case of monetization, if the common measurement units
used for production quantification differ from the common units associated with crop sales, the
valuation of production will be a challenge without converting crop production and sales into kg-
equivalent terms. In the case of kg-equivalent conversion, one would need to rely on crop-unit-
specific conversion factors (possibly differentiated by region), which are often either unavailable
to the researcher or available but not documented adequately and/or suspected to be out of date/in
need of further validation.

A factor that further mediates the success of the kg-equivalent conversion is the issue of crop
condition and state, and in the case of cereals, the ability to express production in kg-grain-
equivalent terms. Put differently, a farmer that reports two 100 kg bags of green maize that is on
the cob would have drastically different production than a farmer that reports two 100 kg bags of
maize in dried grain form. If the questionnaire instrument does not allow for the distinction of crop
condition and state, the researcher would need to make assumptions regarding the crop conditions

6
    Extended-harvest refers to harvest on an ongoing basis.


                                                                                                   5
and states associated with the reported production quantities. Even if the questionnaire instrument
allows for the distinction of crop condition and state, the conversion factor database would need
to cover each crop-unit-condition-state combination – a more demanding challenge for survey
implementers to address compared to having a simpler conversion factor database at the crop-unit-
level.

As the literature on the IR largely overlooks the abovementioned issues with relying on farmer-
reported production values, we now turn to the description of the Ugandan context and the data
that allow us to explore whether, and the extent to which, errors in farmer-reported production
information exist and how, if at all, they affect the often-observed IR.


    3. Country Context

Uganda is a landlocked East African nation of approximately 39 million people, with an annual
population growth rate of 3.25 percent and 83.9 percent of the population living in rural areas
(2015). National and rural rates of the population living in poverty, with respect to the national
poverty line, are estimated at 19.5 and 22.4 percent, respectively (2012), and gross domestic
product per capita in current US dollars stands at 705 (2015). The economy is heavily dependent
on agriculture, such that agricultural land constitutes 71.9 percent of total land area (2014),
agriculture value added corresponds to 25.8 percent of the GDP (2015), and agricultural
employment makes up 71.7 percent of total employment (2013). 7 Agriculture, specifically
increasing agricultural production and productivity, is identified as an essential vehicle for wealth
creation in the country’s key policy documents (GoU, 2013; 2015; MAAIF, 2013).

Maize is a major staple, commercial, and export crop in Uganda. It is the leading cereal crop grown
in almost all parts of the country. In Eastern Uganda, the country’s leading maize producing region
(UBOS, 2010), the crop accounts for the highest share (25 percent) of crop income (World Bank,
2016). At the same time, Eastern Uganda, following Northern Uganda, is also the region with the
highest concentration of the country’s poor, and the latest estimate of the regional absolute poverty
rate stands at 24.5 percent (World Bank, 2016). Commercialization of maize is relatively low in
Eastern Uganda, with less than 41 percent of maize producing households selling any quantity of
maize.8

According to FAOSTAT data depicted in Figure 1 and Figure 2, the trends in maize area harvested
and maize yield are positive for the period of 1995-2014. The national area harvested increased
steadily over time, from 571,000 hectares to 1.1 million hectares in 2014. The national yield


7
  The official World Bank statistics on Uganda are obtained from https://goo.gl/IqGLQh. The reference years are noted
in parentheses.
8
  The statistic is based on the Uganda National Panel Survey (UNPS) 2015/16 data.


                                                                                                                   6
fluctuated around 1.5 tons per hectare mark from 1995 to 2007, but has been above 2.3 tons per
hectare in the period of 2008-2014. The latest national yield estimate in 2014 was 2.5 tons per
hectare. Recent FAOSTAT yield estimates, however, are markedly higher than those computed
from household survey data, including from the methodological experiment informing this study,
which employs objective measurement methods. These discrepancies in yield estimates call into
question, at least for Uganda, the validity of FAOSTAT figures.


    4. Data

             4.1.     Overview

MAPS: Methodological Experiment on Measuring Maize Productivity, Soil Fertility and Variety
is a two-round household panel survey that was conducted in Eastern Uganda to test the relative
accuracy of subjective approaches to data collection vis-à-vis objective survey methods for maize
yield measurement, soil fertility assessment, and maize variety identification. The survey has been
implemented by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, with technical and financial assistance provided
by an inter-agency partnership that is led by the World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study
(LSMS), using the Survey Solutions Computer Assisted-Personal Interviewing (CAPI) platform.9

             4.2.     Sampling Design

In Round I, the MAPS fieldwork was conducted during the first rainy season of 2015, from April
to October 2015, in Eastern Uganda, the top maize-producing region of the country. The sample
was composed of 75 enumeration areas (EAs) that were selected from the 2014 Population and
Household Census (PHC) EA frame and that were distributed across 3 strata, namely (1) Sironko
district (15 EAs), (2) Serere district (15 EAs), and (3) a 400 km2 remote sensing tasking area
spanning Iganga and Mayuge districts (45 EAs). In each stratum, the EAs were sampled with
probability proportional to size, in accordance with the pre-dissemination 2014 PHC EA-level
household counts.



9
  The technical assistance to MAPS I (2015) and MAPS II (2016) was provided through the World Bank LSMS –
Minding the (Agricultural) Data Gap Research Program, funded by UK Aid. In MAPS I, MAPS implementation was
financed by the World Bank LSMS – Minding the (Agricultural) Data Gap Research Program, the Global Strategy to
Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics, led by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),
and the CGIAR Standing Panel on Impact Assessment. In MAPS II, MAPS implementation was financed by the
World Bank Innovations in Big Data Analytics Program, the World Bank Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building
– Innovations in Development Data Window, and the CGIAR Standing Panel on Impact Assessment. In MAPS I and
MAPS II, Terra Bella provided free high-resolution satellite imagery for the MAPS remote sensing tasking area for
research purposes. The technical partners included (i) the World Agroforestry Center on soil fertility measurement,
(ii) the CGIAR Standing Panel on Impact Assessment on maize variety identification, and (iii) Stanford University
Center on Food Security and Environment on remote sensing.


                                                                                                                  7
In each sampled EA, a household listing exercise was conducted to identify, separately, the list of
households that were cultivating at least 1 pure stand maize plot, and the list of households that
were cultivating at least 1 intercropped maize plot, on which maize is self-identified to be the
dominant crop. Given the interest in the validation of survey methods in key sub-samples and the
fact that approximately two-thirds of all maize plots are intercropped in Uganda, the original
intention had been to select, at random, 6 households from each of the pure stand and intercropped
universes of households of an EA, and ensure an even sample split by maize cultivation status.

Still, due to the low incidence of pure stand households, and the cases in which pure stand
households would switch to intercropping status between the household listing and the first
interview, the sample at the start of MAPS I fieldwork was composed of 900 households, of which
385 were pure stand (43 percent) and 515 were intercropped (57 percent). Within the remote
sensing tasking area specifically, the MAPS I fieldwork started out with 540 households, of which
249 were pure stand (46 percent) and 291 (54 percent) were intercropped. In each MAPS
household, 1 maize plot, matching the household cultivation status, was selected at random by the
Survey Solutions CAPI application for crop cutting (for objective yield measurement) and soil
sampling (for objective soil fertility analysis). The variety identification component was
implemented among the 540 MAPS I households residing in the remote sensing tasking area
(specific to the plots on which crop cutting and soil sampling took place), as explained below.

In MAPS II, the MAPS fieldwork was conducted during the first rainy season of 2016, from June
to October 2016. The field teams attempted to track and re-interview 540 households that had been
interviewed in MAPS I in the 400 km2 remote sensing tasking area cutting across Iganga and
Mayuge districts. Appendix I provides the MAPS II household tracking protocol that was followed
by the field teams. The MAPS II fieldwork successfully interviewed 489 out of 540 households,
and the sample informing our analyses is composed of 440 households for which we have obtained
crop cutting measures in both rounds.10 Further, as in Round I, 1 maize plot was selected from
each household for crop cutting and variety identification components, in accordance with the
following rules. Whenever possible, a plot was selected among those that were matching the
household cultivation status in Round I. Preference was also given such that a plot would be
selected from the same parcel that had contained the plot selected in Round I. If multiple plots
match the household cultivation status, the CAPI application selected one plot at random.
Appendix II lays out the MAPS II plot selection protocol that was implemented by the field teams.

10
  34 out of 51 households that we did not interview in MAPS II were due to the fact that they were not cultivating
maize in the first season of 2016. The remaining 17 households can be broken down as follows: 5 households could
not be tracked or were outside of the tracking area defined as the Iganga and Mayuge districts (5); 4 households had
suffered total crop loss prior to post-planting interview; 7 households had already harvested their maize by the post-
planting interview; and 1 household refused. The final analysis sample of 440 households vis-à-vis the original 100
records that had at least been subject to the post-planting interview in MAPS I do not exhibit statistically significant
differences in terms of their MAPS I yield measures and control variables for our regressions. The mean comparisons
are available upon request. In line with this finding, our multivariate regressions are robust to the use of inverse
predicted response probabilities in MAPS I as attrition weights.


                                                                                                                      8
             4.3.     Fieldwork

In each round, there were three visits to each household, namely post-planting, crop-cutting, and
post-harvest. During the post-planting visit, each household was administered a farm survey that
collected information on (1) age, sex, education, economic activities, ethnicity, religion, and
extension service receipts for all household members; (2) household dwelling and ownership of
consumer durables and farm assets; (3) area, tenure, and individual-disaggregated ownership and
rights for all parcels that were owned and/or cultivated by households during the reference rainy
season; and (4) information on area, cultivation pattern, management and decision-making,
conservation agricultural activities, farmer-assessed soil attributes and quality, pre-harvest labor
and seed inputs for all maize plots that were cultivated during the reference rainy season.11 The
plot-level information was intended to be solicited from the corresponding plot manager. Specific
to our analysis sample, the rate at which the plot-level information was solicited from the intended
plot manager stands at 83 percent in both MAPS I and MAPS II. Following the completion of the
household post-planting interview, the enumerator visited the randomly selected maize plot,
measured its area and saved its boundaries on a Garmin eTrex 30 handheld GPS device, and set
up crop cut sub-plots, in accordance with the international best practices, for later harvesting and
weighing. A local crop monitor was recruited in each EA to ensure that the designated crop cut
sub-plots were not harvested by the households until the subsequent visit. Specific to MAPS I, top
and sub-soil samples were also obtained by the enumerators during the post-planting period, for
objective soil fertility testing, as detailed below.

During the crop cutting visit, the enumerator harvested the crop cut sub-plots in order to obtain
objectively measured harvest quantities. Two household members and the local crop cut monitor
helped in the harvesting and shelling of the crop cut harvests that were weighed initially by the
enumerator using an industrial digital scale. The samples were later transferred to a centralized
facility for additional drying, moisture measurement, and final weighing. At crop cutting, the
manager of the randomly selected maize plot also provided information on the morphological
attributes of the maize plants on his/her plot with the help of a photo aid, as described below. In
the final, post-harvest, visit, farmer-reported information on total plot-specific maize production,
non-labor inputs and harvest labor inputs was solicited for all maize plots that were cultivated
during the reference season. The post-harvest visit was scheduled within a 2-month period
following the completion of each household’s harvest.




11
  A parcel is conceptualized as a continuous piece of land under a common tenure system, while a plot is defined as
a continuous piece of land on which a unique crop or a mixture of crops is grown, under a uniform, consistent crop
management system, not split by a path of more than one meter in width, and with boundaries defined in accordance
with the crops grown and the operator. Therefore, a parcel can be made up of one or more plots. This distinction is
key since for the purposes of within-farm analysis of agricultural productivity, the ideal is to capture within-parcel,
plot area measurements linked with plot-level measurement of agricultural production


                                                                                                                     9
             4.4.     Key Measurement Domains and Methods

The measurement methods in each of the key measurement domains of interest, namely maize
production, plot area, and soil fertility, are summarized below.

                           4.4.1. Plot Area Measurement

After walking the perimeter of a given plot with the plot manager to identify the boundaries, the
enumerators re-paced the perimeter and measured the area with a Garmin eTrex 30 handheld GPS
device. The area was recorded on the questionnaire in square meters, and the raw GPS track outline
was stored for the remote sensing work program; linking relevant geospatial variables to the plot
location; and calculating plot shape metrics.12 As noted above, the competing yield measures in
our study are all anchored in GPS-based plot area measurement.

                           4.4.2. Maize Production Measurement

                                        4.4.2.1.      Crop Cutting

Crop cutting has been recognized as the gold standard for yield measurement since the 1950s by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Besides the cost- and
supervision-intensive nature of the exercise, several concerns have been raised regarding the
accuracy of the method. Even if one places only one random crop cutting sub-plot within the
sampled plot, the resulting yield estimate may carry a sampling error if the yields exhibit within-
plot heterogeneity. (1) More thorough-harvesting of crop cut sub-plots vis-à-vis the typical farmer
harvesting practices, (2) possible rounding of crop cut production estimates obtained through
scales; (3) using faulty or inappropriate scales; (4) omitting to net out the weight of the
measurement container from the measured production; (5) including plants that fall outside of the
sub-plot; and (6) non-random placement of crop cut sub-plots have also been suggested as possible
sources of error (Fermont and Benson, 2011).

By implementing a well-supervised crop cutting operation that relied on (a) random sub-plot
placement and high-precision digital weighing scales in both rounds, (b) full plot harvests in a
subsample of MAPS II plots, and (c) field staff and local crop cut monitors that were intensively
trained to circumvent the abovementioned criticisms, our crop cutting-based maize yield estimates,
in comparison to those that rely on farmer-reported production, are assumed, and later shown, to
be more accurate approximations of the true levels. Further, given our interest in the IR, the main


12
  Each plot manager was also asked to estimate the full area in acres, consistent with the practice of the UNPS. Up to
two decimal points were recorded. However, we use the GPS-based plot areas for all analyses, given the systematic
errors in farmer-reported plot areas that have been documented, as reviewed above, in Uganda and elsewhere in Sub-
Saharan Africa.


                                                                                                                   10
assumption in the estimation of our production functions is that the error in crop cutting estimates
is independent of the plot size. Given the random placement of the crop cut sub-plots whose size
did not vary by plot size, this assumption should be tenable, as also maintained by Desiere and
Jolliffe (2017).

Appendix III provides the MAPS sub-plot and full plot crop cutting protocol in detail. In Round I,
a 4x4 meter subplot (divided into four 2x2m quadrants) and a separate 2x2 meter subplot were laid
on the chosen maize plot during the post-planting visit following a strict protocol to ensure the
location of the subplots was random, as described in Appendix III. The subplots were cordoned
off until harvest, and were supervised by the local crop cut monitors between the post-planting and
the crop cutting visits. Each plot manager was asked not to harvest any crop from the sub-plots
until the crop cutting visits, and not to manage the sub-plot any differently than the rest of the plot.
These messages, first communicated by the enumerator, were intended to be enforced by the local
crop cut monitors.

During the crop cutting visit, the shelled maize harvests tied to each of the five 2x2m quadrants
were weighed and barcoded separately in the field, and were reweighed at a central location in
Kampala under strict supervision following additional drying (once the moisture content was in
the range of 12 to 14 percent). At the time of the final weighing, the moisture content of each
sample was captured as to standardize all crop cut sample weights used for our analyses at 12
percent moisture. The MAPS I sub-plot crop cutting based plot-level maize production estimates
are computed by multiplying the combined crop cut sub-plot production across the 20m2 area
covered by the combination of the 4x4m and the 2x2m subplots by the ratio of the entire GPS-
based plot area in m2 to 20m2.13

In MAPS II, only one 8x8 meter sub-plot (divided into four 4x4m quadrants) was laid on each
plot.14 The harvests tied to each of the four 4x4m quadrants were weighed and barcoded separately
in the field, and the rest of the protocols for crop cut sub-plot supervision and harvest management
were identical to those followed in MAPS II.15 The MAPS II sub-plot crop cutting based plot-level

13
   While not reported here, the MAPS I average sub-plot crop cutting plot-level maize yield was not sensitive whether
one used the 20m2 crop cut sub-plot area across both sub-plots; the 16m2 crop cut sub-plot area covered by the 4x4m
sub-plot; or the 4m2 crop cut sub-plot area covered by the 2x2m subplot. These results are available upon request.
14
   The change to the number and size of the sub-plots in MAPS II was underlined by two factors. First, in MAPS I,
within the remote sensing tasking area, the difference between the average maize based on the 4x4m subplot and the
comparable statistic based on the 2x2m subplot was not statistically significant. Second, the standard deviation among
the yields obtained from 5 2x2 crop cut sub-plots was used to calculated the standard error of the mean yield for the
field, assuming that the variability within the sample was representative of the variability throughout the field. A large
fraction of the fields had standard errors above 10, even 20, percent of the mean, especially for fields with relatively
low estimates of mean yield. This in turn raised a question around the extent to which, say, the yield based on a 4x4m
sub-plot could be deemed representative of the yield based on the entire plot area. Taking these observations and other
logistical considerations into account, the crop cut sub-plot area was increased to 8x8m in MAPS II, with each of the
4x4m quadrant harvests tracked separately to ensure maximum comparability to MAPS I.
15
   In cases where the respondent harvested, despite the instructions during the post-planting visit, a portion of the crop-
cutting sub-plot prior to the crop cutting visit, the crop-cutting production figure was inflated by the percentage of the


                                                                                                                        11
maize production estimates are computed by multiplying the crop cut sub-plot production across
the 64m2 area covered by the 8x8m subplot by the ratio of the entire GPS-based plot area in m2 to
64m2.16

In addition, prior to the start of the MAPS II fieldwork, half of the target household population
was chosen at random, within each of the pure stand and intercropped domain in each EA, to be
subject to a full-plot crop cut, as part of which the entire area of the selected plot was harvested,
shelled and weighed by the enumerator, with help from the crop cut assistants recruited from the
household members and the EA-specific crop cut monitor. On the plots selected for full-plot
harvest, the harvest of the designated 8x8m subplot was weighed separately from the full-plot
harvest to allow for comparative yield analysis. The full-plot harvests were only weighed in the
EAs as their transport to and additional drying and reweighing at a central location was deemed
logistically infeasible.

                                         4.4.2.2.     Remote Sensing

There is a longstanding and active literature on using remote sensing for agricultural monitoring
and assessment. Among more recent advances, the GEOGLAM effort to provide in-season
forecasting for major cropping regions (Becker-Reshef et al. 2010, Franch et al. 2015) represents
an important step forward, as it has operationalized yield forecasting at the national scale.
However, because it is based primarily on high temporal, coarse spatial resolution (~5km) data, it
is of little value for field-level assessment. At the same time, many studies have evaluated
correlations between different reflectance indices and field or sub-field scale crop biomass or yield
in specific site/years (e.g., Shanahan et al. 2001, Lobell et al. 2003, Sibley et al. 2014). Although
these studies have demonstrated the potential for accurate satellite-based yield estimates, they
generally (i) are for large-scale commercial systems and (ii) rely on calibrations that are specific
to sites and/or image timings and thus do not generalize well across broad regions. A recent effort
by Lobell et al. (2015) has developed a more general approach to combining crop simulation
models and remote sensing data to map yields at the field scale, but this approach so far has been
tested at the field scale only in large, homogeneous fields of the U.S.



sub-plot pre-harvested, as reported by the enumerator, based on his/her observation, on the crop-cutting questionnaire.
In establishing the pre-harvest percentage, the enumerators were trained extensively to distinguish pre-harvest from
crop damage. In cases where the full sub-plot was pre-harvested by the farmer, the observation was dropped from
analysis. Of the remaining 440 observations in each wave, 8.4 percent and 20 percent of households pre-harvested a
portion of the sub-plot in MAPS I and II, respectively. Of those plots on which pre-harvesting took place, the mean
share of the sub-plot pre-harvested was 28.5 percent in MAPS I and 26.2 percent in MAPS II. The crop cut yields
were not adjusted for any crop damage that may have materialized between the post-planting and the crop cutting
visits.
16
   While not reported here, the MAPS II average sub-plot crop cutting plot-level maize yield was not sensitive whether
one used the 64m2 crop cut sub-plot area or the 16m2 crop cut sub-plot area covered by a randomly selected 4x4m
quadrant within the 8x8m sub-plot. These results are available upon request.


                                                                                                                    12
Several reviews of the sector point to the key needs of (i) better integration of different data
sources, including the new higher resolution data available from several providers, (ii)
development of more robust algorithms that can be applied in many different settings without
additional calibration, and (iii) more complete and accurate data sets of ground-based measures of
crop productivity in order to rigorously establish the accuracy of remote sensing approaches
(Gallego et al., 2010; Atzberger, 2013; Lobell; 2013). The MAPS remote sensing work program
addresses all of these needs in a unique way. To our knowledge, no other research groups working
on agriculture have comparable access to high resolution imagery from the private sector;
approaches that are as scalable and potentially operational for field-scale mapping in smallholder
systems; and ability to collect accurate plot-level maize yield measurement for hundreds of plots.

Specifically, in Round I, remote sensing based yield estimates were obtained based on four images
acquired by the Terra Bella (formerly Skybox) satellites over the 400 km2 tasking area on May 15,
June 9, June 27, and July 28, 2015. These images were first geometrically corrected to ensure that
plot boundaries were properly aligned with the imagery. Clouds and cloud shadows were manually
masked out, and each image was radiometrically corrected to surface reflectance by a standard
approach of histogram matching to Landsat images from the same locations and time of year.
Reflectance values for individual bands were then used to compute two standard vegetation
indices, namely (1) normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) defined by Rouse et al. (1973)
as:

                                           (                  −      )
                                       =
                                           (                  +      )

and (2) green chlorophyll vegetation index (GCVI) defined by Gitelson et al. (2003) as:


                                               =
                                                   (      − 1)

For each image date, the mean NDVI and GCVI values for each plot were calculated based on all
pixels that fell within the GPS-based plot boundaries. The crop cutting yields, based on the 20m2
area covered by the combination of the 4x4m and the 2x2m subplots, were then used to calibrate
an empirical model relating yield to GCVI on the first three imagery dates, namely May 15, June
9, June 27. NDVI was also tested but performed significantly worse.

When using the entire data set of crop-cutting yields on pure stand fields (n = 235), the correlation
between yields and GCVI was low, with an adjusted R2 (R2adj) of 0.13 from a model using the
three dates of GCVI. Based on the possibility that the area covered by the combination of the
subplots may not represent the heterogeneity across the entire plot area, the model was estimated
using different subsets of plots for which the standard error in the crop-cutting yields (as calculated



                                                                                                    13
based on the standard deviation among the yields obtained from five 2x2 crop cut sub-plots) was
below different thresholds. These models demonstrated much higher adjusted R2 values. For
instance, R2adj was equal to 0.33 when using 20 percentage points as the threshold (n = 53) and
0.38 when using 10 percentage points as the threshold (n = 30). The latter model was then used to
predict yields across the entire plot sample.17

                                         4.4.2.3.      Farmer Estimation

Plot managers were asked to report their estimate of maize harvest at the parcel-plot-level during
the post-harvest visit, replicating the design of the relevant Uganda National Panel Survey (UNPS)
questionnaire modules.18 Each plot manager was allowed to report production in non-standard
measurement units, and was asked to report on both the condition (e.g. green harvested; dry after
additional drying; etc.) and the state (e.g. with cob but without stalk or husk; grain; etc.) of up to
three maize harvests that may have occurred on the plot over a period of time. The production
measurement units, conditions, and states were borrowed directly from the UNPS, and are
provided in Appendix IV. The dry grain-equivalent harvest quantities in kilograms were calculated
in each round by using the conversion factor database that has been compiled by the UBOS during
the 2007 Uganda Census of Agriculture (UCA) for each non-standard measurement unit-
condition-state combination and that has been complemented by the data solicited during the
UNPS 2009/10, 2010/11, and 2011/12 waves for the (rare) combinations that were not captured as
part of the UCA exercise.19 Moreover, in Rounds I and II, farmer-reported production information

17
   The MAPS II remote sensing work program was continuing at the time of the publication of the working paper
version of this manuscript. Given the limited availability of cloud-free Terra Bella imagery in 2016 (acquired mirroring
the timeline of the Round I imagery acquisition), the remote sensing validation in MAPS Round II relies primarily on
Sentinel-2 imagery.
18
   It is important to note that the identification of parcels versus plots within parcels was anchored in the precise
definitions that have been referenced above and that have been in effect since the UNPS 2009/10 wave. The
operationalization of these definitions is such that each enumerator, prior to the administration of the post-planting
questionnaire, has a detailed discussion with the holder regarding the organization of his/her farm. This conversation
(1) ensures that the enumerator and the farmer are on the same page regarding what parcels versus plots within parcels
mean, (2) often culminates in sketches of different parcels and plots within parcels that are being cultivated during
that reference season, and (3) establishes how parcels and plots within parcels will be rostered in the questionnaire
instrument. The established parcels and plots within parcels are then reviewed at each subsequent visit to the
household.
19
   The conversion factors have been made available as part of a study by Oseni et al. (2017), and can be accessed here
https://goo.gl/HgdbBv. To calculate the dry grain-equivalent harvest quantities, we start with the UCA+UNPS
augmented database that contains the kilogram value for each measurement unit-condition-state combination. We
merge this file at the unit-condition-state level to each of the reported harvests on the maize plot, and multiply the
reported quantity with the conversion factor to calculate an initial kg-equivalence. Further, there are two domains of
raw harvest quantities – those that are reported on the cob versus those that are reported as grain. We first work in
these domains separately. Within the “cob” domain, we adjust the initial kg-equivalence for all harvest quantities such
that they would be reported in terms of the condition “dry, after additional drying” and state “with cob, without husk
or stalk” The adjustments are precisely the conversion factor ratios within the cob domain between the preferred
condition-state combination and all other observed combinations. Within the “grain” domain, we carry out a similar
adjustment procedure such that all harvested quantities are expressed in terms of condition “dry after additional
drying” and state “grain.” The final adjustment is for expressing the standardized harvest quantities within the cob
domain in terms of condition “dry after additional drying” and state “grain.” To do this, we first compute EA-specific


                                                                                                                     14
was solicited for all maize plots cultivated by the household during the respective season, inclusive
of the plot on which crop cut sub-plots were laid.

                           4.4.3. Objective Soil Fertility Measurement (MAPS I Only)

Analysis of soil fertility was done in partnership with the World Agroforestry Center (ICRAF).
Plot level soil samples were collected from each plot selected for crop cutting following a protocol
carefully designed to maximize the representativeness of the samples while maintaining feasibility
of implementation. From each plot, four samples were collected from the top-soil (0-20cm depth)
and combined to create one composite top-soil sample. Additionally, a single sub-soil sample (20-
50cm depth) was collected from the center of the plot. After being processed at the ICRAF
Kampala office, the samples were shipped to ICRAF Nairobi office, where approximately 10
percent were subject to conventional wet chemistry testing and all samples were subject to spectral
soil analysis. A portion of this 10 percent sample was used to calibrate the prediction models, while
the remainder was used to verify the predictions made onto the spectral data.20 The final results
from the soil analysis include key indicators of soil fertility such as pH, texture analysis (% sand,
% clay, % silt), cation exchange capacity, and the concentration of multiple elements and macro-
and micronutrients, including carbon, nitrogen, and potassium.21

             4.5.      Descriptive Statistics

Before moving to the empirical strategy used to examine the existence of the IR, descriptive
statistics are used to illustrate the deviations between yield measures based on farmer-reported
maize production vis-a-vis crop-cutting and remote sensing. Though not reported, the average
GPS-based plot area was 0.14 hectares in MAPS I (with a maximum value of 1.37 and a standard
deviation of 0.16) and 0.18 hectares in MAPS II (with a maximum value of 2.56 and a standard
deviation of 0.23). 22 , 23 The plot-level averages for maize production (kilograms) and yield


adjustment factors as the average ratio between shelled and unshelled (on the cob, dry after additional drying, prior to
shelling) crop cut sub-plot harvests obtained in MAPS II, and multiply all kg-equivalent production estimates within
the “cob” domain in MAPS I and MAPS II with its corresponding EA-specific adjustment factor.
20
   For details, see Shepherd and Walsh (2002).
21
   During the post-planting interview and prior to visiting the plot for GPS-based area measurement and laying crop
cut sub-plots, each plot manager was also asked a multitude of questions about the soil attributes, specifically color,
texture, type, and overall quality, of the plot selected for crop cutting. We do not provide further information on these
variables as we only rely on objectively-measured soil quality index.
22
   The round-specific descriptive statistics, including GPS-based plot area, are reported in Table A1. Where available,
means are reported for the comparable UNPS 2015/16 sample. Due to high missingness rates of GPS-based area
measurement, and area measurement at the parcel level rather than plot level, plot area and yield figures for UNPS are
not comparable to those in MAPS I or II, and are, therefore, not reported.
23
   In MAPS I and II, the GPS-based area measure was obtained in each household only for the randomly selected
maize plot subject to crop cutting. Farmer-reported area was, however, solicited for the complete set of maize plots
that may have been cultivated by the household during the reference agricultural season. Following Kilic et al. (2017a,
2017b), we estimated a simple imputation model of GPS-based plot areas pooled across MAPS I and II as a function
of farmer-reported plot area, a dichotomous variable identifying 2016 round observations, and EA fixed effects. The


                                                                                                                      15
(kilograms per hectare, using GPS-based plot areas) based on self-reported maize production, crop
cutting and remote sensing are presented in Table 2 for each round.24 To quell any concerns of
bias in self-reported estimates stemming from exposure to full-plot harvest, the computation of
self-reported MAPS II averages excludes plots on which full-plot harvest was conducted. Certain
patterns emerge that are consistent with expectations. First, maize production and yield are, on
average, higher on pure stand plots than their intercropped counterparts, irrespective of the
approach to measurement of maize production. This is part due to still using the entire cultivated
plot area, without further adjustments for planting density, while computing the intercropped
maize yields. Second, there is a marked decline in productivity from MAPS I to MAPS II. This is
in line with the increased incidence of crop damage observed by both plot managers (on the full
plot) and enumerators (on the crop cutting sub-plots), primarily attributable to a reported increase
in drought.25

Third, in each round, the overall self-reported maize yield is, on average, at least 85 percent higher
than its crop cutting and remote-sensing based counterparts. The comparable degree of discrepancy
is at least 25 percent in terms of plot-level maize production – although the self-reported maize
production is, on average, 84 percent higher than the comparable figure based on full-plot crop
cutting. While the means presented in Table 2 illustrate the over-estimation of maize production
and yields on the part of our farmers, they do not address whether a systematic bias is at play. The
correlates of over-estimation of yields with respect to sub-plot crop cutting based yield
measurement are explored in Section 5.

Fourth, the comparison of the averages for production and yield based on alternative measurement
methods, including sub-plot crop cutting, full-plot crop cutting and remote sensing, reveals a
greater similarity among the estimated yields. On pure stand plots, in MAPS II, the differences in
the average plot-level maize yield based on sub-plot crop cutting versus full-plot crop cutting are
not statistically significant, lending confidence to sub-plot crop cutting estimates in this domain.
Similarly, in MAPS I, the difference in the average plot-level maize yield on pure stand plots based
on sub-plot crop cutting versus remote sensing is also not statistically significant, raising hopes
regarding the application of high-resolution satellite imagery based remote sensing for the
measurement of crop yields in smallholder production systems.

R2 for the imputation model was 0.59. Within a multiple imputation framework, we subsequently obtained a single
imputation of GPS-based plot area for the maize plots that were not measured, using predictive mean matching.
Specifically, we use the linear GPS-based plot area prediction as a distance measure to form a set of 5 nearest neighbors
out of the plot sample measured with GPS, and randomly pick one of these neighbors whose observed GPS-based area
value replaces the missing value for the incomplete case at hand. The completed data set with the imputed GPS-based
plot areas was then collapsed at the household-round-level to induce a better understanding of the scale of the maize
farms. The average GPS-based household-level total area cultivated with maize was 0.29 hectares in MAPS I (with a
maximum value of 4.49 and a standard deviation of 0.36) and 0.26 hectares in MAPS II (with a maximum value of
2.56 and a standard deviation of 0.26).
24
   The sample is restricted to those in which remote sensing, crop-cutting, and self-reported estimates are available,
and to those households which had crop-cutting and farmer-estimated production estimates in MAPS I and MAPS II.
25
   Please see Table A2 for round-specific breakdowns of the reported reasons for production loss.


                                                                                                                      16
On the other hand, our analysis further underscores the difficulty of estimating yields in the
intercropped domain, even with objective measurement approaches. In MAPS II, we find that the
average full-plot crop cutting yield on intercropped plots is 85 kilograms per hectare lower than
its sub-plot crop cutting counterpart, and the difference is significant at the 5 percent level. This is
in line with the expectation that the sub-plot crop cutting yield may not entirely reflect the true
measure given the across-household variation in the types of crops intercropped with maize, and
both across-household and intra-plot variation in maize seeding rate. And, if we can think of sub-
plot crop cutting yield estimate in the intercropped domain as an upper bound for the true yield
based on MAPS II data, we see that remote sensing overestimates plot-level maize production and
yield in MAPS I by a significant margin – likely due to difficulties in attributing vegetation growth
to maize production on intercropped plots.26

Overall, the level and direction of discrepancy between farmer estimates of production and crop-
cutting observed in MAPS I and II run contrary to some previous works, synthesized by Fermont
and Benson (2011). Specifically, while MAPS data reveal that maize yields based on farmer-
reported production are significantly over-reported relative to both sub-plot and full-plot crop
cutting, Verma et al. (1988) assert that, on average, farmer estimates are in fact more accurate than
sub-plot crop-cutting relative to full-plot harvests. There are, however, two concerns associated
with this claim.

First, the small sample used by Verma et al. (1988) prohibited analysis at varying plot size levels.
Yet, as presented below and in line with the findings of Desiere and Jolliffe (2017), the degree of
error between farmer estimates and crop-cutting measures is systematic in nature, with production
and yields more significantly over-estimated by the farmer on smaller plots. Ignoring distributional
differences between farmer estimates and crop-cutting, therefore, can mask the true relationship
between the two measures. Second, the plots analyzed by Vermal et al. (1988) were all subject to
a full-plot harvest, which would likely contaminate farmer-reported production values. Full-plot
harvests also eliminate the need for farmers to aggregate periodic harvests (such as early, green
harvest with final, dry harvest), further contributing to the accuracy of farmer-reported production
values in the presence of contamination.

Similarly, Fermont and Benson (2011) compile historical maize yield estimates in Uganda from a
variety of sources, and report that the self-reported yield estimates are consistently lower than the
estimates based on sub-plot crop cutting, in contrast with our findings. Yet, the assertion of
Fermont and Benson (2011) is potentially misleading, since their reported estimates based on crop
cutting originate from on-farm trials, where farmers may be positively selected and may receive
technical assistance for optimal management practices, as opposed to standard household or farm

26
  Since the MAPS II remote sensing work program was continuing at the time of the publication of the working paper
version of this manuscript, we will refrain from making further concrete statements regarding the accuracy and
feasibility of remote sensing for maize yield measurement in smallholder production systems, and will focus on this
topic in a separate study.


                                                                                                                17
survey operations in which no agronomic guidance would be provided to the farmers. Hence, crop-
cuts from on-farm trials may likely constitute an upper bound for maize yields in field conditions,
and would, therefore, be expected to be greater than maize yields based on farmer-reported
production.


5. Empirical Strategy

            5.1.   Inverse Scale-Productivity Relationship

To investigate whether the inverse scale-productivity relationship is sensitive to the way in which
the plot-level maize yield is measured, we estimate several variants of three regressions following
form:

(1)     =     +        +        +       +        +         +
(2)     =     +         +        +          +        +         +         +      +
(3)     =     +         +        +          +        +         +         +      +

In each equation, Y is the logarithmic transformation of the plot-level maize yield (kilograms per
hectare), based on GPS-based plot area. Equation 1 is a cross-sectional linear regression that is
estimated separately in each survey round; Equation 2 is a panel linear regression that is estimated
with household fixed effects; Equation 3 is a panel linear regression that is estimated with parcel
fixed effects. As shown in Table 3, Equations 1 through 3 are estimated using several plot sample
definitions, and alternative maize yield measures based on (1) self-reporting, (2) sub-plot crop
cutting, (3) full plot crop cutting, and (4) remote sensing.

The following is an overview of the notation used in Equations 1 through 3. First, i and h denote
plot and household, respectively; t denotes survey round in the panel regressions; and α and ε are
the constant and the error term, respectively. The common vectors included in all equations include
A, P, H, and M, whose choice takes into account the explanatory variables commonly featured in
production functions estimated to investigate the inverse scale-productivity relationship.

A is the logarithmic transformation of GPS-based plot area, and β1 is the main coefficient of interest
across all estimations. A negative and statistically significant β1 would be in support of the inverse
scale-productivity relationship at the plot-level.

P is a vector of plot-level characteristics, including (1) a binary variable identifying whether the
plot was pure stand with maize; (2) logarithmic transformation of seeding rate under




                                                                                                   18
intercropping27; (3) logarithmic transformation of kilograms of maize seed planted; (4) a binary
variable identifying whether any inorganic fertilizer was applied on the plot28; (5) logarithmic
transformation of total household member days of season-specific labor input on the plot29; (6) a
binary variable identifying whether there was any hired labor input on the plot; (7) logarithmic
transformation of total hired days of season-specific labor input on the plot30; (8) percent seasonal
(May-June) rainfall deviation from plot location-specific long-term average rainfall 31 ; (9)
logarithmic transformation of GPS-based distance between plot and dwelling in kilometers; (10)
enumerator-assessed percent damage in the crop cut sub-plot 32 ; and (11) a binary variable
identifying whether any cover crops were on the plot prior to planting.

H is a vector of household characteristics, including (1) wealth index, (2) agricultural implement
and machinery index, (3) logarithmic transformation of household size, and (4) dependency ratio.
M is a vector of plot manager characteristics, including (1) a binary variable identifying whether
the respondent is also the plot manager, (2) a binary variable identifying whether the plot manager
received agricultural extension services on topics relevant to crop production and marketing in the
last 12 months, (3) a binary variable identifying whether the plot manager is female, and (4)
logarithmic transformations of plot manager age and years of education.

Specific to Equation 2 and Equation 3, T is our time fixed effect, i.e. binary variable identifying
the second round of plot observations in the panel regressions. Further, θ in Equation 2 is the fixed
effect that accounts for time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity at the household-level, while γ in
Equation 3 is the fixed effect that accounts for time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity at the
parcel-level. The sample for Equation 3 includes plots in both rounds only if the plot selected for
crop cutting in MAPS II happened to be on the same parcel as the plot selected for crop cutting in
MAPS I.33

Further, the vector O includes the rest of the objectively-measured plot-level covariates, including
(1) soil fertility index, (2) genetic heterogeneity of the maize on the plot, based on DNA
fingerprinting of seed samples obtained from the combined harvest tied to the 4x4m crop cut sub-

27
   This is calculated as the ratio between the quantity of maize seed planted under intercropping and the counterfactual
quantity of maize seed that would have been planted had the plot been cultivated pure stand, as reported by the farmer.
The pure stand maize plots are assigned a value of 1.
28
   The rare occurrence of inorganic fertilizer use prevents us from using the logarithmic transformation of the quantity
of inorganic fertilizer applied.
29
   This is calculated as the sum of all household member-specific labor inputs reported by the farmer at the plot-level.
30
   The plots without any hired labor are assigned a value of 0.
31
   The plot location-specific dekadal time series rainfall data are sourced from the CHIRPS database. The plot location-
specific long-term average for the period of May-June is computed over the period of 1981-2015 for MAPS I, and
1981-2016 for MAPS II.
32
   In MAPS I, this is calculated as the average percent damage across both 4x4 and 2x2 sub-plots.
33
   MAPS I parcel rosters were carried forward for updating in MAPS II to identify the MAPS I parcels that were still
owned and/or cultivated by the households during the first rainy season of 2016. This information, together with the
known nesting of the maize plots with the parcels in each round, was used to determine whether the selected plot in
MAPS II happened to be on the same parcel as the selected plot in MAPS I.


                                                                                                                     19
plot in MAPS I34, and (3) edge effects, specifically, the share of the crop cut sub-plot that is within
4 meters of the nearest plot edge (and separately, within 1 meter of the nearest plot edge,
specifically in Round 2, given the increase in the crop cut sub-plot area to 8x8m). The inclusion
of this vector is motivated by the competing hypotheses on the weakening or disappearing inverse
scale-productivity relationship as a result of controlling for plot attributes, such as soil quality
(Barrett et al., 2010), and edge effects (Bevis and Barrett, 2017). Appendix V provides more details
on the construction of the soil fertility index and the edge effects.

                5.2.     Drivers of Farmer Over-Estimation

Descriptive analysis is first used to highlight the validity of the hypothesized sources of
measurement error in self-reported production estimates, primarily heaping of production figures.
Consistency of the error across time is additionally explored, with an eye for examining the
potential to correct this measurement error econometrically. Following Desiere and Jolliffe (2017),
we subsequently move to explore the correlates of farmer over-estimation through regression
analysis of the log ratio of self-reported to crop cutting yields. Since it is feasible that the drivers
of farmer over-estimation vary along the distribution of over-estimation, recentered influence
function (RIF) regressions are estimated. The econometric method, put forth by Firpo et al. (2009),
executes an unconditional quantile regression by first estimating an influence function recentered
on a given quantile, and subsequently utilizing the estimated RIF value as the dependent variable
in a linear regression. The influence function for the dependent variable, Y, in this case the degree
of measurement error in self-reported production-based yields proxied by the log ratio of self-
reported to crop cutting yields, is as follows:

                                                            ( −        ≤       )
                                       (4)       ( ;   )=
                                                                     ( )

where        ≤     equals 1 if the dependent variable is less than or equal to the quantile QT (0
otherwise), QT is the population T-quantile of the unconditional distribution of Y, and fY(QT) is the
density of the marginal distribution of Y. The RIF is a function of equation (4), assuming IF(y;v)
is the influence function for an observed productivity outcome y:

(5)         ( ; )=       (   )+       ( ; )

where v(FY) is the distributional statistic for the dependent variable. Therefore,

(6)         ( ;     )=       +      ( ;      )



34
     For more information on the MAPS maize variety identification component, please see Ilukor et al. (2017).


                                                                                                                 20
Finally, the RIF values are regressed on a series of covariates using linear regressions. The
covariates included are those believed to influence productivity itself, as discussed above, as well
as controls for whether self-reported production estimates were rounded/heaped on whole
numbers, included 100, 200, 300, 400 or 500 kg or 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 10 100 kg sacks.


6. Results

           6.1.    Inverse Scale-Productivity Relationship

Table 4 reports the plot area coefficients from the regressions that are estimated as specified in
Table 3. The full set of regression results are reported in the Appendix Tables A4.1-A4.3. As
discussed above, a negative and statistically significant coefficient on plot area confirms the IR.
The results suggest that when using farmer-reported production estimates to define plot-level
maize yields, the IR holds across the entire set of specifications and analysis samples of interest,
including in the instances where we control for unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity at the
household- and parcel-level. The magnitude of the IR is non-trivial; on average, a 1 percent
increase in GPS-based plot area results in a 0.35 to 0.9 percent reduction in maize yields,
depending on the specification. In terms of magnitude, the coefficients are similar with respect to
other published findings in Uganda (Larson et al. 2014).

On the other hand, there is no evidence of the IR when we define maize yield on the basis of sub-
plot crop cutting, full-plot crop cutting, or remote sensing-based crop production estimates. In
MAPS II, using full-plot crop cutting maize yield, the GPS-based plot area coefficient is
insignificant, statistically indistinguishable from zero, irrespective of cultivation status –
suggesting constant returns to scale (CRS). In specifications that exploit the panel nature of the
data, the coefficient of interest at times changes direction, but again is insignificant across all
specifications and analysis sample definitions, with the exception of a marginally significant,
positive coefficient under the parcel-panel column. Similarly, in MAPS I, remote sensing
estimates, on average, suggest a marginally significant positive return to land area, but this result
is not robust as the coefficient loses significance when the sample is disaggregated by cultivation
status, and in the pure stand domain, where we have a higher degree of confidence in remotely-
sensed yields, it is near-zero in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Taken together, the
findings based on maize yields that are measured with objective survey methods support constant,
as opposed to decreasing, returns to scale.

These conclusions hold true (1) in the expanded sample with the households from the two districts,
Serere and Sironko, that are excluded from the analysis sample due to lack of remote sensing and
variety identification data; (2) if the top and bottom 5 percent of the plots in terms of maize yield
are excluded from the analysis sample; and (3) if the analysis sample is limited only to households



                                                                                                  21
that cultivate only one maize plot. These robustness checks, which are available upon request,
work to ensure that the results (1) hold across a greater geographic area in the Eastern region; (2)
are not being driven by outliers in yield data; and (3) in part rule out the theory that errors in self-
reported production are driven by difficulty in reporting production at the plot level, rather than
the (maize) farm level.

Further, as documented in the Appendix Table A3, while IR persists at the mean and throughout
the distribution of plot-level maize yields anchored in farmer-reported production, CRS is
observed throughout the distribution of objective yield measures. This finding is in stark contrast
with the new evidence put forth by Savastano and Scadizzo (2017), who, based on farmer-reported
panel survey data, provide support for the IR among the sample of farmers above the median land
productivity measure.

Contrary also to the findings by Bevis and Barrett (2017), who use the perimeter-to-area ratio as a
proxy for edge effect and find plot edges to be more productive than the interior, the results
summarized in Table 4, and reported in full in the Appendix Tables A4.1-A4.3, suggest that plot
edges are generally not more or less productive than the interior of the plot, and when significant,
the direction of the coefficient suggests the plot edges are less productive. This finding is robust
to an alternative definition of the edge effect, namely a 1m buffer along the plot edge as opposed
to the 4m buffer presented here. The support for CRS, as opposed to the IR, in the MAPS II
estimations that use the full-plot crop cut yield as the dependent variable raises further questions
on the viability of the edge effect hypothesis in our context.

Finally, to illustrate the difference in plot area coefficients across specifications, Figures 3, 4, and
5 present the plot area coefficients with 95 percent confidence intervals for the overall, pure stand,
and intercropped sample, respectively. The confidence intervals around the estimated coefficients
originating from regressions that use sub-plot crop cutting-based yield estimates are considerably
tighter than the comparable confidence intervals associated with the plot area coefficients
estimated from regressions that use self-reported production-based yield estimates. The following
section examines the farmer-reported maize production data more closely and seeks to identify the
correlates of farmer over-estimation.

           6.2.    Drivers of Farmer Over-Estimation

Before addressing the correlates of farmer over-estimation and potential sources of systematic
error, we first address the feasibility of correcting this error with the use of correction factors. In
order for correction factors to be an appropriate course of action to improve the quality of self-
reported production data, the error must be consistent across time and within household. Figure 6,
however, illustrates that this is not the case.




                                                                                                     22
The pairwise correlation of the ratio of self-reported to sub-plot crop cut production estimates from
MAPS I to MAPS II is 0.002, not statistically distinguishable from zero. Confidence in the
consistency of self-reported measurement error in crop production is further degraded by the lack
of predictive power from year to year. Table 5 presents the results of simple OLS regression of
MAPS II yields on MAPS I yields, using both sub-plot crop cut production (columns 1, 2, and 3)
and self-reported production (columns 4, 5, and 6).

When relying on the objective measure of production in the numerator, MAPS I yield is a
significant predictor of MAPS II yields, particularly in the sample in which both plots were from
the same parcel. This reflects farmer ability, the quality of the land, agricultural practices
employed, etc. Conversely, self-reported production-based yields in MAPS I are not a statistically
significant predictor of yields in MAPS II. The correlation of self-reported yields between MAPS
I and II on the parcel panel sample is only 0.012, while the correlation between sub-plot crop
cutting yields is 0.226. The inconsistency of measurement error in self-reported production
estimates observed in Figure 6 and Table 5 severely limits the potential for utilizing a “corrected”
self-reported production data in productivity analysis.

If the over-estimation of maize yields based on farmer-reported maize production were uniform
across the distribution of plot sizes, it would have no influence on the observed relationship
between land productivity and plot area. Rather, the differences in the plot area coefficients suggest
that there is a systematic bias in farmer-reported maize production. To address whether the
deviation between crop cutting and farmer estimates varies across the distribution of plot areas,
Figure 7 presents the mean deviation in yields (as measured by self-reported yield minus crop-
cutting yield) by GPS-based plot area quintile for MAPS I and MAPS II. A clear downward trend
exists, in which farmers more greatly over-estimate yields on smaller plots, with the degree of
over-estimation decreasing with plot area. This systematic bias would have direct consequences
on the IR.

This trend is consistent with evidence on the systematic nature of measurement error in farmer
self-reported estimates of plot area. Carletto et al. (2013, 2015, Forthcoming) find that farmers
overestimate plot areas relative to GPS-based area measurements more significantly on smaller
plots, while only slightly overestimating (or underestimating) the area of larger plots. The
collection of both GPS-based area measurement and farmer self-reported area in MAPS I and II
allows for analysis of the relationship between the measurement error in self-reported crop
production and plot area. As expected, the degree of measurement error observed in these two
variables is significantly and positively correlated, with a correlation coefficient of 0.437 and 0.535
in MAPS I and II, respectively.35


35
  The pairwise correlation coefficient of the ratio of self-reported to sub-plot crop cut based production to the ratio of
self-reported to GPS-based plot area measurement is reported. In MAPS II, plots which were subject to full-plot crop
cutting are excluded.


                                                                                                                       23
To explore another potential source of farmer over-estimation yield, namely the persistence of
rounding of farmer-reported production estimates, Figure 8 presents a histogram of reported
quantities for the primary production units, kilograms and 100 kilogram sacks for MAPS I and
MAPS II, as well as the maize-producing UNPS 2015/16 sample residing the Eastern region and
reporting for the first season of 2015 (overlapping with the MAPS I reference period). There is
clear evidence of heaping at common intervals, such as 50 kg, 100 kg, 200 kg, and 300 kg, and 1
sack, 2 sacks, and 10 sacks, which may explain, at least in part, the trend in greater over-estimation
on smaller plots. Rounding of self-reported production quantity on plots with lower production
may have a more severe impact in terms of percent of total production, therefore resulting in
greater bias.

The results of the RIF estimations, as described in section 4, are presented in Table 6. Plot area is
indeed negatively correlated with farmer over-estimation in MAPS I across the entire distribution
of over-estimation, while area is only significantly different from zero (and negative) in the upper
tail for MAPS II and the household panel. Supporting the theory that subjective estimates of
production are complicated by multiple harvest periods and crop conditions, the number of
conditions in which the farmer reports overall harvest is positively correlated with over-estimation
in MAPS I and the household panel (insignificant in MAPS II except for the least productive
decile). Also exacerbating yield over-estimation are the farmer-reported seed, household labor and
hired labor input quantities, which may, therefore, suffer from the same subjective sources of
measurement error. This theory is supported by the correlation of measurement error observed
between self-reported plot area and crop production discussed above, and signals potential concern
for production function estimations more broadly.

Finally, the enumerator-assessed percent damage in the crop cut sub-plot, which could be taken as
a proxy to the damage on the plot as a whole, is significantly and positively correlated with farmer
over-estimation, suggesting farmers may not be taking into account crop damage when estimating
plot-level production. While some may theorize that farmer over-estimation originates in the
inability of farmers to distinguish between the harvest on multiple plots (that is, potentially
reporting the production of multiple plots on a single plot), the results in Table 6 suggest otherwise.
Whether the household cultivates more than one maize plot or not has no bearing on the degree of
farmer over-estimation.


7. Conclusions

Based on a two-round household panel survey conducted in Eastern Uganda to test the relative
accuracy of subjective approaches to data collection vis-à-vis objective survey methods for maize
yield measurement, soil fertility assessment, and maize variety identification, we provide
unambiguous support for the sensitivity of the plot-level inverse scale-productivity relationship to



                                                                                                    24
the choice of the method by which maize production and yield (anchored in GPS-based plot area
measurement) are computed.

While farmer-reported production-based plot-level maize yield regressions consistently lend
support to the inverse scale-productivity relationship, in magnitudes that are similar to previously
published findings on Uganda and other African settings, the comparable regressions estimated
with maize yields based on sub-plot crop cutting, full-plot crop cutting, and remote sensing point
towards constant returns to scale (CRS). In view of the competing hypotheses for the IR, the
regressions control for objective measures of soil fertility, maize genetic heterogeneity, and edge
effects at the plot-level; a rich set of plot, household and plot manager attributes; as well as
household and parcel fixed effects in select specifications. The existence of the IR anchored in the
use of farmer-reported plot-level maize production is also shown throughout the yield distribution,
while CRS is documented throughout the distribution of maize yields based on crop cutting and
remote sensing variants.

Our core finding is driven by persistent over-estimation of farmer-reported maize production and
yield vis-à-vis their crop cutting-based counterparts, particularly in the lower half of the plot area
distribution. The analysis (1) points to the rounding of maize production as a key factor in farmer
over-estimation, (2) suggests that farmers do not consider the degree of crop damage when
reporting production, and (3) provides evidence for multiple harvests (and the accompanying
heterogeneity in harvested crop conditions) contributing to over-estimation. While some may
argue that farmer over-estimation is driven by the inability of farmers to distinguish production at
the plot level, rather than farm level, our results also serve to refute this claim.

Though the findings contribute to a larger (and renewed) body of literature questioning the inverse
scale-productivity relationship based on omitted explanatory variables or alternative formulations
of the agricultural productivity measures, the analysis, together with Desiere and Jolliffe (2017),
is among the first documenting how errors in self-reported survey data on production mediate the
existence of the IR. The consistency in the findings across our study and that of Desiere and Jolliffe
(2017), which has a focus on Ethiopia, is noteworthy.

Taking into account the similarities in heaping in self-reported maize production information
across our study and the Eastern region sub-sample of the UNPS for the same agricultural season,
our findings emphasize the need for sustained focus on the improvement of crop production and
yield measurement in the context of household and farm surveys that solicit farmer-reported
production information and that capture farming at similar scales as well as pervasive use of non-
standard measurement units, and heterogeneity in harvested crop conditions that could be reported
across and within households.




                                                                                                   25
Although we use the official maize unit-condition-state specific conversion factors that are further
augmented with MAPS-based measurements that provide additional nuance to expression of
unshelled maize in shelled equivalent terms, the quality of conversion factors that are used for
computation of farmer-reported maize production in kg-equivalent terms may mediate the
accuracy of the self-reported maize production. However, there are open empirical questions
regarding the extent that conversion factors should be specific in spatial and temporal terms, and
whether an improved set of conversion factors, including through the introduction of non-standard
measurement units that recognize the variation in sizes for specific units, would be enough to
overcome other challenges that may plague self-reported production information, as reviewed in
Section 2.

Finally, given the absence of the IR based on the objective productivity and plot area measures in
our sample, the results provide further support for promoting a policy environment that reduces
the scope for further subdivision of land and that prioritizes investments in land titling and land
market development. It is important to note, however, that our findings do not suggest a broad
development policy focus shift away from the needs of smallholder farming households since there
are social and economic reasons for why one inherently cares about the improvement of living
standards across a large segment of the population relying on farming. And to the extent that
cultivating small plot(s) is positively correlated with poverty and that the smallest plots are
associated with the most upward bias, the actual yields attained by the poorest may be less than
previously estimated.




                                                                                                 26
References

Ali, D. A., and Deininger, K. (2015). Is There a Farm Size-Productivity Relationship in African
        Agriculture? Evidence from Rwanda.” Land Economics, 91, pp. 317–343.
Andrews, S.S., Mitchel, J.P., Mancinelli, R., Karlen, D.L., Hartz, T.K., et al. (2002). “On-Farm
        Assessment of Soil Quality in California’s Central Valley.” Agronomy Journal, 94, pp. 12-
        23.
Assuncao, J., and Ghatak, M. (2003). “Can unobserved heterogeneity in farmer ability explain the
        inverse relationship between farm size and productivity?” Economics Letters, 80, pp. 189–
        194.
Assuncao, J., and Braido, L.H. (2007). “Testing household-specific explanations for the inverse
        productivity relationship.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 89, pp. 980–
        990.
Atzberger, C. (2013). “Advances in remote sensing of agriculture: context description, existing
        operational monitoring systems and major information needs.” Remote Sensing, 5, pp.
        949–981.
GoU (2013). “Uganda vision 2040.” Retrieved on May 11, 2017 from https://goo.gl/DEZwNn.
Barrett, C. (1996). “On price risk and the inverse farm size–productivity relationship.” Journal of
        Development Economics, 51, pp. 193–215.
Barrett, C.B., Bellemare, M.F., and Hou, J.Y. (2010). “Reconsidering conventional explanations
        of the inverse productivity-size relationship.” World Development, 38, pp. 88-97.
Bevis, L., and Barrett, C. B. (2017). “Close to the edge: do behavioral explanations account for
        the inverse productivity relationship?” Retrieved on August 2, 2017 from
        https://goo.gl/j9dyJM.
Becker-Reshef, I., Vermote, E., Lindeman, M., and Justice, C. (2010). “A generalized regression-
        based model for forecasting winter wheat yields in Kansas and Ukraine using MODIS
        data.” Remote Sensing of Environment, 114, pp. 1312–1323.
Benjamin, D. (1995). “Can unobserved land quality explain the inverse productivity relationship?”
        Journal of Development Economics, 46, pp. 51–84.
Bhalla, S., and Roy, P. (1988). “Mis-specification in farm productivity analysis: the role of land
        quality.” Oxford Economic Papers, 40, pp. 55–73.
Carletto, G., Gourlay, S., Murray, S. and Zezza, A. (Forthcoming). “Cheaper, faster and more than
        good enough: is GPS the new gold standard in land area measurement?” Survey Research
        Methods.
Carletto, G., Gourlay, S., and Winters, P. (2015). “From guesstimates to GPStimates: land area
        measurement and implications for agricultural analysis.” Journal of African Economies,
        24, pp. 593–628.
Carletto, G., Savastano, S., and Zezza, A. (2013). “Fact or artifact: the impact of measurement
        errors on the farm size–productivity relationship.” Journal of Development Economics,
        103(C), pp. 254–261.



                                                                                                27
Davis, B., Di Giuseppe, S., and Zezza, A. (2017). “Are African households (not) leaving
        agriculture? Patterns of households’ income sources in rural Sub-Saharan Africa.” Food
        Policy, 67, pp. 153-174.
Desiere, S. and D. Jolliffe. (2017). “Land productivity and plot size: is measurement error driving
        the inverse relationship?” World Bank Policy Research Paper No. 8134.
Dorosh, P., and Thurlow, J. (2016). “Beyond agriculture versus non-agriculture: decomposing
        sectoral growth-poverty linkages in five African countries.” World Development.
Eastwood, R., Lipton, M., and Newell, A. (2010). "Farm size," In R. Evenson and P. Pingali (Eds.),
        Handbook of Agricultural Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Eswaran, M., and Kotwal, A. (1986). “Access to capital and agrarian production organization.”
        Economic Journal, 96, pp. 482–498.
Fermont, A., and Benson, T. (2011). “Estimating yield of food crops grown by smallholder
        farmers: a review in the Uganda context.” International Food Policy Research Institute
        Discussion Paper No. 1097.
Franch, B., Vermote, E. F., Becker-Reshef, I., Claverie, M., Huang, J., Zhang, J., Justice, C. and
        Sobrino, J. A. (2015). “Improving the timeliness of winter wheat production forecast in the
        United States of America, Ukraine and China using MODIS data and NCAR Growing
        Degree Day information.” Remote Sensing of Environment, 161, pp. 131–148.
Firpo, S., Fortin, N. M., and Lemieux, T. (2009). “Unconditional quantile regressions.”
        Econometrica, 77, 953-973.
Gallego, J., Carfagna, E., and Baruth, B. (2010). “Accuracy, objectivity and efficiency of remote
        sensing for agricultural statistics agricultural survey methods.” In R. Benedetti, M. Bee, G.
        Espa and F. Piersimoni (Eds.), Agricultural Survey Methods, Chichester, UK: John Wiley
        & Sons, Ltd.
Gitelson, A. A., Viña, A., Arkebauer, T. J., Rundquist, D. C., Keydan, G., and Leavitt, B. (2003).
        “Remote estimation of leaf area index and green leaf biomass in maize canopies.”
        Geophysical Research Letters, 30, pp. 1248.
Ilukor, J., Kilic, T., Stevenson, J., Gourlay, S., Kosmowski, F., Kilian, A., Sserumaga, J., and Asea,
        G. (2017). “Blowing in the Wind: The Quest for Accurate Crop Variety Identification in
        Field Research, with an Application to Maize in Uganda.” Mimeo.
Kilic, T., Palacios-Lopez, and Goldstein, M. (2015a). “Caught in a productivity trap: a
        distributional perspective on gender differences in Malawian agriculture.” World
        Development, 70, pp. 416-463.
Kilic, T., Winters, P., and Carletto, C. (2015b). “Gender and agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa:
        introduction to the special issue.” Agricultural Economics, 46, pp. 281-284.
Kilic, T., Yacobou Djima, I. and Carletto, C. (2017a). “Mission impossible? Exploring the promise
        of multiple imputation for predicting missing GPS-based land area measures in household
        surveys.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 8138.




                                                                                                   28
Kilic, T., Zezza, A., Carletto, C., and Savastano, S. (2017b). “Missing(ness) in action: selectivity
        bias in GPS-based land area measurements.” World Development, 92, pp. 143-157.
Lamb, R. L. (2003). “Inverse productivity: land quality, labor markets, and measurement error.”
        Journal of Development Economics, 71, pp. 71–95.
Larson, D. F., Otsuka, K., Matsumoto, T., and Kilic, T. (2014). “Should African rural development
        strategies depend on smallholder farms? An exploration of the inverse-productivity
        hypothesis.” Agricultural Economics, 45, pp. 355–367.
Lobell, D. B. (2013). “The use of satellite data for crop yield gap analysis.” Field Crops Research.,
        143, pp. 56–64.
Lobell, D. B., Asner, G. P., Ortiz-Monasterio, J. I., and Benning, T. L. (2003). “Remote sensing
        of regional crop production in the Yaqui Valley, Mexico: estimates and uncertainties.”
        Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 94, pp. 205-220.
Lobell, D. B., Thau, D., Seifert, C., Engle, E., and Little, B. (2015). “A scalable satellite-based
        crop yield mapper.” Remote Sensing of Environment,164, pp. 324–333.
Lowder, S. K., Skoet, J., and Raney, T. (2016). “The number, size, and distribution of farms,
        smallholder farms, and family farms worldwide.” World Development, 87, pp. 16-29.
MAAIF (2013). “National agriculture policy.” Uganda, Kampala: MAAIF.
Mukherjee A., and Lal, R. (2014). “Comparison of soil quality index using three methods.” PLoS
        ONE, 9.
Nkonya, E., Pender, J., Jagger, P., Sserunkuuma, D., Kaizzi, C., and Ssali, H. (2004). “Strategies
        for sustainable land management and poverty reduction in Uganda.” International Food
        Policy Research Institute Research Report No. 133.
Oseni, G., Durazo, J., and McGee, K. (2017). “The use of non-standard measurement units for the
        collection of food quantity: a guidebook for improving the measurement of food
        consumption and agricultural production in living standards surveys.” LSMS Guidebook,
        Washington, DC: World Bank. Retrieved on August 7, 2017 from https://goo.gl/DMK97z.
Rouse, J. W., Haas, R. H., Schell, J. A., and Deering, D. W. (1973). “Monitoring vegetation
        systems in the great plains with ERTS.” In Third ERTS Symposium (Vol. I, pp. 309–317).
        NASA SP-351.
Savastano, S., and Scandizzo, P. L. (2017). “Farm size and productivity: a ‘direct-inverse-direct’
        relationship.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 8127.
Shanahan, J. F., Schepers, J. S., Francis, D. D., Varvel, G. E., Wilhelm, W. W., Tringe, J. M.,
        Schlemmer, M. R., and Major, D. J. (2001). “Use of remote-sensing imagery to estimate
        corn grain yield.” Agronomy Journal, 93, pp. 583–589.
Sibley, A. M., Grassini, P., Thomas, N. E., Cassman, K. G., and Lobell, D. B. (2014). “Testing
        remote sensing approaches for assessing yield variability among maize fields.” Agronomy
        Journal, 106, pp. 24-32.
Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) (2010). “Uganda census of agriculture 2008/2009 - crop area
        and production report.” Retrieved on May 11, 2017 from https://goo.gl/hxn2MS.




                                                                                                  29
Verma, V., Marchant, T., and Scott, C. (1988). Evaluation of crop-cut methods and farmer reports
      for estimating crop production: results of a methodological study in five African countries.
      London: Longacre Agricultural Development Centre Ltd.
World Bank (2016). “The Uganda poverty assessment report. Farms, cities and good fortune:
      assessing poverty reduction in Uganda from 2006 to 2013.” Retrieved on May 11, 2017
      from https://goo.gl/Pvp9ew.




                                                                                               30
                                                  Tables


            Table 1. Potential Sources of Error in Farmer-Reported Estimates of Production
Type                        Mechanisms
Measurement
Complications               Conversion of non-standard production units to standard units or monetary values
                            Variation in crop condition and state at harvest

Unintentional Bias           Recall bias
                             Rounding of production quantity
                             Partial early/green harvest
                             Extended harvest/permanent crops

Intentional Bias             Perceived benefits of under-reporting (such as eligibility for program or service)
                             Desire to appear successful, leading to over-reporting




                                                                                                                  31
   Table 2. Mean Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha) and Production (Kg) by Round, Survey Method & Cultivation
                       Pattern & Results from Tests of Mean & Distributional Differences
                                              MAPS I                                   MAPS II
                                        All        Pure Stand Intercropped              All        Pure Stand Intercropped
Yields (kg/ha)
Self-Reported (SR)                    2,634           3,035          2,296            1,838           1,822           1,845
Sub-Plot Crop Cutting (CC)            1,064           1,220           932              731             835             693
Remote Sensing (RS)                   1,425           1,191          1,622             N/A             N/A             N/A
Full Plot Crop Cutting (FP)            N/A             N/A            N/A              665             854             608
Difference in Means:
   SR vs CC                            ***             ***            ***              ***             ***              **
   SR vs RS                            ***             ***             -               N/A             N/A             N/A
   CC vs FP                            N/A             N/A            N/A               **               -              **
   CC vs RS                            ***               -            ***              N/A             N/A             N/A
Difference in Distributions:
   SR vs CC                            ***             ***            ***              ***             ***             ***
   SR vs RS                            ***             ***            ***              N/A             N/A             N/A
   CC vs FP                            N/A             N/A            N/A              ***             ***             ***
   CC vs RS                            ***             ***            ***              N/A             N/A             N/A
Quantity Harvested per Plot (kg)
Self-Reported (SR)                     242             319            177              212             293             178
Sub-Plot Crop Cutting (CC)             173             234            122              145             205             123
Remote Sensing (RS)                    191             186            195              N/A             N/A             N/A
Full Plot Crop Cutting (FP)            N/A             N/A            N/A              115             211              85
Difference in Means:
   SR vs CC                            ***             ***            ***              ***             ***              **
   SR vs RS                            ***             ***             -               N/A             N/A             N/A
   CC vs FP                            N/A             N/A            N/A              ***               -             ***
   CC vs RS                              -              **            ***              N/A             N/A             N/A
Difference in Distributions:
   SR vs CC                            ***             ***            ***              ***             ***             ***
   SR vs RS                            ***             ***            ***              N/A             N/A             N/A
   CC vs FP                            N/A             N/A            N/A              ***             ***             ***
   CC vs RS                            ***             ***            ***              N/A             N/A             N/A
Notes: The sample is limited to households with crop cutting in both MAPS I and MAPS II. MAPS II self-reported figures
further exclude observations subject to full-plot harvest. ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1/5/10 percent level,
respectively. The distributional differences are assessed based on the Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests of the equality of
distributions.




                                                                                                                     32
                          Table 3. Overview of Cross-Sectional & Panel Regressions Estimated with
                                    Alternative Sample & Dependent Variable Definitions

                                                                   Observation Numbers by Regression Type
Cultivation     Source of Dependent Variable
                                                        MAPS I               MAPS II          Household     Parcel
Domain          Maize Yield (Kg/Ha)
                                                   Cross-Sectional Cross-Sectional               Panel       Panel
             Self-Reporting‡                              440                   240               480         316
             Sub-Plot Crop Cutting‡                       N/A                   240               480         316
All          Sub-Plot Crop Cutting (All Plots)            440                   440               880         594
             Remote Sensing                               440              In Progress        In Progress In Progress
             Full Plot Crop Cutting                       N/A                   200               N/A         N/A
             Self-Reporting‡                              201                   70                118         64
             Sub-Plot Crop Cutting‡                       N/A                   70                118         64
Pure Stand   Sub-Plot Crop Cutting (All Plots)            201                   117               186         114
             Remote Sensing                               201              In Progress        In Progress In Progress
             Full Plot Crop Cutting                       N/A                   47                N/A         N/A
             Self-Reporting‡                              239                   170               240         170
             Sub-Plot Crop Cutting‡                       N/A                   170               240         170
Intercropped Sub-Plot Crop Cutting (All Plots)            239                   323               430         312
             Remote Sensing                               239              In Progress        In Progress In Progress
             Full Plot Crop Cutting                       N/A                   153               N/A         N/A
Notes: ‡ MAPS II cross-sectional regressions exclude plots subject to full-plot crop cutting.




                            Table 4. Overview of Log Plot Area (GPS, Ha) Regression Coefficients

Cultivation    Source of Dependent Variable               MAPS I             MAPS II             Household             Parcel
Domain         Log Maize Yield (Kg/Ha)                 Cross-Sectional    Cross-Sectional          Panel               Panel
                 Self-Reporting‡                           -0.708***           -0.731***           -0.730***          -0.790***
                 Sub-Plot Crop Cutting‡                        N/A               0.161*               0.063              0.116
All              Sub-Plot Crop Cutting (All Plots)            0.066             0.138**               0.093             0.155*
                 Remote Sensing                              0.273*           In Progress         In Progress        In Progress
                 Full Plot Crop Cutting                        N/A               -0.093                N/A                N/A
                 Self-Reporting‡                           -0.561***           -0.805***            -0.346*           -0.890***
                 Sub-Plot Crop Cutting‡                        N/A               -0.169               0.084             -0.124
Pure Stand       Sub-Plot Crop Cutting (All Plots)          0.159**              -0.071              -0.092             -0.126
                 Remote Sensing                               0.047           In Progress         In Progress        In Progress
                 Full Plot Crop Cutting                        N/A                0.018                N/A                N/A
                 Self-Reporting‡                           -0.829***           -0.702***           -0.705***          -0.872***
                 Sub-Plot Crop Cutting‡                        N/A              0.260**               0.146              0.208
Intercropped Sub-Plot Crop Cutting (All Plots)               -0.087             0.201**               0.117              0.148
                 Remote Sensing                               0.470           In Progress         In Progress        In Progress
                 Full Plot Crop Cutting                        N/A               -0.101                N/A                N/A
Notes: ‡ MAPS II cross-sectional regressions exclude plots subject to full-plot crop cutting. MAPS I regressions controls for plot-
level (1) soil quality index, (2) maize genetic heterogeneity, and (3) edge effects (specifications 2, 4, and 6). MAPS II regressions
based on self-reported maize yield exclude observations subject to full-plot harvest. ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the
1/5/10 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                                                           33
                                            Table 5. Predictive Power of MAPS I Yields
Dependent Variable:                          CC Yield MAPS II                                    SR Yield MAPS II‡
                                                                  Not Parcel                                            Not Parcel
Sample:                              All        Parcel Panel        Panel           All              Parcel Panel         Panel

  CC Yield MAPS I                 0.121**         0.143***           0.088
  SR Yield MAPS I                                                                     -0.002            0.007             -0.092

Constant                        582.775***       545.015***       647.650***      1849.667***        1566.281***        2504.644***

N                                  240             158               82               240                 158               82
R2                                0.034           0.051            0.016             0.000               0.000             0.001
Notes: Robust standard errors; ‡ MAPS II cross-sectional regressions exclude plots subject to full-plot crop cutting.


Correlation coefficients:
Parcel Panel Only; excludes households with full plot crop-cut in MAPS II

                                    CC I            CC II            SR I             SR II
       CC MAPS I                      1
       CC MAPS II                  0.2263              1
       SR MAPS I                  -0.0085          -0.0330             1
       SR MAPS II                 0.0029            0.0251          0.0116              1




                                                                                                                           34
                                                       Table 6. Regression Results on Farmer Yield Over-Estimation
                                           Dependent Variable: Log of Plot-Level Ratio of Self-Reported to Sub-Plot Crop Cutting Yield
                                                                                                                         MAPS I
Decile                                                                 10          20           30           40          50            60        70         80          90
Plot Characteristics
  Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                                             -0.359*   -0.221**    -0.341***    -0.234**    -0.317***    -0.499***   -0.365***   -0.296**   -0.856***
  Production Heaped†                                                 0.658***   0.351***     0.273**     0.267**     0.370***       0.311*      0.258     0.507***    0.684**
  Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS, km)                             0.120     0.023       0.037       -0.011       0.032        0.111       0.173*      0.016        0.007
  Pure stand†                                                           0.172     0.073       0.050        0.131       0.169       0.423**      0.070       -0.014      0.073
  % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop Cut Sub-Plot                     0.002     0.002       0.004*     0.006**     0.009***     0.012***    0.017***    0.015***    0.023***
  Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for Pure stand Plots)          -0.568*    -0.110       -0.044      -0.209       -0.012       -0.134      0.099       -0.147      0.055
  Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†                                0.074    -0.099       0.060       -0.041       -0.052       0.088       -0.125      -0.100      -0.279
  Log Maize Seed Planting Rate (Kg/Ha)                                  0.189    0.122*       0.060       0.124*      0.220**       0.182       0.209*     0.240**       0.172
  Organic Fertilizer Application†                                       0.653    -0.059       0.255        0.518       -0.406       -0.232      0.241       -0.046     -0.945*
  Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                                    -0.218    -0.032       -0.098      -0.015       -0.056       -0.056      -0.077      0.042       -0.154
  Log Household Labor Days                                             -0.075    -0.026       -0.040      -0.019       -0.068       0.024       0.120       0.085        0.067
  Log Hired Labor Days                                                  0.066     0.052       0.105      0.153**     0.277***     0.283***    0.325***    0.287***       0.260
  No Hired Labor†                                                      -0.065    -0.012       0.129        0.328      0.832**       0.784*     0.970**      0.673        0.258
  % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June) Rainfall from Long-Term Mean       0.016     0.000       0.007        0.017       0.016        0.028      0.043**     0.033*        0.007
   Harvest Reported in More Than One Condition†                      0.794***   0.362***     0.313**     0.299**     0.430***      0.425**      0.339*      0.231       -0.013
Household Characteristics
  Wealth Index                                                         0.098     -0.029       0.053        0.081       0.036         0.124     0.029       -0.087     -0.205
  Agricultural Asset Index                                             0.091     0.094*       0.058        0.017       -0.100        -0.165    -0.079       0.020      0.050
  Dependency Ratio                                                     0.062      0.010       -0.042      -0.082       -0.083       -0.140*    -0.115     -0.151**    -0.124
  Log Household Size                                                   0.108      0.120       0.082        0.086       0.143         0.044     -0.258      -0.177     -0.110
  HH Cultivates More Than One Maize Plot                              -0.133    -0.227**      -0.190      0.026        0.042         -0.001    -0.113      -0.143     -0.383
Manager Characteristics
  Manager = Respondent†                                               -0.283      -0.107      0.001        0.011       0.029        0.119      -0.056      0.151      -0.285
  Received Crop-Production Related Extension Services†                 0.086      0.174*      0.046        0.060       0.138        0.018      -0.028      -0.016     0.157
  Female†                                                             -0.280      -0.004      -0.081      -0.040       -0.182       -0.223     -0.257      -0.163     -0.249
  Log Age (Years)                                                      0.172      -0.011      0.127       -0.026       -0.036       -0.081     0.025       0.221       0.403
  Log Years of Education                                               0.061       0.024      -0.024      -0.004       -0.043       -0.109     -0.082      -0.060     -0.098
Round II Indicator (=1) †
Constant                                                              -2.638     -1.814*     -2.684**     -1.983*     -3.501**      -3.590*   -4.744***   -3.692**    -4.308
Enumerator Dummies?                                                    Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
Random Effects?                                                          -           -           -            -           -             -          -          -          -
N                                                                      440         440          440         440          440          440        440         440       440
R2                                                                    0.156       0.191        0.165       0.201        0.253        0.289      0.273       0.261     0.221
Continued next page
                                                Table 6. Regression Results on Farmer Yield Over-Estimation (continued)
                                          Dependent Variable: Log of Plot-Level Ratio of Self-Reported to Sub-Plot Crop Cutting Yield
                                                                                                                      MAPS II‡
Decile                                                                 10           20            30            40            50          60         70         80         90
Plot Characteristics
  Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                                             -0.036       0.030         0.011         0.012        0.048        -0.215    -0.235**   -0.542**     -0.495
  Production Heaped†                                                  0.245        0.386        0.329*       0.323**      0.504***      0.977***     0.315     0.633*       0.705
  Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS, km)                           -0.107      -0.123         0.010         -0.005      -0.041        -0.105     -0.016      0.062       0.118
  Pure stand†                                                         0.176        0.193        0.293*         0.088        0.083         0.007      0.061      0.011       0.580
  % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop Cut Sub-Plot                  0.016**     0.021***      0.013***      0.012***     0.012***      0.022***   0.014***   0.024***   0.024**
  Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for Pure stand Plots)          0.365*       0.042         0.032         -0.006      -0.077        -0.141     -0.075     -0.287     -0.934*
  Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†                              0.357       -0.049        -0.241         -0.112      -0.228        -0.219      0.152     -0.029     -0.909*
  Log Maize Seed Planting Rate (Kg/Ha)                                0.306      0.438***      0.325***      0.251***     0.305***      0.487***   0.424***   0.737***   0.701**
  Organic Fertilizer Application†                                     -0.198      -0.445         0.042        -0.713*      -0.489        -0.279     -0.027     -0.635      -0.817
  Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                                   0.171        0.296         0.025         0.200        0.248         0.184     -0.249     -0.581      -0.165
  Log Household Labor Days                                            -0.026       0.118        0.143*         0.103      0.140**         0.084      0.025      0.054    0.722***
  Log Hired Labor Days                                                0.235        0.127         0.111       0.174**        0.116         0.102      0.109     0.407*    1.157***
  No Hired Labor†                                                     0.746        0.371         0.330         0.529        0.309         0.303      0.177      0.827    2.839**
  % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June) Rainfall from Long-Term Mean     -0.028      -0.066         0.007         0.019        0.035         0.082      0.047      0.091      -0.174
   Harvest Reported in More Than One Condition†                      0.717**       0.332         0.115         0.119        0.051        -0.025     -0.036     -0.192      -0.429
Household Characteristics
  Wealth Index                                                        0.045        0.202         0.027        0.043         0.015         0.094     0.020       0.094      0.343
  Agricultural Asset Index                                            0.135        0.089         0.055        0.051         0.052        -0.060     0.007      -0.139     -0.028
  Dependency Ratio                                                    0.019        0.175         0.064        0.061         0.085         0.018     0.036      -0.037     -0.218
  Log Household Size                                                 0.543**       -0.134       -0.044        -0.001        0.076         0.150     0.156       0.304      0.004
  HH Cultivates More Than One Maize Plot                              0.248       0.441**       0.051         0.111         0.028        -0.028    -0.291*     -0.171     -0.266
Manager Characteristics
  Manager = Respondent†                                               0.332        0.066        -0.070        0.026        0.025         -0.045     -0.115    -0.664*     -0.183
  Received Crop-Production Related Extension Services†                -0.379     -0.477**       -0.154        0.048        0.136          0.381     0.318*      0.420      0.029
  Female†                                                             -0.218      -0.161        -0.083        0.027        -0.073         0.051      0.167    0.807**     0.894*
  Log Age (Years)                                                     -0.397      -0.096         0.087        0.049        0.062         -0.023      0.015     -0.343     0.006
  Log Years of Education                                              0.114        0.216         0.146        0.049        0.003         -0.080     -0.077     -0.178     -0.214
Round II Indicator (=1) †
Constant                                                             -4.898**     -3.770*     -3.598***     -2.933***    -2.639***      -3.240*     -2.019     -1.884     -3.182
Enumerator Dummies?                                                     Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
Random Effects?                                                          -            -            -             -            -             -          -          -          -
N                                                                       237         237          237           237          237           237        237         237        237
R2                                                                     0.204       0.239        0.257         0.239        0.292         0.276      0.286       0.333      0.358
Continued next page




                                                                                                                                                                  36
                                                   Table 6. Regression Results on Farmer Yield Over-Estimation (continued)
                                             Dependent Variable: Log of Plot-Level Ratio of Self-Reported to Sub-Plot Crop Cutting Yield
                                                                                                                         Household Panel‡
Decile                                                                       10          20           30           40           50        60                     70            80           90
Plot Characteristics
  Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                                                     -0.153      -0.110       -0.166*       -0.061        -0.094      -0.326**      -0.394***     -0.465***     -0.427**
  Production Heaped†                                                         0.479***    0.373***     0.372***     0.331***      0.505***      0.551***        0.221        0.433**        0.454*
  Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS, km)                                    0.032       0.006         0.008       0.014         0.043         0.041         0.055          0.007        -0.054
  Pure stand†                                                                  0.137      0.215*         0.211       0.155         0.097         0.203         0.201          0.287       0.444*
  % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop Cut Sub-Plot                            0.005     0.008***     0.009***     0.010***      0.012***      0.016***      0.013***       0.015***     0.019***
  Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for Pure stand Plots)                  -0.073      -0.120        -0.016       -0.075        0.011         0.022         -0.028        -0.237      -0.696**
  Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†                                      -0.076      -0.114        -0.241       -0.205      -0.364**        -0.376        -0.143         0.073        0.021
  Log Maize Seed Planting Rate (Kg/Ha)                                         0.054       0.122      0.207**      0.187***      0.293***       0.306**      0.349***       0.289**       0.393**
  Organic Fertilizer Application†                                              0.283      -0.299        -0.110       -0.588       -0.745*        -0.629        -0.264        -0.372        -0.940
  Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                                           -0.006       0.015        -0.045       -0.027        0.150         0.075         -0.131         0.009        0.087
  Log Household Labor Days                                                     0.004       0.017         0.053       0.093         0.094         0.138         0.067          0.146      0.412***
  Log Hired Labor Days                                                         0.128       0.083         0.075      0.165**       0.157**        0.046         0.104         0.211*       0.289*
  No Hired Labor†                                                              0.344       0.191         0.088      0.479*         0.508         0.140         0.230          0.166        0.103
  % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June) Rainfall from Long-Term Mean              0.005      -0.021         0.021      0.029*        0.040**       0.060**        0.035          0.035        -0.032
   Harvest Reported in More Than One Condition†                              0.861***    0.406***     0.326**      0.292***      0.259**       0.390**         0.296*         0.219        0.204
Household Characteristics
  Wealth Index                                                                -0.013       0.060        0.087        0.082         0.019         0.051         0.015          0.050       0.090
  Agricultural Asset Index                                                    0.029        0.095        0.074        0.080         0.038         -0.048        -0.010         0.022       0.137
  Dependency Ratio                                                            0.030        0.034        0.026        -0.008        0.019         -0.064        -0.083        -0.136       -0.164
  Log Household Size                                                         0.337**       0.034        0.036        0.002         0.066         0.086         0.073          0.042       -0.196
  HH Cultivates More Than One Maize Plot                                      -0.001      -0.033       -0.088        0.033         0.028         0.017         -0.149        0.146        -0.059
Manager Characteristics
  Manager = Respondent†                                                        0.028       0.001        0.014        0.032         0.164         0.388*        0.081          0.006       0.066
  Received Crop-Production Related Extension Services†                       -0.314*      -0.122       -0.123        0.015         0.055         0.138         0.145         -0.066       0.223
  Female†                                                                     -0.178      -0.105       -0.114        0.037         -0.130        -0.049        -0.003         0.049       -0.105
  Log Age (Years)                                                             -0.010       0.027        0.229        0.124        0.344**        0.261         0.062          0.125       0.287
  Log Years of Education                                                      -0.004       0.023        0.057        0.019         0.030         0.012         -0.042        -0.139       -0.097
Round II Indicator (=1) †                                                      0.542      -0.606       1.116        1.331**       1.827**       2.589**        1.144         1.471        -1.508

Constant                                                                      -2.959*      -0.875    -4.370*** -4.036*** -6.088*** -7.123***                   -3.791**      -3.225         0.204
Enumerator Dummies?                                                             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Random Effects?                                                                 Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
N                                                                               474         474          474          474           474             474           474          474           474
R2                                                                             0.144       0.153       0.188         0.206         0.271           0.242         0.23         0.252         0.257
Notes: ‡ Sample excludes plots that were subject to full-plot crop cut in MAPS II. † denotes a dummy variable. ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1/5/10 percent level,
respectively. Production indicated as "heaped" if at least one condition of harvest was reported as 100, 200, 300, 400, or 500 kg, or 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 10 100 kg sacks. Overall R2 reported for
panel specifications.


                                                                                                                                                                                    37
                    Figures

Figure 1. Maize Area Harvested (‘000s Ha), Uganda
           FAOSTAT Annual Time Series




       Figure 2. Maize Yield (Ton/Ha), Uganda
            FAOSTAT Annual Time Series
               Figure 3. Selected Plot Area Coefficients w/ 95% Confidence Intervals - All Plots




Notes: SR, CC, RS, and FP stand for self-reporting, sub-plot crop cutting, remote sensing, and full-plot crop cutting,
respectively. MAPS II SR estimates are based on the plot sample net of those subject to full-plot crop cutting.
Household and Parcel Panel are defined as in Table A4.1.


          Figure 4. Selected Plot Area Coefficients w/ 95% Confidence Intervals – Pure Stand Plots




Notes: SR, CC, RS, and FP stand for self-reporting, sub-plot crop cutting, remote sensing, and full-plot crop cutting,
respectively. MAPS II SR estimates are based on the plot sample net of those subject to full-plot crop cutting.
Household and Parcel Panel are defined as in Table A4.2.




                                                                                                                 39
         Figure 5 - Selected Plot Area Coefficients w/ 95% Confidence Intervals - Intercropped Plots




Notes: SR, CC, RS, and FP stand for self-reporting, sub-plot crop cutting, remote sensing, and full-plot crop cutting,
respectively. MAPS II SR estimates are based on the plot sample net of those subject to full-plot crop cutting.
Household and Parcel Panel are defined as in Table A4.3.


                              Figure 6. Consistency of Bias Across MAPS I and II




                                                                                                                 40
Figure 7. Over-Estimation in Self-Reported Yields by Round & GPS-Based Plot Area Quintile




                                                                                            41
Figure 8. Comparisons of Heaping in Self-Reported Production Across UNPS 2015/16, MAPS I and MAPS II




                                                                                                  42
                                                  Appendix Tables


                                         Table A1. Variable Means by Round

                                                                                               UNPS             UNPS
                                                         MAPS      MAPS                       2015-16          2015-16
                                                                            Difference
                                                          I         II                        Eastern           MAPS
                                                                                               Region         Districts
Plot Area (GPS, ha)                                      0.14      0.18     0.03 ***               -               -
Pure stand†                                              0.46      0.27     -0.19 ***           0.30             0.19
Maize Seed Planted (Kg)                                  6.33      5.99     -0.33               6.59             5.72
Intercropping Seeding Rate (= 1 for Pure stand Plots)    0.83      0.81     -0.02               0.74             0.71
Organic Fertilizer Application†                          0.01      0.02     0.01                0.02             0.01
Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                        0.10      0.08     -0.02               0.04             0.05
Household Labor Days                                    50.09     49.50     -0.59               48.53           54.67
Hired Labor Days                                         5.50      5.68     0.18                1.40             0.95
No Hired Labor†                                          0.56      0.58     0.02                0.80             0.83
Female Plot Manager                                      0.40      0.49      0.09 ***            0.34            0.25
Plot Manager Years of Education                          6.32      6.34      0.02               7.70             7.98
Household Size                                           6.39      6.69     0.30                6.77             7.54
Dependency Ratio                                         1.44      1.37     -0.07               1.41             1.63
Incidence of HH level maize sales‡                       N/A       N/A       N/A                41%              37%
Observations                                             440       440       440                 457              81
Notes: † denotes a dummy variable. ‡ Incidence of maize sales of any quantity, of maize-growing households. Sales data
not available in MAPS I or MAPS II due to timing of survey. *** denotes statistical significance of the mean difference at
1 percent level.




                                                                                                                     43
Table A2.1 Farmer-Reported Incidence of Damage on Selected Plot

             MAPS I                              MAPS II
Any damage occurred           84%    Any damage occurred         96%
Damage due to…                       Damage due to…
    Too much rain             16%        Unpredictable rain       6%
    Too little rain           11%        Drought                 37%
    Locust                     0%        Locust                   0%
    Termites                  51%        Termites                44%
    Other insects             28%        Other insects           16%
    Crop disease              25%        Crop disease            20%
    Weeds                     24%        Weeds                   21%
    Hail                       1%        Hail                     0%
    Floods                     3%        Floods                   0%
    Frost                      0%        Frost                    0%
    Wild Animals               3%        Wild Animals             5%
    Domestic Animals          13%        Domestic Animals        12%
    Birds                      8%        Birds                    4%
    Shortage of seed           1%        Shortage of seed         0%
    Bad soil                  19%        Bad soil                15%
    Security / theft          11%        Security / theft        16%
    Spoiled seed               4%        Spoiled seed             1%
Observations                  540    Observations                489


Table A2.2 Incidence of Damage & Pre-Harvest in Crop Cut Sub-Plot

                                                 MAPS I       MAPS II
Incidence of Crop Cut Sub-Plot Damage             36%          89%
     Mean % Damaged                               29%          30%
Incidence of Crop Cut Sub-Plot Pre-Harvesting      8%          20%
     Mean % Pre-Harvested                         29%          26%




                                                                        44
               Table A3. Unconditional Quantile Regression (RIF): Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Household Panel Sample, All Plots

Dependent Variable                                                                           Self-Reported Yield‡
Decile                                                10          20          30          40          50          60         70          80          90
Plot Characteristics
   Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                          -0.127      -0.312     -0.366**   -0.741***   -0.560***   -0.590***   -0.577***   -0.872***   -1.840***
   Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS, km)         0.395      0.206        0.132      0.258       0.147       0.003       -0.064      -0.135      0.144
   Pure Stand†                                       0.546      0.599        0.048      -0.133      -0.342      -0.275      0.016       0.273       0.879
   % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop Cut
Sub-Plot                                           -0.025**     -0.016     -0.012*      -0.013      -0.009      -0.007      -0.005      -0.003      0.001
   Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for Pure
Stand Plots)                                        -0.697*     -0.096      -0.123      -0.098      0.109       -0.073      0.066       -0.246     -0.748
   Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†            0.233       0.724      0.483       0.361       0.034       -0.175      0.045       0.056      0.434
   Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)                       0.050       0.005      0.0800      0.185       0.142       0.026       0.086       0.260      0.519
   Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                 0.741       0.830      0.251       0.202       0.173       0.429       -0.002      -0.077     -0.261
   Log Household Labor Days                          0.367*      0.334      0.138       0.366*      0.184      0.373**     0.292**      0.318      0.453
   Log Hired Labor Days                              0.182     0.599**      0.253       0.373       0.244      0.297*       0.155       0.083      -0.140
   No Hired Labor†                                   0.304     1.299**      -0.011      -0.228      0.101       0.101       0.003       -0.197     -0.663
   % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June) Rainfall
from Long-Term Mean                                 -0.024      -0.060      -0.005      -0.053      -0.003      0.006       0.018       -0.014      0.085
   % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of Plot Edge
Household Characteristics
   Wealth Index                                     -0.251       0.075      0.065       0.116       0.084       0.156       0.090       0.092      -0.074
   Agricultural Asset Index                         -0.228      -0.230      -0.023      0.039       0.069       -0.064      -0.050      0.102      0.328
   Dependency Ratio                                 0.172       0.171       0.000       0.007       0.207       0.155       0.018       -0.137     -0.159
   Log Household Size                               -0.043       0.035      -0.061      -0.692      -0.330      -0.201      0.589       0.284      0.504
Manager Characteristics
   Manager = Respondent†                             0.679      0.535       0.254       0.481       0.272       0.355       0.180       0.503       0.779
   Received Crop-Production Related Extension
Services†                                           -0.199      -0.595      -0.291      -0.431      -0.114      -0.255      0.057       -0.126     -0.278
   Female†                                          -0.067      -0.144      -0.235       0.154      0.276       0.286       0.060       0.366      -0.020
   Log Age (Years)                                   0.966       0.720      0.235        0.272      0.128       -0.022      0.049       -0.321     -0.080
   Log Years of Education                           -0.361      -0.369      -0.295      -0.036      0.123       0.126       0.107       0.411      0.586
Round II Indicator (=1)†                            -0.475      -2.237      -0.201      -2.335      -0.221       0.22       0.668       -0.686     3.084
Constant                                             4.756       3.723       5.634       6.995      4.164       4.209        2.14       5.536      -0.114
Household Fixed Effects?                              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
N                                                     480         480         480         480        480         480         480         480        480
R2                                                   0.179       0.178      0.182        0.253      0.238       0.247       0.271       0.289      0.304
Continued next page
        Table A3. Unconditional Quantile Regression (RIF): Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Household Panel Sample, All Plots (Continued)

Dependent Variable                                                                   Sub-Plot Crop Cut Yield‡
Decile                                          10          20          30          40          50          60            70           80             90
Plot Characteristics
  Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                     -0.046      0.078       0.025        0.040       0.158        0.094        0.008       -0.023          0.196
  Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS,
km)                                            0.165      0.316       0.273*      0.217**      0.252*       0.110        0.018       -0.053          -0.261
  Pure Stand†                                  0.173      -0.387      -0.251       0.007       0.160        0.253        0.190       0.044           0.073
  % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop
Cut Sub-Plot                                 -0.062***   -0.043***   -0.022***   -0.016***   -0.020***    -0.018***    -0.010***    -0.009***    -0.008*
  Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for
Pure Stand Plots)                             0.193       0.401       0.250       -0.041       -0.057       -0.194      -0.149       -0.143          -0.204
  Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†      0.540       0.376       0.385       0.300        0.276        0.255       0.178        0.156           -0.012
  Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)                 -0.414      -0.296      -0.189      0.006        -0.053       0.025       -0.038       -0.042          -0.059
  Inorganic Fertilizer Application†           0.189       0.808       0.360       0.205        0.229        0.380       0.112        0.010           0.044
  Log Household Labor Days                    -0.077      0.015       -0.035      -0.112       -0.052       -0.041      -0.055       0.010           -0.175
  Log Hired Labor Days                        0.117       0.195       -0.048      -0.042       -0.036       -0.066      0.018        -0.025          0.045
  No Hired Labor†                             -0.139      0.424       -0.196      -0.081       -0.096       -0.314      -0.324       -0.349          0.174
  % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June)
Rainfall from Long-Term Mean                  -0.040      -0.030      -0.021      -0.056*      -0.060      -0.078*      -0.066*     -0.078**         -0.076
  % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of Plot
Edge                                          -0.934      -0.307      -0.270      -0.190       0.193        -0.026       0.051        0.039          0.064
Household Characteristics
  Wealth Index                                0.218       0.167        0.102      -0.034       0.036        0.048       0.020         0.025          0.257
  Agricultural Asset Index                    -0.411      -0.233      -0.055      -0.100       -0.147       -0.170      -0.130       -0.076          -0.122
  Dependency Ratio                            -0.169      -0.299      -0.052      0.015        0.056        0.074       0.044         0.109          0.223
  Log Household Size                          -1.652      0.175       -0.378      -0.365       -0.053       -0.553      -0.568      -0.910**         -0.841
Manager Characteristics
  Manager = Respondent†                       -0.222       0.224       0.051       0.228       0.233        0.182        0.024       -0.133          0.114
  Received Crop-Production Related
Extension Services†                           0.151       -0.041       0.011       0.010       -0.046       -0.052       -0.050      -0.171       -0.137
  Female†                                     0.319       0.167        0.072       0.041       -0.133       -0.038       -0.055      -0.173       -0.082
  Log Age (Years)                             1.593       0.474       -0.158       -0.181      -0.237       -0.118       -0.487      -0.451       0.215
  Log Years of Education                      -0.294      0.132        0.176       -0.068      -0.025       -0.064       -0.024      -0.036       -0.126
Round II Indicator (=1)†                      -1.573      -1.362      -0.998      -2.360*      -2.385      -3.039*      -2.584*     -3.131**      -3.304
Constant                                       6.074      5.136      8.716***    11.696***   11.838***    13.467***    13.989***   15.029***    13.044***
Household Fixed Effects?                        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
N                                               480        480          480         480         480          480          480          480         480
R2                                            0.258       0.325        0.335         0.3       0.288        0.254        0.202        0.213       0.228
Continued next page

                                                                                                                                                              46
         Table A3. Unconditional Quantile Regression (RIF): Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Household Panel Sample, All Plots (Continued)

Dependent Variable                                                                              Sub-Plot Crop Cut Yield (All Plots)
Decile                                                         10           20          30          40         50            60            70            80            90
Plot Characteristics
  Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                                    0.101        0.038       0.080       0.059      0.145         0.057         0.033         0.079         0.114
  Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS, km)                  0.430       0.278*       0.075       0.066      0.087         0.024         -0.016        -0.041       -0.093
  Pure Stand†                                                0.183       -0.036      -0.066       0.065      0.084         0.155         0.083         0.157         0.110
  % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop Cut Sub-                 -            -           -           -                        -
Plot                                                      0.065*** 0.041*** 0.025*** 0.014*** -0.017*** 0.013*** -0.008*** -0.007*** -0.005**
  Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for Pure
Stand Plots)                                                 0.337        0.285       0.157       0.067      0.035        -0.015         -0.039        -0.044       -0.010
  Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†                     0.348        0.194       0.179       0.085      0.199         0.061         -0.046        -0.085       -0.066
  Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)                                0.018       -0.005       0.017      -0.025      -0.068       -0.052         -0.036        -0.075       -0.156
  Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                          0.056       0.736*      0.533*       0.233      0.407         0.291         0.207         0.141         0.151
  Log Household Labor Days                                  -0.235        0.010      -0.094      -0.005      0.046         0.004         0.020         0.029        -0.080
  Log Hired Labor Days                                       0.128       -0.074      -0.188      -0.024      -0.101        0.020         0.059         0.100         0.143
  No Hired Labor†                                           -0.114       -0.156      -0.435      -0.161      -0.308       -0.094         -0.130        0.045         0.212
  % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June) Rainfall from
Long-Term Mean                                              -0.049       -0.021       0.005      -0.006      -0.007       -0.013        -0.045*        -0.035       -0.020
  % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of Plot Edge             -0.134       -0.220      -0.111      -0.088      0.179         0.143         0.112         0.070         0.029
Household Characteristics
  Wealth Index                                               0.105        0.056       0.058       0.035      0.118         0.081         0.042         -0.012        0.115
  Agricultural Asset Index                                  -0.264       -0.094      -0.037      -0.019      -0.049       -0.066         0.040         0.036         0.044
  Dependency Ratio                                          -0.143       -0.091      -0.008       0.049      0.044        0.055          -0.010        0.107         0.108
  Log Household Size                                        -0.323        0.630       0.390       0.182      0.083        -0.004         -0.213        -0.285       -0.302
Manager Characteristics
  Manager = Respondent†                                      0.100        0.158       0.004       0.055      -0.001       -0.057         -0.093        -0.150       -0.047
  Received Crop-Production Related Extension
Services†                                                    0.578        0.243       0.062       0.034      0.082        -0.022         -0.047        -0.111       -0.045
  Female†                                                    0.030       -0.322      -0.201      -0.191      -0.366       -0.193         -0.179        -0.195       -0.072
  Log Age (Years)                                            0.331       -0.720      -0.695      -0.377      -0.716       -0.347         -0.422        -0.194        0.123
  Log Years of Education                                     0.061        0.242       0.178       0.001       0.053        0.001          0.039        -0.053       -0.174
Round II Indicator (=1)†                                    -1.917       -0.866       0.056      -0.389      -0.312       -0.577       -1.951**       -1.553*       -0.972
Constant                                                     8.117      8.313**    8.440*** 8.143*** 10.124*** 9.237*** 11.544*** 10.581*** 9.206***
Household Fixed Effects?                                      Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
N                                                             880          880         880         880         880          880            880          880           880
R2                                                           0.246        0.287       0.273       0.243       0.23         0.19          0.169         0.178         0.150
Notes: ‡ Sample excludes plots that were subject to full-plot crop cut in MAPS II. † denotes a dummy variable. ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1/5/10
percent level, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                         47
                          Table A4.1. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - All Plots

                                                                    MAPS I - Cross-Sectional                                    MAPS II - Cross-Sectional
                                                                                                                                             Sub-Plot
                                                                                                                         Self-   Sub-Plot Crop Cut Full Plot
                                               Self-Reported               Sub-Plot              Remote Sensing
Dependent Variable                                                                                                     Reported Crop Cut       Yield      Crop Cut
                                                    Yield               Crop Cut Yield               Yield
                                                                                                                        Yield ‡   Yield ‡       (All       Yield
                                                                                                                                               Plots)
Specification                                  1           2             3           4            5           6            7         8           9           10
Plot Characteristics
   Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                  -0.712***   -0.708***      0.070       0.066        0.270*      0.273*     -0.731***    0.161*     0.138**      -0.093
   Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS,
km)                                          -0.016       0.004       -0.080*     -0.061       -0.504***   -0.486***     0.043      0.087        0.004      -0.129
   Pure Stand†                               0.293        0.275        0.165*      0.144         -0.247      -0.264      0.255      0.239*       0.145     0.497***
   % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in
Crop Cut Sub-Plot                           -0.010***   -0.009**     -0.020***   -0.018***      -0.001       0.000     -0.012***   -0.032***   -0.032***   -0.025***
   Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100
for Pure Stand Plots)                        -0.121      -0.085         0.167      0.202        -0.009       0.023       0.082       0.151     0.170***    0.294**
   Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†    0.351*      0.307*        0.190*      0.143        -0.081      -0.121       0.143       0.140       0.080       0.275
   Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)               0.190*      0.173*        -0.007     -0.024        -0.131      -0.146     0.396***     -0.053      -0.023       0.052
   Inorganic Fertilizer Application†          0.249       0.301         0.127     0.189*        -0.549      -0.500      -0.133      -0.113       0.034     0.430**
   Log Household Labor Days                 0.380***    0.381***        0.020      0.015         0.172       0.171     0.364***      0.019      -0.019      -0.004
   Log Hired Labor Days                     0.287***    0.286***        0.001      0.004         0.013       0.013       0.162      -0.011      -0.033      -0.053
   No Hired Labor†                           -0.100      -0.116        -0.135     -0.146         0.221       0.207      -0.043       0.121      -0.086      -0.149
   % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June)
Rainfall from Long-Term Mean                 -0.010      -0.004      -0.026***   -0.018**      0.063**     0.068**      -0.047      -0.001      0.030*       0.007
Objectively-Measured Plot Characteristics
   Soil Quality Index                                   1.262**                  1.188***                    1.113
   Genetic Heterogeneity of Plot's Maize                 0.006                   0.011***                    0.007
   % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of
Plot Edge                                                              0.014      -0.011                                             0.030      -0.001
Household Characteristics
   Wealth Index                              0.106       0.122         -0.009      0.007         -0.170      -0.155     0.138*       0.082       0.009      -0.079
   Agricultural Asset Index                  0.018       0.024        0.119***   0.128***         0.203       0.209     -0.032      -0.088       0.001       0.124
   Dependency Ratio                          -0.004      -0.016       0.090***   0.078**        -0.260*     -0.271*      0.003      -0.041       0.036       0.070
   Log Household Size                        -0.114      -0.103        -0.014     -0.003          0.149       0.159     -0.131      -0.027      -0.043       0.044
Manager Characteristics
   Manager = Respondent†                      0.121       0.150        0.036       0.059         0.193       0.218       0.121       0.036      -0.020      -0.143
   Received Crop-Production Related
Extension Services†                          0.068        0.077        -0.126     -0.129         0.023       0.028      -0.206      -0.138       0.006      -0.069
   Female†                                   -0.058       -0.09         0.035     -0.011        -0.074      -0.106       0.018      -0.103      -0.076      -0.262
Continued next page
                      Table A4.1. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - All Plots (continued)

                                                                  MAPS I - Cross-Sectional                                  MAPS II - Cross-Sectional
                                                                                                                                         Sub-Plot
                                                                                                                     Self-   Sub-Plot Crop Cut Full Plot
                                                Self-Reported             Sub-Plot            Remote Sensing
Dependent Variable                                                                                                 Reported Crop Cut       Yield      Crop Cut
                                                     Yield             Crop Cut Yield             Yield
                                                                                                                    Yield ‡   Yield ‡       (All       Yield
                                                                                                                                           Plots)
Specification                                   1           2           3           4           5           6          7         8           9           10
  Log Age (Years)                            -0.112      -0.109      -0.024      -0.019      -0.075      -0.071     -0.074     0.085       0.166       0.407*
  Log Years of Education                     -0.074      -0.086      -0.010      -0.020      0.330*      0.320*      0.127     0.110       0.058       0.123

Round II Indicator (=1)†

Constant                                    5.003***     3.450*     7.285***    5.369***      2.204       0.73      3.704***    6.478***    5.944***   3.207**

Fixed Effects?                                 N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A        N/A         N/A         N/A        N/A
N                                              440         440         440         440         440         440        240         240         440        200
R2                                            0.233       0.245       0.338       0.384       0.092       0.096      0.249       0.465       0.477      0.361
Continued next page




                                                                                                                                                            49
                      Table A4.1. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - All Plots (continued)

                                                                               Household Panel                                     Parcel Panel
                                                                                                   Sub-Plot                                        Sub-Plot
                                                                                  Sub-Plot                                          Sub-Plot
                                                               Self-Reported                      Crop Cut       Self-Reported                    Crop Cut
Dependent Variable                                                                Crop Cut                                          Crop Cut
                                                                   Yield ‡                          Yield            Yield ‡                        Yield
                                                                                   Yield ‡                                           Yield ‡
                                                                                                  (All Plots)                                     (All Plots)
Specification                                                       11               12               13               14               15            16
Plot Characteristics
  Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                                        -0.730***          0.063            0.093         -0.790***           0.116        0.155*
  Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS, km)                       0.251**           0.118            0.077             0.278           0.113        0.099*
  Pure Stand†                                                      0.085            0.116            0.119             0.193           0.132         0.204
  % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop Cut Sub-Plot              -0.015***        -0.028***       -0.024***          -0.009*        -0.025***     -0.024***
  Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for Pure Stand Plots)       -0.170           0.058            0.121            -0.238          -0.036         0.088
  Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†                           0.178          0.353***           0.141             0.034          0.353*         0.179
  Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)                                      0.135            -0.053          -0.027             0.206          -0.037        -0.010
  Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                                0.224            0.377*         0.437**             0.372           0.374       0.500**
  Log Household Labor Days                                       0.401***           -0.091          -0.085          0.436***          -0.062        -0.096
  Log Hired Labor Days                                            0.257**           -0.039          -0.002             0.179           0.026         0.096
  No Hired Labor†                                                  0.229            -0.138          -0.110             0.374           0.003         0.118
  % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June) Rainfall from Long-
Term Mean                                                          -0.015         -0.050**          -0.023           -0.028           -0.034        -0.020
Objectively-Measured Plot Characteristics
  Soil Quality Index
  Genetic Heterogeneity of Plot's Maize
  % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of Plot Edge                                    -0.011            0.089                            -0.060        0.034
Household Characteristics
  Wealth Index                                                     0.022            0.167           0.116*           -0.024            0.150         0.125
  Agricultural Asset Index                                         -0.039         -0.171**          -0.064           -0.081          -0.152*        -0.058
  Dependency Ratio                                                 0.044           -0.070           -0.041           -0.060           -0.091        -0.022
  Log Household Size                                               0.006           -0.087            0.191            0.078            0.105         0.266
Manager Characteristics
  Manager = Respondent†                                           0.471**          0.058            -0.008          0.519**            0.059        -0.049
  Received Crop-Production Related Extension Services†            -0.343*          0.043             0.064           -0.162            0.178         0.099
  Female†                                                          0.236           -0.189          -0.263**          -0.075           -0.125        -0.123
  Log Age (Years)                                                  0.713           -0.050           -0.269           -0.254            0.004        -0.245
  Log Years of Education                                           -0.081          -0.154           -0.004           -0.066           -0.089         0.061


Continued next page



                                                                                                                                                                50
                     Table A4.1. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - All Plots (continued)

                                                                                   Household Panel                                           Parcel Panel
                                                                                                           Sub-Plot                                               Sub-Plot
                                                                                       Sub-Plot                                                Sub-Plot
                                                                  Self-Reported                           Crop Cut        Self-Reported                          Crop Cut
Dependent Variable                                                                     Crop Cut                                                Crop Cut
                                                                      Yield ‡                               Yield             Yield ‡                              Yield
                                                                                        Yield ‡                                                 Yield ‡
                                                                                                          (All Plots)                                            (All Plots)
Specification                                                            11                12                 13                14                 15                 16
Round II Indicator (=1)†                                               -0.545           -1.948**            -0.929            -1.309             -1.449             -0.906

Constant                                                               2.479           10.403***          8.892***            6.590*           9.253***           8.553***

Fixed Effects?                                                       Household         Household       Household            Parcel               Parcel             Parcel
N                                                                        480              480              880               316                   316                594
R2                                                                      0.334            0.489            0.448             0.423                 0.454              0.458
Notes: ‡ Sample excludes plots that were subject to full-plot crop cut in MAPS II. † denotes a dummy variable. ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1/5/10 percent
level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                               51
                      Table A4.2. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Pure Stand Plots

                                                                    MAPS I - Cross-Sectional                                    MAPS II - Cross-Sectional
                                                                                                                                             Sub-Plot
                                                                                                                         Self-   Sub-Plot Crop Cut Full Plot
                                               Self-Reported               Sub-Plot              Remote Sensing
Dependent Variable                                                                                                     Reported Crop Cut       Yield      Crop Cut
                                                    Yield               Crop Cut Yield               Yield
                                                                                                                        Yield ‡   Yield ‡       (All       Yield
                                                                                                                                               Plots)
Specification                                  1           2             3           4            5           6            7         8           9           10
Plot Characteristics
   Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                  -0.584***   -0.561***     0.161**     0.159**       0.024       0.047      -0.805***    -0.169      -0.071      0.018
   Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS,
km)                                          -0.090      -0.063        -0.105*     -0.076      -0.378**    -0.350**      0.138       0.065      -0.037      -0.118
   Pure Stand†                              (omitted)   (omitted)     (omitted)   (omitted)    (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)
   % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in
Crop Cut Sub-Plot                            -0.007      -0.005      -0.016***    -0.014***     -0.017      -0.016      -0.011*    -0.022***   -0.024***    -0.008
   Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100
for Pure Stand Plots)                       (omitted)   (omitted)     (omitted)   (omitted)    (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)
   Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†     -0.070      -0.083        0.032      -0.006       -0.173      -0.188       -0.038      0.163       0.026       0.548
   Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)                0.097       0.080        -0.006      -0.022       -0.261      -0.278      0.401**      0.169       0.203       0.158
   Inorganic Fertilizer Application†          0.258       0.281         0.089       0.137       -0.215      -0.189       0.409       0.215       0.153      0.666*
   Log Household Labor Days                  0.445**     0.457**       -0.024      -0.026        0.014       0.026      0.425**     0.134**      0.030      -0.098
   Log Hired Labor Days                      0.317**     0.325**       -0.082       -0.06        0.014       0.023       0.095       -0.044     -0.010      -0.010
   No Hired Labor†                            -0.072      -0.087       -0.097      -0.081       -0.167      -0.182       -0.332      0.098      -0.081       0.333
   % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June)
Rainfall from Long-Term Mean                  0.030      0.039*        -0.011      0.003        0.057       0.066        0.016       0.027       0.025      0.000
Objectively-Measured Plot Characteristics
   Soil Quality Index                                   1.519**                   1.559***                  1.615
   Genetic Heterogeneity of Plot's Maize                 0.002                     0.010**                  0.003
   % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of
Plot Edge                                                              -0.084      -0.202                                          -0.888**     -0.279
Household Characteristics
   Wealth Index                               0.082       0.100         0.029      0.055        0.058       0.078       0.199       0.055       -0.063      -0.224
   Agricultural Asset Index                  -0.076      -0.058        0.113*     0.144**       -0.070      -0.051      -0.043      -0.097      -0.005      0.136
   Dependency Ratio                           0.043       0.039         0.073      0.067        -0.355      -0.359      0.103       0.034       -0.032      0.032
   Log Household Size                        -0.239      -0.278        -0.108      -0.137       0.394       0.354       -0.156      -0.077      0.136       -0.098
Manager Characteristics
   Manager = Respondent†                     -0.326      -0.271        -0.076      -0.017       0.625       0.684       -0.352       0.208       0.038      -0.354
   Received Crop-Production Related
Extension Services†                           0.212      0.258         -0.093      -0.086       -0.316      -0.269      -0.278      -0.242      0.099       0.742
   Female†                                   -0.223      -0.209        -0.105      -0.130       -0.616      -0.604      0.327       -0.268      -0.083      -0.073
   Log Age (Years)                           0.289       0.323         0.121       0.163        0.268       0.304       0.067       -0.388      -0.328      0.073
Continued next page
                                                                                                                                                                  52
                 Table A4.2. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Pure Stand Plots (continued)

                                                                 MAPS I - Cross-Sectional                                  MAPS II - Cross-Sectional
                                                                                                                                        Sub-Plot
                                                                                                                    Self-   Sub-Plot Crop Cut Full Plot
                                               Self-Reported            Sub-Plot             Remote Sensing
Dependent Variable                                                                                                Reported Crop Cut       Yield      Crop Cut
                                                    Yield            Crop Cut Yield              Yield
                                                                                                                   Yield ‡   Yield ‡       (All       Yield
                                                                                                                                          Plots)
Specification                                  1           2           3           4           5          6           7         8           9           10
  Log Years of Education                    -0.154      -0.160      -0.022      -0.031      0.459*     0.452*       0.228     0.001       0.008       0.230

Round II Indicator (=1)†

Constant                                     2.037       0.518     7.705***    5.399***     0.990       -0.668      3.456     7.694***    7.284***   5.858**

Fixed Effects?                                N/A         N/A        N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A        N/A        N/A
N                                             201         201        201         201         201         201         70          70         117        47
R2                                           0.233       0.247      0.271       0.351       0.128       0.135       0.349       0.632      0.463      0.416
Continued next page




                                                                                                                                                          53
                Table A4.2. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Pure Stand Plots (continued)

                                                                               Household Panel⁰                                 Parcel Panel⁰
                                                                                                   Sub-Plot                                        Sub-Plot
                                                                                  Sub-Plot                                       Sub-Plot
                                                               Self-Reported                      Crop Cut      Self-Reported                     Crop Cut
Dependent Variable                                                                Crop Cut                                       Crop Cut
                                                                   Yield ‡                          Yield           Yield ‡                         Yield
                                                                                   Yield ‡                                        Yield ‡
                                                                                                  (All Plots)                                     (All Plots)
Specification                                                       11                12              13             14              15               16
Plot Characteristics
  Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                                         -0.346*            0.084          -0.092        -0.890***        -0.124           -0.126
  Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS, km)                         0.000             0.089          0.047            0.556        -0.162            0.037
  Pure Stand†                                                    (omitted)         (omitted)       (omitted)       (omitted)      (omitted)        (omitted)
  % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop Cut Sub-Plot                -0.010          -0.017**       -0.023***       -0.044***        -0.008         -0.021***
  Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for Pure Stand Plots)     (omitted)         (omitted)       (omitted)       (omitted)      (omitted)        (omitted)
  Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†                           -0.470             0.168         -0.155         -1.236**        -0.005           -0.075
  Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)                                      0.385             0.343*       0.323***          0.552**         0.131          0.337***
  Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                                -0.229            0.210           0.119           -0.345         0.207            0.174
  Log Household Labor Days                                          0.332            -0.155         -0.054         0.601***         0.036            0.018
  Log Hired Labor Days                                            0.343**            0.117          -0.125           -0.174        -0.163          -0.211**
  No Hired Labor†                                                 0.983**           0.916**          0.137          1.320*         0.496*           -0.043
  % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June) Rainfall from Long-
Term Mean                                                          0.020            -0.044          -0.007         -0.014          -0.061           -0.054
Objectively-Measured Plot Characteristics
  Soil Quality Index
  Genetic Heterogeneity of Plot's Maize
  % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of Plot Edge                                     0.435           0.096                          -0.178           0.156
Household Characteristics
  Wealth Index                                                    -0.174            0.217           0.037           0.317          0.223            0.172
  Agricultural Asset Index                                        0.241             0.030           0.104          0.363*          0.025            0.003
  Dependency Ratio                                                0.011             -0.101          -0.093          0.061          -0.169           -0.109
  Log Household Size                                              -1.158            0.154            0.103          0.912           0.291           -0.355
Manager Characteristics
  Manager = Respondent†                                          -0.844***          -0.416*         -0.212          -0.352        -0.395**          -0.293
  Received Crop-Production Related Extension Services†             -0.076            -0.012         -0.018         -0.716*         -0.259            -0.14
  Female†                                                          0.611*            -0.345        -0.393*          -1.093        -0.631**          -0.289
  Log Age (Years)                                                  -0.911          -1.298**         -0.455        -2.025***        -0.662           -0.306
  Log Years of Education                                           0.477*            0.069          0.070           -0.351          0.128           -0.211

Round II Indicator (=1)†                                           0.371            -1.913          -0.231          0.292          -2.423           -2.033


Continued next page

                                                                                                                                                                54
                Table A4.2. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Pure Stand Plots (continued)

                                                                                 Household Panel⁰                                         Parcel Panel⁰
                                                                                                         Sub-Plot                                              Sub-Plot
                                                                                      Sub-Plot                                              Sub-Plot
                                                                 Self-Reported                          Crop Cut        Self-Reported                         Crop Cut
Dependent Variable                                                                    Crop Cut                                              Crop Cut
                                                                     Yield ‡                               Yield            Yield ‡                             Yield
                                                                                       Yield ‡                                               Yield ‡
                                                                                                        (All Plots)                                           (All Plots)
Specification                                                          11                12                 13               14                 15                16
Constant                                                             8.671*          13.752***           8.801***          11.620*          11.459***         11.462***

Fixed Effects?                                                          Household   Household          Household              Parcel            Parcel          Parcel
N                                                                          118          118                186                  64                64              114
R2                                                                        0.514        0.592              0.527               0.822             0.837            0.655
Notes: °Limited to households with Pure Stand plots in both waves. ‡ Sample excludes plots that were subject to full-plot crop cut in MAPS II. † denotes a dummy variable.
***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1/5/10 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                            55
                     Table A4.3. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Intercropped Plots

                                                                    MAPS I - Cross-Sectional                                      MAPS II - Cross-Sectional
                                                                                                                                               Sub-Plot
                                                                                                                           Self-   Sub-Plot Crop Cut Full Plot
                                               Self-Reported               Sub-Plot               Remote Sensing
Dependent Variable                                                                                                       Reported Crop Cut       Yield      Crop Cut
                                                    Yield               Crop Cut Yield                Yield
                                                                                                                          Yield ‡   Yield ‡       (All       Yield
                                                                                                                                                 Plots)
Specification                                  1           2             3           4             5            6            7         8           9           10
Plot Characteristics
   Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                  -0.813***   -0.829***      -0.077      -0.087        0.479        0.470      -0.702***   0.260**     0.201**      -0.101
   Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS,
km)                                           0.013       0.026        -0.093      -0.080      -0.602***    -0.602***      0.002       0.070      -0.002      -0.125
   Pure Stand†                              (omitted)   (omitted)     (omitted)   (omitted)     (omitted)    (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)   (omitted)
   % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in
Crop Cut Sub-Plot                           -0.010**     -0.009*     -0.021***    -0.020***      0.010        0.011      -0.013***   -0.034***   -0.034***   -0.031***
   Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100
for Pure Stand Plots)                         -0.165      -0.122        0.196       0.241        -0.08       -0.067       0.070       0.181*     0.180***    0.303**
   Intercropped with Legumes†                 0.210       0.194        0.097       0.087        0.773*       0.794*        0.149       0.269       0.138       0.004
   Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†    0.474**     0.431*       0.242**      0.205*       -0.128       -0.113       0.131       0.168        0.077      0.293
   Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)              0.251**     0.227**        0.008       -0.020       0.046         0.034      0.384**      -0.128      -0.073      0.016
   Inorganic Fertilizer Application†          0.019       0.046        0.106        0.132       -0.306       -0.315       -0.652      -0.126      -0.017     0.370*
   Log Household Labor Days                  0.294**     0.298**        0.055       0.057        0.259        0.250      0.290**      -0.029      -0.044      0.155
   Log Hired Labor Days                     0.290***    0.271***       0.074        0.056        0.035        0.028        0.159      -0.021      -0.082      -0.206
   No Hired Labor†                            -0.081      -0.133       -0.176      -0.231        0.535        0.500       -0.073       0.068      -0.119      -0.370
   % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June)
Rainfall from Long-Term Mean                -0.034**     -0.028      -0.036***    -0.028**       0.048        0.055       -0.065       0.007       0.032      -0.009
Objectively-Measured Plot Characteristics
   Soil Quality Index                                     1.097                   0.986**                    -0.290
   Genetic Heterogeneity of Plot's Maize                  0.011                   0.014**                    0.015
   % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of
Plot Edge                                                              -0.016       0.017                                              0.393       0.116
Household Characteristics
   Wealth Index                               0.104       0.114        -0.034      -0.024       -0.415*      -0.422*      0.140       0.092       0.032       -0.089
   Agricultural Asset Index                  0.066       0.062        0.140**     0.135**       0.462**      0.461**      -0.061      -0.082      0.003       0.178
   Dependency Ratio                          -0.039      -0.058       0.128**     0.108**        -0.250       -0.247      -0.008      -0.063      0.048       0.121
   Log Household Size                        0.028        0.042        0.038       0.044          0.045        0.017      -0.082      0.019       -0.076      0.046
Manager Characteristics
   Manager = Respondent†                    0.646**     0.651***       0.081        0.079        0.046        0.007        0.379       0.048       0.031       0.146
   Received Crop-Production Related
Extension Services†                          -0.027      -0.024        -0.099      -0.095        0.410        0.419       -0.231      -0.090      -0.025     -0.465**
   Female†                                   0.036       -0.002        0.109       0.067         0.119        0.107       -0.104      -0.068      -0.118     -0.444**
Continued next page
                                                                                                                                                                    56
                 Table A4.3. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Intercropped Plots (continued)

                                                                   MAPS I - Cross-Sectional                                 MAPS II - Cross-Sectional
                                                                                                                                         Sub-Plot
                                                                                                                     Self-   Sub-Plot Crop Cut Full Plot
                                                Self-Reported             Sub-Plot             Remote Sensing
Dependent Variable                                                                                                 Reported Crop Cut       Yield      Crop Cut
                                                     Yield             Crop Cut Yield              Yield
                                                                                                                    Yield ‡   Yield ‡       (All       Yield
                                                                                                                                           Plots)
Specification                                    1           2           3          4            5          6          7         8           9           10
  Log Age (Years)                             -0.387     -0.394*      -0.170     -0.174       -0.264     -0.261     -0.131     0.138      0.260**      0.386
  Log Years of Education                      -0.008      -0.016      -0.015     -0.017       0.050      0.067       0.053     0.109       0.073       0.178

Round II Indicator (=1)†

Constant                                     6.463***     4.694*     7.354***   5.409***      3.312      2.256     4.274***    6.314***    5.864***   3.103**

Fixed Effects?                                 N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A        N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A       N/A
N                                              239         239         239         239         239        239         170         170         323       153
R2                                            0.292       0.306       0.396       0.436       0.156      0.160       0.243       0.473       0.499     0.403
Continued next page




                                                                                                                                                           57
              Table A4.3. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Intercropped Plots (continued)

                                                                               Household Panel⁰                                 Parcel Panel⁰
                                                                                                   Sub-Plot                                        Sub-Plot
                                                                                  Sub-Plot                                       Sub-Plot
                                                               Self-Reported                      Crop Cut      Self-Reported                     Crop Cut
Dependent Variable                                                                Crop Cut                                       Crop Cut
                                                                   Yield ‡                          Yield           Yield ‡                         Yield
                                                                                   Yield ‡                                        Yield ‡
                                                                                                  (All Plots)                                     (All Plots)
Specification                                                       11               12               13             14              15               16
Plot Characteristics
  Log Plot Area (GPS, ha)                                        -0.705***           0.146           0.117        -0.872***         0.208            0.148
  Log Plot Distance from Dwelling (GPS, km)                        0.362*            0.091           0.043           0.019          0.104            0.073
  Pure Stand†                                                     (omitted)        (omitted)       (omitted)       (omitted)      (omitted)        (omitted)
  % Enumerator-Assessed Damage in Crop Cut Sub-Plot               -0.016**        -0.031***       -0.026***         -0.006       -0.032***        -0.026***
  Log Intercropping Seeding Rate (=100 for Pure Stand Plots)       -0.116            0.062           0.110          -0.134          0.060            0.119
  Intercropped with Legumes†                                        0.434            0.046           0.008           0.524          0.204            0.135
  Cover Crops Present Prior to Planting†                            0.390            0.194           0.096           0.416          0.256            0.125
  Log Maize Seed Planted (Kg)                                       0.012           -0.111          -0.072           0.031         -0.169           -0.036
  Inorganic Fertilizer Application†                                 0.566           0.849*           0.549        1.217***          1.388            0.768
  Log Household Labor Days                                          0.148           -0.148           0.016           0.275         -0.171           -0.041
  Log Hired Labor Days                                             0.309*            0.075           0.014           0.183          0.115            0.023
  No Hired Labor†                                                   0.387           -0.035          -0.143          -0.026          0.030           -0.038
  % Deviation of Seasonal (May-June) Rainfall from Long-
Term Mean                                                         -0.027            -0.015         -0.036*         -0.072          -0.007           -0.024
Objectively-Measured Plot Characteristics
  Soil Quality Index
  Genetic Heterogeneity of Plot's Maize
  % of Crop Cut Sub-Plot within 4m of Plot Edge                                     0.128           0.281                          -0.070           0.120
Household Characteristics
  Wealth Index                                                    -0.025            0.183            0.116         -0.148           0.147           0.109
  Agricultural Asset Index                                        -0.079            -0.143          -0.102         -0.131          -0.192*         -0.168*
  Dependency Ratio                                                -0.018            -0.144          -0.044         0.033            -0.009          0.045
  Log Household Size                                               0.719             0.479           0.541          0.456            0.496          0.650
Manager Characteristics
  Manager = Respondent†                                          0.912***           0.246            0.107        0.849***         -0.075           -0.130
  Received Crop-Production Related Extension Services†            -0.537*           0.143            0.144          -0.124         0.289             0.224
  Female†                                                          -0.192           0.112           -0.121          -0.050         0.333            -0.018
  Log Age (Years)                                                  -0.392           0.275           -0.308         -0.773*         0.429            -0.147
  Log Years of Education                                           -0.018           -0.202          -0.135           0.159         -0.144           -0.120

Round II Indicator (=1)†                                          -0.914            -0.585         -1.425*         -2.907          -0.256           -0.964

Continued next page

                                                                                                                                                                58
                 Table A4.3. OLS Regression Results - Dependent Variable: Log Plot-Level Maize Yield (Kg/Ha, GPS) - Intercropped Plots (continued)

                                                                                 Household Panel⁰                                         Parcel Panel⁰
                                                                                                        Sub-Plot                                               Sub-Plot
                                                                                     Sub-Plot                                               Sub-Plot
                                                                 Self-Reported                         Crop Cut        Self-Reported                          Crop Cut
Dependent Variable                                                                   Crop Cut                                               Crop Cut
                                                                     Yield ‡                              Yield            Yield ‡                               Yield
                                                                                      Yield ‡                                                Yield ‡
                                                                                                       (All Plots)                                            (All Plots)
Specification                                                         11                 12                13                14                15                 16
Constant                                                             6.216            6.684**           8.730***           8.230*             5.711            7.494***

Fixed Effects?                                                     Household         Household         Household           Parcel             Parcel            Parcel
N                                                                     240               240               430               170                170               312
R2                                                                   0.389             0.550             0.467             0.490              0.564             0.476
Notes: °Limited to households with intercropped plots in both waves. ‡ Sample excludes plots that were subject to full-plot crop cut in MAPS II. † denotes a dummy
variable. ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1/5/10 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                            59
                     Appendix I - MAPS II Household Tracking Protocol

The following is an excerpt from the MAPS II field staff manual:

“If (i) the head of household is in the MAPS I dwelling:
     Consider the household to be tracked.
     Mark the ID of the head and all MAPS I members living with the head.

If (i) the head of household has moved out of the MAPS I dwelling AND (ii) the head of household
lives in the same enumeration area (EA) or in its close vicinity (in Iganga or Mayuge), either with
the entire set or a subset of MAPS I household members or by himself:
      Track the head living in the same EA or in its close vicinity. Once located, consider the
          household to be tracked.
      Mark the ID of the head and all MAPS I household members living with the head.

If (i) the head of household has moved out of the MAPS I dwelling, AND (ii) the head of household
DOES NOT live in the same EA or in its close vicinity (in Iganga or Mayuge), AND (iii) the spouse
or other MAPS I household members live in the EA or in its close vicinity (in Iganga or Mayuge)
- including the possibility of living in the MAPS I dwelling:

  Scenario #1:
    Attempt to track first the spouse living in the same EA or in its close vicinity. Once located,
      consider the household to be tracked.
    Mark the ID of the spouse and all MAPS I household members living with the spouse.

  Scenario #2:
    If there was no spouse in MAPS I or the spouse is not in the same EA or in its close vicinity,
      locate the largest group of MAPS I household members living in the same EA or in its
      close vicinity. If there is a tie in group size, locate the group members that live closest to
      the MAPS I dwelling location. If there is yet another tie in terms of distance, locate the
      group that contains the lowest MAPS I PID. Once the group is located, consider the
      household to be tracked.
    Mark the ID of the MAPS I household member with the lowest PID and all MAPS I
      household members living him/her.

If (i) all MAPS I household members have moved out of the MAPS I dwelling, AND (ii) the head
of household lives in the same EA or in its close vicinity (in Iganga and Mayuge) – either by himself
or with the entire set or a subset of MAPS I household members:
      Track the head living in the same EA or in its close vicinity. Once located, consider the
          household to be tracked.
      Mark the ID of the head and all MAPS I members living with the head.

If (i) all MAPS I household members have moved out of the MAPS I dwelling, AND (ii) the head
DOES NOT live in the same EA or in its very close vicinity (in Iganga or Mayuge), AND (iii) the
spouse or other MAPS I household members live in the EA or in its close vicinity (in Iganga or
Mayuge):
  Scenario #1:
    Attempt to track first the spouse living in the same EA or in its close vicinity. Once located,
      consider the household to be tracked.
    Mark the ID of the spouse and all MAPS I household members living with the spouse.

  Scenario #2:
    If there was no spouse in MAPS I or the spouse is not in the same EA or in its close vicinity,
      locate the largest group of MAPS I household members living in the same EA or in its
      close vicinity. If there is a tie in group size, locate the group members that live closest to
      the MAPS I dwelling location. If there is yet another tie in terms of distance, locate the
      group that contains the lowest MAPS I PID. Once the group is located, consider the
      household to be tracked.
    Mark the ID of the MAPS I household member with the lowest PID and all MAPS I
      household members living him/her.

If all MAPS I household members moved out of the EA:

      If the household was a single-headed household in MAPS I…

       Scenario #1:
              o If the head is alive and living in Iganga or Mayuge, he/she is the tracking target.
                  Once located, the household could be considered tracked.
              o Mark the ID of the head and all MAPS I members living with the head.

       Scenario #2:
          o If the head is not alive or is not living in Iganga or Mayuge, and the household was
              NOT a one-member household in MAPS I, locate the largest group of MAPS I
              household members that are known to be living together in Iganga or Mayuge. If
              there is a tie in group size, locate the group members that live closest to the MAPS
              I dwelling location in Iganga or Mayuge. If there is yet another tie in terms of
              distance, locate the group that contains the lowest MAPS I PID. Once the group is
              located, consider the household to be tracked.
          o Mark the ID of the MAPS I household member with the lowest PID and all MAPS
              I household members living him/her.

      If the household had a head and a spouse in MAPS I…

       Scenario #1:
              o If the head and spouse are together elsewhere in Iganga or Mayuge, they are the
                  tracking targets. Once located, consider the household to be tracked.
              o Mark the ID of the head and all MAPS I household members living with the
                  head and the spouse.

       Scenario #2:
              o If one of the partners is not alive, the remaining partner is the tracking target as


                                                                                                 61
         long as he/she is living in Iganga and Mayuge. Once located, consider the
         household to be tracked.
       o Mark the ID of the head or the spouse and all MAPS I household members
         living with him/her.

Scenario #3:
       o If one of the partners is not alive, the remaining partner is not living in Iganga
           and Mayuge, locate the largest group of MAPS I household members that are
           known to be living together in Iganga or Mayuge. If there is a tie in group size,
           locate the group members that live closest to the MAPS I dwelling location in
           Iganga or Mayuge. If there is yet another tie in terms of distance, locate the
           group that contains the lowest MAPS I PID. Once located, consider the
           household to be tracked.
       o Mark the ID of the MAPS I household member with the lowest PID and all
           MAPS I household members living him/her.

Scenario #4:
       o If the head and spouse have moved separately and are both known to be alive
           and living in Iganga and Mayuge, the head is the tracking target. Once located,
           consider the household to be tracked.
       o Mark the ID of the head and all MAPS I household members living with
           him/her.

Scenario #5:
       o If the head and spouse have moved separately and are both known to be alive
           but and only one of them is living in Iganga and Mayuge, the partner living in
           Iganga or Mayuge is the tracking target. Once located, consider the household
           to be tracked.
       o Mark the ID of the head or the spouse and all MAPS I household members
           living with him/her.

Scenario #6:
       o If the head and spouse have moved separately and only of them is alive and
           living in Iganga and Mayuge, the living partner living in Iganga or Mayuge is
           the tracking target.
       o Once located, consider the household to be tracked.
       o Mark the ID of the head or the spouse and all MAPS I household members
           living with him/her.

Scenario #7:
       o If the head and spouse have moved separately and none of them is living in
           Iganga and Mayuge, locate the largest group of MAPS I household members
           that are living together in Iganga or Mayuge. If there is a tie in group size, locate
           the group members that live closest to the MAPS I dwelling location in Iganga
           or Mayuge. If there is yet another tie in terms of distance, locate the group that
           contains the lowest MAPS I PID. Once located, consider the household to be



                                                                                             62
         tracked.
       o Mark the ID of the MAPS I household member with the lowest PID and all
         MAPS I household members living him/her.

Scenario #8:
       o If the head and spouse are both deceased, outside of Iganga and Mayuge or in
           an institution, locate the largest group of MAPS I household members that are
           living together in Iganga or Mayuge. If there is a tie in group size, locate the
           group members that live closest to the MAPS I dwelling location in Iganga or
           Mayuge. If there is yet another tie in terms of distance, locate the group that
           contains the lowest MAPS I PID. Once located, consider the household to be
           tracked.
       o Mark the ID of the MAPS I household member with the lowest PID and all
           MAPS I household members living him/her.”




                                                                                        63
                        Appendix II - MAPS II Plot Selection Protocol

The following is an excerpt from the MAPS II field staff manual:

“Household is classified with pure stand cultivation status if they have at least one pure stand
maize plot during the on-going agricultural season.

Similarly, a household is classified with intercropped cultivation status if they have at least one
intercropped maize plot during the on-going agricultural season.

Note that a household may possess both pure stand and intercropped cultivation statuses.

If the household was of pure stand cultivation status in 2015, and the household is of pure
stand cultivation status in 2016 in accordance with the definition above:

       … If the parcel that was selected for crop cutting in 2015 is still in household’s possession
       and has at least one maize plot that is of pure stand cultivation status, select a maize plot at
       random that is of pure stand cultivation status among the pure stand maize plots on the
       same parcel from 2015.

       … If the parcel that was selected for crop cutting in 2015 either is not in household’s
       possession OR is in household’s possession BUT does not have any plots that is cultivated
       with maize (irrespective of cultivation pattern) OR is in household’s possession and have
       at least one plot that is cultivated with maize BUT does not have at least one plot that is of
       pure stand cultivation status, select a pure stand plot at random among all the pure stand
       plots that are being cultivated by the household in 2016.

If the household was of intercropped cultivation status in 2015, and the household is of
intercropped cultivation status in 2016 in accordance with the definition above:

       … If the parcel that was selected for crop cutting in 2015 is still in household’s possession
       and has at least one maize plot that is of intercropped cultivation status, select a maize plot
       at random that is of intercropped cultivation status among the intercropped maize plots on
       the same parcel from 2015.

       … If the parcel that was selected for crop cutting in 2015 either is not in household’s
       possession OR is in household’s possession BUT does not have any plots that is cultivated
       with maize (irrespective of cultivation pattern) OR is in household’s possession and have
       at least one plot that is cultivated with maize BUT does not have at least one plot that is of
       intercropped cultivation status, select a intercropped plot at random among all the
       intercropped plots that are being cultivated by the household in 2016.

If the household was of pure stand cultivation status in 2015, and the household is of not pure
stand cultivation status and is of intercropped cultivation status in 2016 in accordance with
the definition above:




                                                                                                    64
       … If the parcel that was selected for crop cutting in 2015 is still in household’s possession
       and has at least one intercropped maize plot, select a maize plot at random that is of
       intercropped cultivation status among the intercropped maize plots on the same parcel from
       2015.

       … If the parcel that was selected for crop cutting in 2015 either is not in household’s
       possession OR is in household’s possession BUT does not have any plots that is cultivated
       with maize, select an intercropped plot at random among all the intercropped plots that are
       being cultivated by the household in 2016.

If the household was of intercropped cultivation status in 2015, and the household is of not
intercropped cultivation status and is of pure stand cultivation status in 2016 in accordance
with the definition above:

       … If the parcel that was selected for crop cutting in 2015 is still in household’s possession
       and has at least one pure stand maize plot, select a maize plot at random that is of pure
       stand cultivation status among the pure stand maize plots on the same parcel from 2015.

       … If the parcel that was selected for crop cutting in 2015 either is not in household’s
       possession OR is in household’s possession BUT does not have any plots that is cultivated
       with maize, select a pure stand plot at random among all the pure stand plots that are being
       cultivated by the household in 2016.”




                                                                                                 65
            Appendix III – MAPS Sub-Plot and Full-Plot Crop Cutting Protocol

Sub-Plot Crop Cutting

The following is an excerpt from the MAPS I field staff manual. The MAPS II crop cutting
protocol was identical to that of Round I, with one difference. In MAPS II, as opposed to setting
up one 4x4m (divided into four 2x2m quadrants) and another 2x2m sub-plot on each plot, the
enumerator set up only one 8x8m sub-plot (divided into four 4x4m quadrants).

"There are three aspects to this exercise – the first is conducted with the post-planting
questionnaire and the last two are conducted at the time of harvest:

   1. The first aspect is the selection of a random 4m x 4m crop-cutting subplot AND a random
      2x2m crop-cutting subplot within the plot. Using rope, the 4mx4m subplot will be divided
      into four 2mx2m quadrants. The 4x4m subplot and the 2x2m subplot will be selected using
      random number tables. This will take place as part of the post-planting questionnaire.

   2. The second aspect of this exercise is the harvesting of the maize once it is ready for harvest.
      This should be done at a time that is convenient for the farmer. It is very important that the
      farmer does not harvest the land before you arrive – therefore, please coordinate with the
      farmer and the local crop-cut monitor to learn the time at which he/she would like to
      harvest, and be sure to arrive without delay. The crop will be weighed at the time of harvest.
      Each of the five 2x2m quadrants will be weighed separately.

   3. The third aspect is the drying of the crop. This will take place at a centralized location in
      Kampala. Dry weights of the maize harvest will be conducted by a separate team in
      Kampala.

The materials that you will need for use in this exercise are:

      Module K (Post-Planting Questionnaire) and Module M (Crop-Cutting Questionnaire)
      Compass
      Pre-measured 4m x 4m PVC pipe
      Pre-measured 2m x 2m PVC pipe
      Sticks (13) for Area Demarcation
      Measuring Tape
      Rope (32+ meters per household)
      Bags, Barcodes, Writing Materials
      Industrial Digital Weighing Scale

Module K and Module M: Module K will be completed as part of the post-planting visit, when
the crop-cutting subplots are demarcated. Module M will be completed during the crop-cutting
visit, when the subplots are harvested and the crop is weighed.

Compass: This is a device used for capturing geographic bearings in degrees (00).



                                                                                                  66
Pre-measured 4m x 4m PVC pipe: A set of PVC pipes that are pre-measured to create a 4x4
meter square will be provided to each enumerator to ensure the crop-cut area is precisely 4x4
meters.

Pre-measured 2m x 2m PVC pipe: A set of PVC pipes that are pre-measured to create a 2x2
meter square will also be provided to each enumerator to ensure the second crop-cut area is
precisely 2x2 meters.

Sticks: These will be used to mark the four corners of the areas selected for crop cutting. Eight
sticks will be used to mark the corners of the 4x4 meter subplot and four sticks to mark the
corners of the 2x2 meter subplot.

Measuring Tape: This is a distance-measuring instrument marked in metric-units (segments),
which will be used to determine the location of the areas in the plot.

Bags, Barcodes, Writing Materials: Each quadrant’s harvest will be stored in bags that will be
provided for sample transport. Each bag will be tagged with a water-resistant barcode sticker,
whose duplicate will be placed inside the bag. You will be provided with pen and pencils for
note taking.

Industrial Digital Weighing Scale: This will be used to weigh the harvested maize at the time
of harvest (in grain form). Each of the five 2x2m quadrants must be weighed separately.

Procedure for Crop Cutting

We will be conducting crop cutting on a 4m x 4m subplot AND a 2m x 2m subplot of the maize
plot. However, we will divide the 4mx4m area into four 2mx2m squares (also called quadrants).
Therefore, there will be a total of FIVE 2m x 2m quadrants. The harvest of each quadrant will
be recorded separately. Here, we describe in further detail each of the four main aspects to the crop
cutting exercise.

You will first construct the 4m x 4m subplot by following steps 1 and 2 below. Only after
demarcating the 4m x 4m subplot you will repeat steps 1 and 2 for the 2m x 2m subplot. The 4x4
and 2x2 subplots may not overlap.

   1) Crop Cutting Area Selection:

       a. Use Random Number Table #1 to identify the corner from which you will start. Use the
          first number in the random number table that matches one of the corners of the plot. The
          corner in which you started the area measurement, the northwest corner, is corner #1.
          Corner #2 is the next corner of the plot, moving around the plot clockwise.

       b. Measure the distance of the two sides along the selected corner with the measuring tape.
          Identify which is the longer side and which is the shorter side.

       c. Take the bearing from the start corner down the shorter side. Note this in your notebook.



                                                                                                    67
   d. Use the Random Number Table #2 provided for this household. The first number should
      be the number of meters that you will walk along the length of the longer side of the
      plot. If the first number is larger than the length of the side, choose the next random
      number (and so on, until you find a number that is less than the length of the side). For
      example, if the length of the longer side is 25 meters and the first random number in the
      list is 28, move on to the next number.

   e. Beginning at your starting point and continuing along the longer side of the plot, walk
      the number of meters indicated by your random number.

   f. Turn into the plot so that your bearing is the same as the bearing you measured down
      the shorter side of the plot. This means you will be entering the plot parallel to the shorter
      side. Choose the next random number from Random Number Table #2 that is shorter
      than the length of the shorter side and walk the number of meters indicated by this
      second random number. You should be walking in a direction that is parallel to the
      shorter edge of the plot. Walk in a straight line. Try not to veer to the right or left to
      avoid shrubs or wet spots.

   g. The corner of the crop cutting subplot is located where your foot lands on the last step:
      this is point A.

2) Crop Cutting Subplot Demarcation:

    a. At point A, insert the first stick firmly into the ground, then turn your face
                                                                                        N
       to the east and lay the PVC pipe square in front of you (if you do not have
       PCV pipe with you, measure 4 meters directly to the east). One side of the W        E
       PVC square should go from Point A to the east, which we call Point B. From       S
       Point B, the next corner of the PVC pipe should be to the north where we
       put Point C (if you do not have PCV pipe with you, measure 4 meters directly to the
       north).

   b. With the PVC square on the ground, insert sticks exactly at each corner.

   c. Tie a rope around all four sticks. Carefully dis-assemble and remove the PVC pipe
      square, leaving only the rope. The rope will stay on the subplot until the time of harvest.

   d. In order to make sure that the subplot size is correct, check to make sure that the diagonal
      line (Line A-C) is: (1) 5.66 meters on the 4m x 4m subplot and (2) 2.828 meters on the
      2m x 2m subplot.




                                                                                                 68
                 4m x 4m Subplot          C                                     2m x 2m Subplot
       D                                                                D                               C




                                                                                                            2 meters
                                                4 meters
                                                                                               2.828
                          5.66                                                                 meters
                          meters
                                                                        A                               B
                                                                                            2 meters
       A
                                           B
                      4 meters

Note: If the random numbers obtained from the random table for long and short sides of the plot
do not fall in the crop plot area, drop both random numbers and start over again. Each time when
one or both of the random numbers fail to fall in the plot, drop both and start again until both
random numbers fall on the plot. Also, if the 2x2 subplot overlaps with the 4x4 subplot, you must
drop the random numbers and start again on the 2x2 subplot.

If there is an obstacle in one or more of the crop-cutting subplots, such as a large tree stump, a
boulder, large ant hill, etc. re-select the subplot by starting with a new random corner.

If in one or more of the crop-cutting subplots there is maize damage, DO NOT re-select the
subplot. Leave it as it and we will record the damage in the crop-cut questionnaire.

       e. FOR THE 4x4 SUBPLOT ONLY: The last step is to divide the 4m x 4m subplot into
          4 equal quadrants. Measure 2m from each corner and enter a new stick. These new
          sticks will mark the middle of the rope on each side. Next, tie a piece of rope between
          the new sticks so that there are four (4) equal quadrants as in the example below. These
          four quadrants will be called quadrant A, B, C, and D. When conducting the harvest,
          you will need to keep the crop from each quadrant separate.

                                               4m x 4m Subplot
                                   D                                        C
                                        Quadrant D         Quadrant C


                                        2 meters
                                                                                 2 meters




                                         Quadrant A        Quadrant B



                                   A
                                                                        B
                                        2 meters
                                                                                                                  69
    3) Harvest of Demarcated Section – Completed at the time of harvest

With the consent of the farmer, harvest all of the maize contained within the demarcated plot area,
keeping the crop from each quadrant separate. Count the number of plants and cobs that are
harvested from each quadrant. Once harvested and shelled, the grain should be weighed carefully
using the digital scales, and the data recorded in the Module M of the Crop-Cutting Questionnaire.
Remember, the crop from each quadrant must be weighed separately. The crop cut samples will
be picked up on weekly supervision visits and delivered to the central drying location in Kampala.
A separate team will then dry the crop for an additional time, weigh it again at a later date, and
capture the moisture content at the time of the final weighing.

Full Plot Crop Cutting in MAPS II

Out of the initial target of 540 households, half of households in each of the pure stand and
intercropped domains in each MAPS Round I EA were selected at random, prior to the start of the
MAPS II fieldwork, to be subject to full-plot crop cutting, in addition to the 8x8m sub-plot crop
cutting. This yielded a pre-full-plot crop cut sample of 282 households. Given the attrition
dynamics in Round II and 31 households that were selected for full-plot crop cutting but that had
to harvest their only plot prior to the crop cutting visit (with the exception of the crop cut sub-plot),
the final sample that was subject to full plot crop cutting was composed of 214 households.

At the time of the harvest, the 8x8 crop cut sub-plot was harvested first, and both unshelled and
shelled weights were taken, alongside shelled grain moisture readings for each of the 4x4m
quadrant harvest. Subsequently, the rest of the plot was harvested for unshelled and shelled weight
measurements and shelled grain moisture measurements, following the steps outlined below. For
capturing unshelled and shelled weights tied to full-plot crop cut harvests, we used high-accuracy,
digital, industrial HIWEIGH scales that were procured through and calibrated by the Uganda
National Bureau of Standards. Each scale had a maximum load of 300 kilograms and a readability
of 0.01 grams. We used DICKEY-john mini GAC moisture meters that were borrowed from the
National Crop Resources Research Institute (NaCCRI). Each of the 3 survey teams had one scale
and one moisture meter.

Due to different planting times, farmers were harvesting their grain at different times. Instead of
concentrating on one EA at a time, the teams adopted a system of visiting an average of 2 to 3 EAs
per day during the crop cutting fieldwork period, and conducting crop cuts on an average of 3
sampled plots across harvest-ready households. Each household was allocated, on average, four
100 kilogram bags to facilitate the full plot harvest. Every plot had 2 crop assistants recruited from
the associated household to assist in the full-plot crop cut. Every crop assistant was paid 5000
Ugandan Shillings, approximately 1.5 USD. Further, each full-plot crop cut household received a
tarpaulin (used for maize drying), in addition to a hoe and a panga knife that was provided to all
MAPS II households.




                                                                                                      70
The specific steps in the full-plot crop cuts were:

   1. Visit the plot; and count and record the number of plants in each of the 4 quadrants of the
      crop cut sub-plot, and separately, in the rest of the plot.

   2. Harvest, transport to the dwelling location, and count the cobs; and take unshelled weights,
      for the each of the 4 quadrants of the crop cut sub-plot, and separately for the rest of the
      plot, which would in turn be shelled by the farmer and household-specific crop cut
      assistants.

       (The time commitment to Steps 1 and 2 for a 1-acre plot was approximately 2 hours. The
       crop cut assistants followed up with the households during the shelling period to ensure
       compliance with the instructions regarding (1) the separation of the harvests tied to the sub-
       plot quadrants versus the rest of the plot as well as other plots that may have been cultivated
       by the household, and (2) the prevention of household consumption of shelled maize until
       the weight and moisture measurements were taken.)

   3. Visit the household in 2 to 3 days depending on the shelling progress; obtain shelled maize
      weights and moisture readings for the each of the 4 quadrants of the crop cut sub-plot, and
      for each 100 kg sack utilized by the household for storing the harvest tied to the rest of the
      plot.




                                                                                                   71
Appendix IV – Inputs into MAPS Farmer-Reported Production Estimates

                     List of Allowable Farmer-Reported
                       Production Measurement Units
              Unit
              Code        Unit Description
              1           Kilogram (kg)
              2           Gram
              4           Small cup with handle (Akendo)
              9           Sack (120 kgs)
              10          Sack (100 kgs)
              11          Sack (80 kgs)
              12          Sack (50 kgs)
              13          Sack (unspecified)
              20          Tin (20 lts)
              21          Tin (5 lts)
              22          Plastic Basin (15 lts)
              29          Kimbo/Cowboy/Blueband Tin (2 kg)
              30          Kimbo/Cowboy/Blueband Tin (1 kg)
              31          Kimbo/Cowboy/Blueband Tin (0.5 kg)
              37          Basket (20 kg)
              38          Basket (10 kg)
              39          Basket (5 kg)
              40          Basket (2 kg)
              63          Crate
              64          Heap (Unspecified)
              66          Bundle (Unspecified)
              67          Bunch (Big)
              68          Bunch (Medium)
              69          Bunch (Small)
              70          Cluster (Unspecified)
              85          Number of Units (General)
              99          Other Units (Specify)


                    List of Allowable Farmer-Reported
                             Harvest Conditions
              Condition
              Code        Condition Description
              1           Green Harvested
              2           Fresh/Raw Harvested
              3           Dry At Harvest
              4           Dry After Additional Drying


                     List of Allowable Farmer-Reported
                                Harvest States
              State Code State Description
              1              With Cob and Stalk
              2              With Cob and Husk, Without Stalk
              3              With Cob, Without Husk, Stalk
              4              Grain
              5              Other (Specify)


                                                                      72
         Appendix V – Construction of the Soil Quality Index and the Edge Effects

Soil Quality Index

The soil quality index was constructed following the guidance provided by Mukherjee and Lal
(2014) in their comparison of three approaches to the computation of soil quality indices, including
(i) a simple additive approach, (ii) a weighted additive approach, and (iii) a principal component
approach. Indices following each of the three approaches were constructed, including numerous
specifications of the principal component approach. Following bivariate analysis of each index
and crop cutting yield estimates, the principal component approach was identified as the most
appropriate method for this analysis.

Multiple indices were constructed using the principle component approach, with different
combinations of soil properties. Ultimately, the index with the greatest predictive power with
respect to crop cut yield was composed of organic carbon (%), soil electrical conductivity (an
indicator of soil salinity), and pH. First, principal component analysis was estimated, followed by
the identification of highly weighted soil properties in each component with an eigenvalue greater
than or equal to 1. In accordance with the guidance set forth by Mukherjee and Lal (2014), the
highest weighted soil property was maintained for each component (when greater than or equal to
1). In the case where the highest weighted soil property was within 10 percent of the weight of
another property, both (or all) properties were maintained, provided the correlation of the
properties was less than or equal to 0.60. Weights were then constructed for each of the retained
variables, defined as the share of the variance explained by the respective component relative to
the total cumulative explained variance. For detailed explanations, see Mukherjee and Lal (2014)
and Andrews et al. (2002).

Linear scores for each retained soil property were determined by dividing all observations by the
highest value in the sample for soil properties in which a higher value is more beneficial (organic
carbon). Soil electrical conductivity and pH have an optimal range, whereby there are both lower
and upper bounds. For these properties, the observations were split into those above and below the
critical thresholds, as defined by Mukherjee and Lal (2014), with those below the threshold treated
as though a higher value is preferred and those above the threshold treated as though a lower value
is preferred. Linear scores are normalized over the sample and, therefore, range from zero to one.
The final index is weighted mean of the three soil properties, constructed using weights identified
in the principal analysis and the normalized soil property scores.

Edge Effects

The variables indicating the proximity of the crop-cutting sub-plot to the plot edge are constructed
by overlaying the sub-plot border on the plot boundary. The sub-plot boundaries are re-constructed
with the GIS tools based on the coordinate of the crop cut sub-plot starting corner. A variable is


                                                                                                 73
then constructed for the share of the subplot that fell within a 4-meter internal buffer of the plot
boundary. A separate variable is computed considering a 1-meter plot buffer for MAPS II, given
the increase in the crop sub-plot area to 64 m2 in this round.

In the case of MAPS I, since there are two crop cut sub-plots (a 4x4m sub-plot and a separate
2x2m sub-plot) and each may have a different share of the subplot within the buffer zone, an
aggregated variable is necessary. This variable is computed as the sum of the shares of the sub-
plots within the buffer zones, weighted by the total crop cut area of 20 m2 that a given crop cut
sub-plot accounted for:

                            ℎ
                                                                                16
                             = ( ℎ          4 4                              )×
                                                                                20
                                                                                4
                             + ( ℎ          2 2                              )×
                                                                                20

The indicator for MAPS II is simply the share of the 8x8 meter subplot in the buffer zone.




                                                                                                 74
