                                                          WPS8018


Policy Research Working Paper                            8018




                          Ageing Poorly?
 Accounting for the decline in earnings inequality in Brazil,
                        1995–2012

                              Francisco H. G. Ferreira
                                  Sergio P. Firpo
                                  Julián Messina




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8018


  Abstract
 The Gini coefficient of labor earnings in Brazil fell by nearly                    wage disparities during the period. Substantial reductions
 a fifth between 1995 and 2012, from 0.50 to 0.41. The                              in the gender, race, informality and urban-rural wage gaps,
 decline in earnings inequality was even larger by other mea-                       conditional on human capital and institutional variables,
 sures, with the 90–10 percentile ratio falling by almost 40                        also contributed to the decline. Although rising mini-
 percent. Although the conventional explanation of a falling                        mum wages were equalizing during 2003–2012, they
 education premium did play a role, an RIF regression-based                         had the opposite effects during 1995–2003, because of
 decomposition analysis suggests that the decline in returns                        declining compliance. Over the entire period, the direct
 to potential experience was the main factor behind lower                           effect of minimum wages on inequality was muted.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at fferreira@worldbank.org, firpo@insper.edu.br, and julianm@iadb.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                          Ageing Poorly?
    Accounting for the decline in earnings inequality in Brazil, 1995-2012



                          Francisco H. G. Ferreira            Sergio P. Firpo

                                            Julián Messina




Keywords:        Earnings inequality; Brazil; RIF Regressions

JEL Codes:       D31, J31





  Ferreira (1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C., 20433, USA, +1 (202) 473-4382, fferreira@worldbank.org)
is at the World Bank and IZA. Firpo (Rua Quatá 300, São Paulo, SP, 04546-042, Brazil, +55 (11) 4504-2400,
firpo@insper.edu.br) is at Insper Institute of Education and Research and IZA. Messina (1300 New York Ave,
N.W., Washington, D.C. 20577, USA, +1 (202) 623-3272 julianm@iadb.org) is at Inter-American Development
Bank and IZA. We are grateful to Camila Galindo, Nicolás Guida Johnson and, especially, to Juan Pablo Uribe
for excellent research assistance. We are also grateful to Edmund Amann, Armando Barrientos, Nora Lustig,
Ben Ross Schneider and seminar participants at MIT, DFID/University of Manchester and University of Cape
Town workshops, as well as at the LAMES 2014, LACEA 2015, NIP 2015, and SOLE 2015 conferences for
comments on earlier versions. All errors are our own.
1. Introduction

              Rising income inequality has recently attracted a great deal of attention in both
academic and policy circles. Best-selling books by Piketty (2014) and Stiglitz (2012) have
described pronounced increases in inequality in advanced economies, and discussed their
myriad social costs. The sustained rise in wage and income inequality in the United States
since 1980 has attracted particular attention, with a long and distinguished literature
documenting it and debating the relative importance of various contributing factors. Changes
in relative skill supplies have been central to the debate, as they can affect the structure of
earnings directly through composition effects (Lemieux, 2006) or indirectly through changes
in the schooling and experience premiums (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Card and Lemieux,
2001). Changes in technology, subsumed under the rubric of skill-biased technical change,
have long been thought to affect the relative demand for skilled and unskilled labor, and
hence their relative wages.1 Others have emphasized the role of changes in labor market
institutions, such as the decline in unionization rates and in real minimum wages (e.g.,
DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux, 1996). Changes in trading patterns and the effect of rising
import competition on domestic wages have also gained prominence (Autor, Dorn and
Hanson, 2013). As the vibrant debate on the causes of rising inequality in the United States
continues, it seems increasingly unlikely that a single culprit will ultimately be identified.
              But inequality can fall, as well as rise. A recent World Bank study has found that
income inequality fell (by more than one Gini point) in 39 of 91 countries for which data
were available in the 1993-2008 period (World Bank, 2016). Most of these declines were
found among emerging and developing countries: inequality fell in 10 African and 11 Latin
American countries, for example. Of course, as the World Bank study acknowledges, in many
developing countries there are serious concerns about data quality and comparability, which
make reliable analysis difficult. Yet, this is not true in all cases and, in those countries where
the data are reliable and where the inequality trends are markedly different from those in the
United States and Western Europe, it would seem possible to learn much that is of general
interest.2 It is therefore surprising that so little attention has been given in the mainstream

                                                            
1 See, for example, Bound and Johnson (1992), Katz and Autor (1999), Acemoglu (1998 and 2002), and Card
and DiNardo (2002) among many others. More recently, changes in the distribution of occupations and, in
particular, in the role that different tasks within occupations have on wage determination, have become central
to the discussion of technical change (e.g. Autor, Levy and Murnane, 2003).
2 This argument is analogous to the suggestion by Hamermesh (2004) that much of general interest could be

learned from studying the determinants of labor demand in developing countries: “It is true that in many cases
the data on labor markets in developing countries are not as complete as in developed economies, but in some
cases they are, and in those instances the availability of good data that cover periods of widespread policy

                                                                                                             2 
 
economics literature to the drivers of inequality dynamics in countries other than the United
States, Britain, France and Germany. In particular, studying cases where inequality actually
fell for a sustained period of time can presumably teach us something about the combination
of economic environments and policies under which such a trend is possible—even if, as in
the case of rising disparities in the United States, there turn out to be many factors at play.
              In this paper, we investigate the proximate determinants of a substantial decline in
the inequality of labor incomes in Brazil—the largest economy in Latin America, and one of
the 10 largest in the world—during the 1995-2012 period. Starting from very high levels, the
Gini coefficient of the country’s distribution of household per capita income fell by 12
percent, from 0.59 in 1995 to 0.52 in 2012. A 7 basis points reduction in the Gini coefficient
in 17 years is truly remarkable. For comparison, the Gini coefficient of household income
inequality in the US increased by 8 basis points between 1967 and 2011, from 0.40 to 0.48
(Jacobson and Occhino, 2012). Most of the decline in inequality in Brazil can be attributed
to changes in the distribution of labor earnings (Barros et al., 2010; Azevedo et al., 2013),
and the Gini coefficient for that distribution fell by 18% in the same period, from 0.50 to
0.41.
              Economic studies of changes in inequality fall into two broad categories: the first
uses exogenous sources of variation (instruments or experiments, say) to identify the effect
of one or two factors on the overall distribution (e.g., Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2013). The
second group of studies decomposes the overall change in the distribution into its statistical
components (e.g., DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux, 1996; Juhn, Murphy and Pierce, 1993).
There are, of course, advantages and disadvantages to both approaches. In the former, a
successful identification strategy would render us confident of the causal impact of the
particular factor under consideration (e.g., the effect of trade with China on wages in certain
parts of the United States), but the remainder of the change—including any offsetting
effects—remains unidentified. In the latter approach, one obtains an exact statistical
decomposition of the overall change, but the assumptions required for treating that
decomposition as causal identification are somewhat stronger (see Fortin, Lemieux and
Firpo, 2011).
              We view these two approaches as complements, rather than substitutes. In this paper,
we follow the second route and use recent decomposition methods based on re-centered
influence function (RIF) regressions (Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux, 2009; and Fortin, Lemieux


                                                            
changes allows us to make inferences about labor demand that should be useful for students of labor market
behavior generally” (Hamermesh, 2004: 554).

                                                                                                        3 
 
and Firpo, 2011) to estimate the quantitative impact of five groups of candidate explanatory
factors on changes in the Brazilian earnings distribution. These factors are: i) human capital;
ii) labor market institutions; iii) demographic characteristics of workers; iv) spatial
segmentation; and v) sectoral distribution of the labor force. For each group of factors we
separate out what can be attributed to changes in the distribution of observable workers’
characteristics, the composition or endowment effect, and what is due to changes in the
premiums associated with those characteristics, the pay structure effect.3
              By casting the net wide and avoiding preconceived ideas, we come to somewhat
different conclusions from those of most of the earlier literature about the recent decline in
Brazilian—and Latin American—inequality. During the study period, Brazil experienced a
large increase in the supply of relatively skilled workers (with completed secondary schooling
or higher), which led to a decline in the returns to education (or skill premiums). Most early
papers on falling inequality in Brazil (and elsewhere in Latin America) tend to attribute most
of the decline to this falling skill premium effect. 4 More recently, other authors have
attributed much – even most – of the decline to the direct and indirect effects of a rising real
minimum wage policy (Alvarez et al., 2016, and Engbom and Moser, 2016).
              To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first study to allow for possible
contributions from all of these competing factors—as well as others—within a single
empirical model. In so doing, we find that falling skill wage premiums did contribute to lower
wage disparities, but that this effect was almost entirely offset by the inequality-increasing
effect of higher endowments of education (which moved workers towards a steeper section
of the convex earnings-schooling profile). 5 As a result, the overall effect of changes in
education—taking both composition and structure effects into account—was economically
insignificant. Similarly, rising minimum wages did contribute to falling wage inequality during
2003-2012 but were actually inequality-increasing in the earlier sub-period (1995-2003), when
falling compliance with the policy led to higher wage gaps between workers who kept formal
sector jobs and those who did not.
              We find that the bulk of the decline in wage inequality in Brazil over the 1995-2012
period can be accounted for by two other factors. The first is a marked reduction in returns
to potential experience 6 —an effect consistent with the age-biased technical change

                                                            
3 This follows a long tradition that can be traced back to Oaxaca (1973) and Blinder (1973).
4 See, e.g., Ferreira, Leite and Litchfield (2008), Barros et al. (2010), Lustig, López-Calva, and Ortiz-Juárez
(2013), and Gasparini et al. (2011).
5 This is the “paradox of progress” of Bourguignon, Ferreira and Lustig (2005), on which more below.
6 Our data, discussed below, does not permit us to observe actual experience for workers, so we rely on potential

experience, defined as age minus years of schooling minus six.

                                                                                                               4 
 
hypothesis that has been put forward elsewhere in the literature. 7 Combining both
composition and structure effects, experience accounts for 3.5 of the 9.0 Gini points decline
in the full period. The second factor is a reduction in wage gaps associated with race, gender,
location and formal work status, conditional on the observed human capital and labor market
institutional variables. These gaps were closing in both of the sub-periods we study (1995-
2003 and 2003-2012), thus substantially reducing what one might call “horizontal wage
inequalities”: between observationally equivalent men and women; blacks and whites; rural
and urban areas; and formal and informal sector workers. We think of this effect as a move
towards leveling the playing field in the Brazilian labor market. These two main findings are
robust to widely different specification choices, including changes in the inequality indicator
whose influence function is used as a dependent variable in the RIF regression.
              By reporting on a statistical decomposition of inequality dynamics, we hope that this
paper contributes an important first step in the analysis of Brazil’s remarkable inequality
dynamics during the late 1990s and until 2012, prior to the onset of its more recent economic
crisis. But while it establishes the stylized facts that must be explained, it does not offer a
causal analysis of why returns to experience and horizontal labor market inequalities fell.
That task is left for future work.
              The paper is organized as follows. The next section briefly describes our data. Section
3 then reviews the evidence on falling inequality in Brazil, and describes the main trends in
the key variables under study. Our empirical approach is described in Section 4, and Section
5 presents the results. Section 6 concludes.




                                                            
7   See, for example, Behaghel and Greenan (2010), Friedberg (2003) and De Koning and Gelderblom (2004).

                                                                                                           5 
 
2.            Data
The main data source for this study is the Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (PNAD),
and the period of analysis is 1995-2012. The PNAD is an annual, nationally representative
household survey, covering both rural and urban areas.8 It is fielded by the Brazilian Census
Bureau (Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística, IBGE) every year, except for census years.
The descriptive analysis uses all available years in the period 1995-2012, but for the
decompositions we use the PNAD datasets for six years: 1995, 1996, 2002, 2003, 2011 and
2012.
              The following filters were applied to the data to generate our working sample. Our
sample includes all workers aged 18-65 who reported positive earnings during the survey’s
reference week. Our measure of earnings is total monthly earnings from all jobs, and it is
expressed in real values using the CPI deflator with base-year 2005. Monthly earnings are
trimmed at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Sample sizes vary somewhat over time, but about
130,000 individuals per year are included on average.
              All variables used in the analysis are categorical, except for earnings, schooling and
experience in the labor market. The last two are measured in years. Demographic worker
characteristics include a gender dummy and a three-way categorical variable for race (white,
black and other). The analysis also distinguishes between rural and urban workers. Rural and
urban areas are classified in accordance with the Brazilian census definitions. Spatial
measures also include dummies for the five main geographic regions of Brazil: North,
Northeast, Center-West, Southeast and South. Finally, regarding sectoral distribution,
workers are divided into 17 different sectors of economic activity (see Table 2 below).
              In terms of institutional factors, we distinguish three characteristics of the job.
Workers are classified as formal employees if they have a job that is properly registered in
their work-card or “carteira de trabalho,” which provides workers with various benefits
including rights to pensions, unemployment insurance and severance payments. Those
employees whose employers have not registered their job in the “carteira de trabalho” are
considered informal employees, and we also include in the analysis own-account or self-
employed workers (“conta própria”) as a separate category. Self-employment in developing
countries is often considered as an indicator of informality, although it also encompasses
workers engaged in liberal professions and some entrepreneurs with no employees of their

                                                            
8 Except for the rural areas of Acre, Amapá, Amazonas, Pará, Rondonia and Roraima states, which correspond
to the Amazon rain forest. These areas, which according to census data account for 2.3 per cent of the Brazilian
population, were excluded from the survey before 2003. To preserve sample comparability, we exclude these
areas from our sample in all years.

                                                                                                              6 
 
own. We have also included in the analysis an indicator variable for workers below or at the
national minimum wage in a given year. Minimum wage information is collected from the
ILOSTAST Database. The description of trends in earnings and other variables in the next
section is based on this dataset and variable definitions.

3.            Falling Inequality in Brazil and Its Five Potential Drivers
As noted earlier, Brazil has experienced a non-trivial reduction in income inequality since the
macroeconomic stabilization of 1994-1995. This decline was particularly pronounced since
2003, a period during which average incomes also grew relatively rapidly (Figure 1, Panel A)
and poverty fell sharply.9 Brazil was not alone: similar trajectories were observed in a number
of other Latin American countries over the same period. A comprehensive discussion of the
trends in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Peru can be found in López-Calva and Lustig
(2010).10
              Much of the popular discourse on falling inequality in Latin America has stressed the
role of growing fiscal redistribution, through new social protection instruments such as
conditional cash transfers (CCTs). Indeed, Brazil’s federal government launched a
conditional cash transfer program named Bolsa Família in 2003, which has since reached over
50 million people, and become one of the world’s largest CCT programs. Although Bolsa
Família and other fiscal redistribution programs did contribute to the reduction in household
income inequality, the best available estimates put this contribution at between 30-40 percent
of the overall decline (Barros et al., 2010; Azevedo et al. 2013). Another 10 percent or so has
been attributed to demographic factors, chiefly the rapid decline in family sizes, which has
been most pronounced among poorer households. The remaining 50-60 percent of the
decline in inequality in household incomes has been attributed to changes in the distribution
of labor earnings. It is these changes that are our subject here.
              Figure 1 provides a visual description of the basic income trends in Brazil over this
period. Panel A depicts trends in levels, rather than in dispersion: real labor earnings and (per
capita) household incomes behaved similarly in the 1995-2012 period, but their behavior
differed markedly across two sub-periods. From 1995 to 2003, both earnings and household
incomes were either stable or declining: median labor earnings and average household per
capita incomes were roughly constant, while mean labor earnings fell by 18 percent. The

                                                            
9 This section draws in part on our earlier paper (Ferreira, Firpo and Messina, 2016).
10 In addition to these four in-depth case studies, this volume contains thematic chapters looking at the
Tinbergen race between educational upgrading and technological change, the political economy of
redistribution and trends in top incomes.

                                                                                                       7 
 
situation changed around 2002-03, when all three series began to trend sharply upwards.
Average labor earnings, for example, increased by about 40 percent from 2003 to 2012.
Median earnings and household incomes also grew rapidly in this second sub-period.11
                                                               [Insert Figure 1 around here]
              Panels B, C and D of Figure 1 present the trends in inequality. Panel B shows the
point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals for the Gini coefficients of total
household income per capita and of labor earnings. During 1995-2003, the decline in income
inequality is clearly less rapid than that in labor earnings, for which the Gini loses four points,
but both fall throughout. The second sub-period sees a continuation in the decline in labor
earnings inequality, and an acceleration in the decline for household incomes. Over the full
seventeen years, income inequality falls by about 12 percent and earnings inequality by as
much as 18 percent, when both are measured by the Gini coefficient. Furthermore, Panels
C and D show that the decline in earnings inequality is robust to the choice of index: the
reductions are actually proportionally larger when measured by the Theil index and by the
90-10 percentile ratio, at 34 percent and 37 percent, respectively.
              The recent literature on the decline of income inequality in Brazil, exemplified by
Barros et al. (2010) and Ferreira, Leite and Litchfield et al. (2008), suggests two main (and
clearly related) mechanisms that may account for this reduction in earnings inequality: i)
rising levels of educational attainment in the labor force, particularly at the secondary level;
and ii) a decline in the wage schooling premium. In other words, they suggest that the
dominant explanation for falling wage inequality in Brazil lay firmly in the domain of human
capital and, more specifically, that of education: as the supply of educated workers rose faster
than the demand for them, the skill premium fell, leading to a more compressed wage
distribution.
              But other factors besides rising levels of educational attainment and reductions in the
school premium were also at play during these 17 years, including in the broad domain of
human capital. For example, there was a sharp reduction in the experience or age premium,
a phenomenon that may be related to the aging of the labor force (although those
composition changes were small) or may indicate that technical change was most beneficial
to young workers, who are more likely to be familiar with new technologies. There were also
changes in the gender and racial composition of the labor force and in the corresponding

                                                            
11The causes of this inflection and of the boom decade of 2002-2013 go beyond the scope of this paper. 2002
was the year in which President Luis Inácio Lula da Silva took office. It is also now commonly viewed as the
beginning of the commodity price super-cycle, which benefited all commodity exporting countries in Latin
America, including Brazil. Messina and Silva (2017) discuss possible mechanisms through which the super-cycle
may have affected the proximate drivers of earnings inequality.

                                                                                                           8 
 
wage premiums. Similarly, changes in Brazil’s labor market institutions, such as the level and
coverage of minimum wages, and the degree of enforcement of formal employment
contracts, may have played a role. Indeed, in a recent paper using administrative matched
employer-employee data from Brazil’s formal sector (the RAIS dataset), Engbom and Moser
(2016) claim that the rise in the real value of the minimum wage, including indirect spillover
effects along the distribution, may account for as much as 70 percent of the reduction in the
variance of log earnings in essentially the same period we study here (1996-2012).
              The commodity boom that benefited Brazil during the 2000s may have triggered
sectoral reallocation of employment, with additional effects on skill premiums and inequality,
to the extent that different sectors have different intensities of demand for skills. Finally,
there were also changes in employment and wage gaps across spatial areas: both rural versus
urban, and across the country’s five main geographical regions.
              We have therefore grouped the factors that may have affected earnings inequality in
Brazil into five major categories: human capital, demographics, institutions, geography and
sectoral distribution. Before describing our methodological approach in more detail in
Section 4, and presenting results in Section 5, the remainder of this section looks descriptively
at each of the five groups of candidate explanatory factors in turn. We first describe changes
in the distribution of the relevant variables, and then report—again, descriptively – on
changes in the partial correlation between labor earnings and each variable.


3.1 Changes in the Distribution of Candidate-Proximate Factors
We begin with human capital. Figure 2 shows the cumulative distribution functions for years
of schooling in the working age population (18-65), at three points in time: 1995, 2003 and
2012. These distribution functions illustrate an impressive expansion in the supply of years
of schooling in the labor force. The proportion of the working age population with at least
10 years of schooling, for example, doubled from 25 percent to 50 percent between 1995
and 2012.12
                                                               [Insert Figure 2 around here]
              In the absence of information on actual experience per worker, we look at age and
potential experience, defined as age minus years of schooling minus six, for each worker. As
life expectancy increased over this period, the proportion of the working-age population aged

                                                            
12This increase in the supply of educated workers reflects educational policy changes dating back to the late
1980s, but also the subsequent decentralization of basic education funding from the state level to municipal
level, as well as changes in the funding system with the creation of FUNDEB (Fundo Nacional para o
Desenvolvimento da Educação Básica) to reallocate funding according to demand. See Cruz and Rocha (2016).

                                                                                                           9 
 
30 or over increased from 64 percent to 69 percent (an 8 percent increase over the period),
and those aged 45 or over increased from 22 percent to 29 percent (a 32 percent increase).
Yet, the increase in years of schooling documented in Figure 1 proved sufficient to offset
the age effect on experience: as shown in Table 1, average potential experience in the labor
force experienced a slight decline from 23.1 years in 1995 to 22.3 years in 2012.
                                                               [Insert Table 1 around here]
              The second group of factors concerns changes in Brazil’s labor market institutions.
Under this heading, we focus on two variables in particular: changes in the level and coverage
of the national minimum wage; and changes in the extent of formal and informal
employment, as well as self-employment. Panel A of Figure 3 plots the trajectory of minimum
wages in the 1995-2012 period, alongside those of mean and median earnings. While real
mean and median earnings increased by 14 percent and 43 percent, respectively, the real
minimum wage increased by 103 percent over the full period. Interestingly, the bulk of that
increase took place in the second sub-period: between 2003 and 2012, the real minimum
wage index in Figure 3 (Panel A) rose from 1.26 to 2.03.
                                                               [Insert Figure 3 around here]
              Panel B of Figure 3 plots the density functions for real earnings for the years 1995-
96, 2002-03 and 2011-12.13 Vertical lines indicate the values of the minimum wage in each
year, and the corresponding spikes are clearly visible. One can also see how the earnings
distribution shifted to the right and became more compressed over time. Nevertheless,
although such a large increase in minimum wages is clearly associated with a move of density
mass to the right, there is a non-negligible mass of workers that remains below the minimum
wage threshold. Over the full period, the proportion of employed workers earning strictly
less than the minimum wage actually increased by about four percentage points, from 12 to 16
percent. As documented in Table 1, this tendency was dominant in the first sub-period:
Between 1995 and 2003 the share of workers below the minimum wage increased by 6
percentage points, and then declined during the 2003-2012 boom. This turns out to have
important consequences for our results.
              The relative extents of formal and informal employment also changed during this
period, with a marked increase in the proportion of employees with formal labor contracts
(“carteira de trabalho assinada”). This trend may reflect two underlying forces. First, the
economic boom of the 2000s, which reduced unemployment rates to record levels and thus


                                                            
13These pairs of surveys were pooled to increase precision in the non-parametric estimation of the kernel
densities.

                                                                                                      10 
 
reduced job insecurity, may have increased the leverage of workers to demand that the labor
contract be formalized. The second driver has to do with a more active role of two Brazilian
institutions, the Brazilian Public Prosecutor’s Office, or PPO (Ministério Público), and the
Ministry of Labor and Employment (MLE). Corseuil, Almeida and Carneiro (2012) present
evidence of increased enforcement from these two institutions. They document a causal
relationship between changes in the frequency and effectiveness of labor inspections and
increases in formal employment from 1996 to 2006, using municipality-level data on labor
inspection intensity and job flows.
              Whatever the exact causes for the increase in formalization, the fact is that the
proportion of workers employed under formal contracts increased by almost a fifth, from 48
percent to 57 percent, over the complete period, as shown in Table 1. This came at the
expense of both informal employees and self-employment. Interestingly, Table 1 also shows
that the increase in the proportion of workers earning below the minimum wage during 1995-
2003 occurred despite this rising formalization: doubling the real level of the minimum wage
proved to be too large an increase to sustain coverage, even as informality as a whole was in
retreat.
              The third group of factors affecting earnings inequality is related to the demographic
composition of the labor force. As shown in Table 1, there was a substantial increase in
female labor force participation between 1995 and 2012, as a result of which the proportion
of female workers increased by 10 percent, from 38 percent to 42 percent. This trend is
associated with increases in women’s educational attainment levels but, more recently, there
were also large increases in the provision of public childcare. From 1991 to 2007, the
proportion of 0-6 year old children attending childcare increased from 27% to 44.5%,
according to the IBGE.14 It is likely that such a large increase might also have had an enabling
impact on female labor force participation. Table 1 also shows that the proportion of non-
white workers (mostly Afro-Brazilians and people of mixed race) in the working-age
population increased by 8 percentage points, to just over 51 percent of the total.
              The fourth set of candidate explanatory factors relates to the spatial distribution of
the labor force. Table 1 points to the continued trend towards a more urban labor force, with
the rural share of the working-age population decreasing by 38 percent, from 16 percent to
10 percent of the total. On the other hand, changes in the regional composition of the labor
force were not particularly pronounced, as seen in the same table.



                                                            
14   See http://seriesestatisticas.ibge.gov.br/series.aspx?vcodigo=CAJ318.

                                                                                                 11 
 
       Finally, changes in the sectoral structure of the workforce may have a bearing on
changes in inequality, since sectoral labor demands differ in skill intensity. Despite the
commodity boom, the period was still characterized by a reduction in the proportion of
workers in agriculture. The expansion of the construction sector (which gained 2 percentage
points) and construction-related services (2 percentage points in the real estate sector) were
also noteworthy. Because both agriculture and construction are sectors intensive in unskilled
labor, the impact of these sectoral changes on the relative demand for skills is a priori
ambiguous.

3.2 Changes in Labor Market Premiums
Having briefly described the main distributional and institutional changes that may have
affected earnings inequality in the previous subsection, we now turn to the changes in the
partial associations between these candidate explanatory variables and earnings. We use an
extended Mincerian equation as a descriptive tool and will loosely refer to its coefficients as
returns or “premiums” to various observed worker characteristics. Table 2 reports the
coefficients of an OLS regression of log earnings on the characteristics listed in the previous
subsection, by year.
                                      [Insert Table 2 around here]
        Once again we start by looking at the behavior of the human capital premiums. To
simplify the exposition, we used the coefficients of our only two continuous regressors—
years of schooling and years of potential experience, both of which are entered as quartic
polynomials—to plot the predicted earnings-education and earnings-experience profiles.
Both of these curves, shown in Figure 4, have changed dramatically over time. The convexity
of the education premium and the concavity of the experience premium are preserved, but
the average returns to both education and experience fell over the period. Other things equal,
the wage gap between a highly-skilled worker—whether in terms of education or
experience—and a low-skilled worker was considerably smaller in 2012 than in 1995.
                                    [Insert Figure 4 around here]
       Focusing on the evolution of the schooling premium, it is interesting to note
differences across sub-periods. Between 1995 and 2003, returns to secondary education
(complete or incomplete) and of incomplete tertiary fall, relative to no schooling. But the
returns to completing tertiary education rise relative to secondary or incomplete tertiary. In
other words, even as the earnings-education profile in Panel A of Figure 4 shifts downwards
in this first sub-period, it also becomes more convex. In contrast, the 2003-2012 period is
characterized by a reduction of all schooling premiums, as the log-earnings curve continues

                                                                                            12 
 
to move downwards but also becomes less convex, a feature that is shared with other Latin
American countries (Gasparini et al., 2011). Returns to potential experience also fall
markedly, as shown in Panel B of Figure 4, and most of the observed decline takes place in
the second sub-period.
              In terms of the marginal effects related to institutional factors, there were two
important changes during this period, which may have contributed to some earnings
compression. As shown in Table 2, the (conditional) gap between those above and below
the minimum wage fell from 102 percent to 94 percent, and that between formal and
informal sector employees (that is, excluding the self-employed) fell from 13 percent to 2
percent.
              The marginal effects of demographic characteristics also became smaller towards the
end of the period. The gap between black and white workers, for example, fell from 13
percent to 8 percent,15 and that between men and women fell from 35 percent to 26 percent,16
a trend shared with other Latin American countries (Ñopo, 2012). This pattern is also a
continuation of trends observed through the late 1980s and early 1990s (Ferreira, Leite and
Litchfield, 2008).
              Disparities across the five main geographical regions of the country, conditional on
other observables, were generally stable over the study period, but the gap between rural and
urban workers narrowed by two percentage points. Finally, sectoral wage gaps also declined.
Earnings in the agriculture, fishing and, in particular, mining sectors—all of which tend to
pay relatively low wages, but which benefitted from the commodity boom of the 2000s—
grew closer to those in other sectors.

4. Methodology
As discussed in the previous section both the distribution of relevant worker characteristics
and their partial correlations with earnings have changed over time, and these changes must
have shaped the final earnings distribution. Indeed, we have already seen that both the mean
and several inequality measures of the earnings distribution changed considerably over the


                                                            
15 The omitted group is the “indigenous and other” category that basically consists of Asian descendants, as the
remaining indigenous population is very small in the Brazilian labor market, particularly since the rural areas of
the Northern region are excluded from the sample. The negative coefficient on the white dummy comes from
workers of Asian (mostly Japanese) descent, who have typically commanded a premium over observationally
comparable white workers.
16 Until the early 1980s the existence of such wage gaps was generally interpreted as a measure of labor market

discrimination. Although we are now more careful, because of various omitted variables that may well be
correlated with race or gender (such as the probability of taking time off for child care, or the quality of
education), it is of course still quite possible that some of these gaps do reflect active discrimination.

                                                                                                              13 
 
1995-2012 period. So, we now briefly discuss how to connect changes in covariates and
premiums to changes in the earnings distribution.
           If one is interested in comparing average earnings between two time periods, say t =
1 and t = 2; then it is possible to apply the method proposed by Blinder (1973) and Oaxaca
(1973). Following their seminal papers, one could postulate that earnings are linear and
separable in observable and unobservable characteristics, for each time period t = 1 and t =
2:

(1)                 	   	       ′               ,			          	 	         	1, 2,
where           is a vector of length k and β is a parameter vector of same length, such that                                       ′
is the inner product of these vectors. We also write a pooled model for earnings that
combines both time periods:

(1)’            	       	                  .	
           Let the variable                            be an indicator of being observed at time t = 2. If unobservable
components are mean independent of observable ones (and normalized to have same mean)
then the overall mean earnings gap can be written as

(2)        E 	|	            	           	1 	     	E 	|	             	     	0 	
                                          	E      	|	     	         	1 ′ 	       	– 	      E   	|	       	   	0 ′ 	       	
                                                         	E         	|	     	      	1 	   	E   	|	   	       	0 ′

           Replacing expected values with sample averages (denoted by variables with an upper bar)
and parameters with estimated coefficients, one obtains an estimate of the overall mean earnings gap:

(3)                                 	           	 	–                             	–                                   Δ       Δ .

           The first term of the sum in equation (3) is the estimated pay structure effect, Δ
       	   	–                            	–            , while the second term is the estimated composition effect, Δ
                        . As their names and formulae indicate, Δ is an estimate of how changes in
average earnings can be explained by changes in premiums, whereas Δ is an estimate of how
changes in average earnings can be explained by changes in the distribution of covariates.
           Because of the additive linearity assumption, it is easy to compute the various
elements of a detailed decomposition, in which each term corresponds to a single covariate
or observable characteristic. The structure and composition effects can be written as sums
over the explanatory variables, indexed by j, as follows:



                                                                                                                                    14 
 
(4)     Δ          ∑       ,              ,   	–                    ,                   	–   ,

(5)     Δ          ∑               ,           ,


where          ,       ,                  and              ,            ,       	–                   ,    	–       ,   are   the   respective
contributions of the jth covariate to the composition and wage structure effects. One can
allow for an intercept, which means that                                            ,    =1 for t=1, 2. That means that the structure
effect will have a component                           ,       	–           ,            that reflects changes in average returns to
unobservables.
        This standard Oaxaca-Blinder framework has been a workhorse of labor economics
for decomposing gaps in average earnings since the 1970s. Because we are ultimately
interested in how covariates have impacted not only average earnings, but also other features
of the distribution, we use a variant of this method based on re-centered influence function
(RIF) regressions, which was introduced by Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009). Usage of
RIF-regressions as a way to extend the method by Oaxaca and Blinder to functionals of the
distribution, such as quantiles and inequality measures, has been extensively discussed in
Fortin, Lemieux and Firpo (2011). In fact, RIF-regressions, when applied to the mean, yield
exactly the same decomposition proposed by Blinder (1973) and Oaxaca (1973).
        RIF-regression methods provide a simple way of performing detailed
decompositions for any statistic of the earnings distribution, as long as that statistic admits
an influence function. The influence function can be understood as the leading part of a
linearization procedure. Therefore, by using influence functions one can approximate non-
linear functionals of the distribution, such as quantiles or specific inequality indices, by an
expectation.
        The RIF-regressions are used in exactly the same way as standard regressions in
Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions, except that the dependent variable, Y, is replaced by the
(re-centered) influence function of the statistic of interest. Let                                                     be a functional of the
earnings distribution. In this paper, our choices for                                                are the mean , the Gini coefficient G
and the τth percentile                 . Then the structure and composition effects for a functional                                     can
be written as sums over the explanatory variables:

(6)     Δ          ∑   Δ   ,             ∑         ,                ,   	–                       ,       	–    ,

(7)     Δ          ∑   Δ       ,          ∑            ,                        ,




                                                                                                                                          15 
 
where            ,   and           correspond respectively to the coefficients associated with covariate j in a
regression of the re-centered influence function of                        on X for period t and for the pooling
of the two periods. Interestingly, if                          , then RIF equals Y, so the standard OLS regression
used in the traditional Oaxaca-Blinder method is a special case of the decomposition method
using RIF.
              We then aggregate the contribution of each Δ                      ,   and Δ   ,   into our five groups
(human capital, institutional factors, demographics, geography and sectors), although we also
further disaggregate human capital into education and experience, and institutional factors
into minimum wage and formalization.
              A relevant detail for the implementation of our method is the fact, noted in Section
2, that many of our regressors are categorical variables. It is well-known in the literature on
Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition methods that results are not invariant to the choice of the
excluded category (Oaxaca and Ransom, 1999; Yun, 2005; Gardeazabal and Ugidos, 2004;
and Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo, 2011). Several attempts to solve the invariance problem
have been proposed in the literature. In this paper we do not impose restrictions on the
parameters beyond the usual practice of dropping one from each set of dummies and
including the constant. We opted for choosing the best performers (i.e., the categories
displaying the highest wages in the pooled sample) to be the omitted categories (white males,
urban center-west, and being a formal employee). There is a practical rationale for this choice:
1995-2012 is a period of rapid inequality reduction in Brazil. Hence, the earnings of the most
disadvantaged groups tended to grow faster than the earnings of the most advantaged. By
selecting the most advantaged as our reference category we minimize the role of the
unobserved component in the decomposition.17



5. Results
We present our results in three parts. First, we briefly discuss the main features of the typical
Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition for the mean, breaking the analysis down into the two sub-
periods: 1995-2003 and 2003-2012. We then decompose the Gini coefficient in the same
way. Finally, we consider individual percentiles and three specific percentile ratios (90/10,
90/50 and 50/10).


                                                            
17
   As a robustness check, we tried all possible permutations of omitted categories. There are no important
differences in the results, once the effects of the unobserved component are discounted.

                                                                                                                 16 
 
5.1 Average Earnings
Table 3 presents the results of the Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition of differences in average
earnings over time, disentangling the composition and pay structure effects of each of the
five groups of candidate explanatory factors listed in the Introduction, and described in
Section 3. The first column presents results for the full period, 1995-2012, whereas the next
two columns refer to the first (1995-2003) and second (2003-2012) sub-periods, respectively.
To improve the accuracy of the estimates we have pooled two years of data on each end:
1995 refers to the pooling of 1995 and 1996, 2003 refers to the pooling of 2002 and 2003
and 2012 refers to the pooling of 2011 and 2012. The top panel gives log earnings in each
relevant year, the difference between them, and the decomposition of this difference into the
overall composition and structure effects. The second panel further decomposes endowment
effects into those of individual (or groups of) variables, whereas the third panel does the
same for structure effects. The bottom panel combines structure and composition effects
for each individual or group of variables, and reports their total contribution.
                                                               [Insert Table 3 around here]
              Average earnings increased 0.26 log points in the entire period, but decreased 0.12 in
the first sub-period and increased by 0.38 in the second. For the full period, the composition
and structure effects are roughly identical: 0.12 and 0.13, respectively. However, looking at
each sub-period separately, we find that changes in premiums explain all of the change in
1995-2003, while structure effects explain about two thirds of the increase in average earnings
in 2003-2012. For the full period, pure compositional changes associated with the increase
in educational attainment had a large effect on the rise of labor income (0.18 log points), but
they were counter-balanced by the decline in the education premium (the structure effect of
-0.26 log points). Changes in sectoral premiums (mainly in the first sub-period) and in the
returns of unobservable components that are captured by changes in the intercept (mainly
in the second sub period) explain most of the increase in earnings for the entire period.
              The earnings losses during 1995-2003 are largely accounted for by unobserved
structure effects, which may be attributable to macroeconomic factors that affect earnings in
ways that are uncorrelated with specific individual characteristics. 18 Weak education and
experience premiums also contributed significantly to the decline of income levels. The role
of the unobserved factors is even more important during 2003-2012 (0.51 log points) but
with the opposite sign, possibly reflecting economy-wide terms of trade gains associated with
the commodity boom that are uncorrelated with the five forces discussed above. However,

                                                            
18   In particular, the 1999 currency crisis was associated with a large GDP decline.

                                                                                                 17 
 
there were also non-negligible effects of minimum wage increases, increasing formalization
and the declines of the gender and ethnic wage gaps in overall earnings growth during this
second sub-period.

5.2 Changes in the Gini Coefficient
Let us now consider changes in inequality and, in particular, in the Gini coefficient, whose
RIF-decompositions are described in Table 4 (for the full 1995-2012 period), Table 5 (for
1995-2003) and Table 6 (for 2003-2012). Each table has the same four-panel structure as
Table 3. The six columns present different, incrementally richer, specifications. In column 1
we report decomposition results when only education and potential experience are included
as regressors in the Gini RIF regression. Columns 2-6 add the remaining candidate
explanatory factors outlined earlier, one at a time: minimum wage, formality status, race and
gender, geographical factors and sector of economic activity.19
              Overall, the Gini coefficient decreased by 9 percentage points, from 0.498 in 1995 to
0.408 in 2012. In 2003, it was 0.467, so most of the reduction occurred in the second sub-
period. Structure effects explain all of the inequality reduction between 1995 and 2012, and
were indeed partly offset by a positive composition effect. Had only changes in distributions
(the “composition effect”) taken place during this period, inequality would have increased
by four points (Table 4). The same pattern holds for both sub-periods, as changes in the
distribution of observable characteristics of the workforce were inequality-enhancing
between 1995 and 2003 (2.85 Gini points) and 2003 and 2012 (1.78 points).
                                                               [Insert Tables 4 to 6 around here]
              To understand the inequality-increasing endowment effect, note that it is driven
predominantly by the education component, both for the full period and in each sub-period.
This is consistent with what is known as the “paradox of progress” (Bourguignon, Ferreira
and Lustig, 2005): 20 increases in educational attainment—even when its dispersion
declines—may be inequality-enhancing because of the marked convexity of the earnings-
education profile. As the distribution of education shifts to the right, the density mass at the
range of years of schooling with the steepest returns increases. That contributes to an
increase in average earnings (as seen in Section 5.1), but also to rising earnings inequality.



                                                            
19 Although a number of insights can be gained by comparing results across columns, the discussion below
focuses on the preferred specification in Column 6. Specific results refer to that specification, unless otherwise
explicitly noted.
20 See also Knight and Sabot (1983) and Lam (1999).


                                                                                                               18 
 
        The second element in importance for the endowment effect is the minimum wage,
which has an interestingly differentiated effect across the two sub-periods. Overall, changes
in the proportion of people earning less than the minimum wage were inequality-enhancing
(by 1.13 Gini points) and that is driven basically by the first sub period, when it added 1.84
points to the Gini. During 2003-2012, in contrast, the minimum wage endowment effect was
negative. This result should be seen in the light of the changes in the proportion of workers
below the minimum wage (Table 1), and of the real minimum wage trends and associated
density functions in Figure 3. The picture that arises suggests that increases in the real
minimum wage reduce inequality only if labor markets can afford them. In the first sub-
period there was a decrease of 13 log points on average earnings (Table 3, second column),
which reflected the weak conditions of the labor market for that period. Despite the weak
labor market, the real minimum wage increased by 26 percent, contributing to an increase in
the proportion of workers below the minimum wage of 6 percentage points (Table 1). It was
this increase in non-compliance with the minimum wage policy that contributed to increasing
inequality.
        Aside from education and minimum wages, all of the remaining compositional
changes contributed to reducing inequality. But their contributions were much smaller than
those of education and minimum wages, in absolute terms. For example, in 1995-2003, the
increase in the proportion of people earning less than the minimum wage contributed to an
increase in inequality of 1.84 Gini points. The combined negative effects from changes in
the distribution of potential experience, formality, race and gender, geographical and sectoral
allocation was about one third that value. In the second sub-period, the “paradox of
progress” effect was very substantial, with educational endowments contributing 3.1 Gini
points towards higher inequality. Changes in the distribution of all other factors, including
the proportion of workers below the minimum wage, contributed 1.32 Gini points to reducing
inequality.
        If compositional changes were by and large inequality-enhancing, then the bulk of
inequality reduction during 1995-2012 must be explained by changes in different premiums,
or the structure effect. The main drivers of the negative (inequality-decreasing) structure
effect were the declines in those earning gaps outlined above. In particular, potential
experience, formal vs. informal, race, gender and location gaps declined, all contributing to
reductions of inequality.
        The most important structure effect was the reduction in returns to experience. Its
contribution to the reduction in inequality ranges from 4.9 Gini points (column 1 of Table


                                                                                            19 
 
4) to 3.1 Gini points when all explanatory factors are included in the decomposition (column
6 of Table 4). But although it was the most important factor, the structure effect of potential
experience did not act alone. Column 6 of Table 4 reports reductions in the wage penalty of
informal workers (-1.14 Gini points), in the gender and racial wage gaps (-1.59) and in
regional disparities in wages (-1.27). All of these are both statistically and economically
significant. If we take these three factors together and add their impact through composition
and structure effects their overall contribution to inequality reduction during 1995-2012 is
4.61 Gini points, or 51 percent of the observed inequality reduction during the period.21
Driven by a strong structure effect that was equalizing across these three dimensions, this
“leveling the playing field” effect was stronger during the 1995-2003 period than during
2003-2012.
              The contribution of changes in the schooling and experience premium merits a
separate discussion. For the 1995-2012 period as a whole, changes in the schooling premium
had moderately negative (i.e., decreasing) effects on inequality, although they were not
statistically significant in the full model (column 6 of Table 4). However, if we add the
positive impact of compositional changes associated with increased schooling in the labor
force, the total effect of education was strongly inequality-enhancing (by almost four Gini
points; see bottom of Table 4).
              There were important differences across sub-periods: Between 1995 and 2003, the
total contribution of education to inequality is strongly positive (3.8 Gini points according
to the estimates in column 6 of Table 5). The positive effect of compositional changes is
reinforced by a positive structure effect. As noted in Section 3, this is a period when the high
school premium with respect to basic or no education is falling, but the premium of tertiary
education with respect to high-school is rising. This second effect turns out to dominate, in
terms of the Gini coefficient. The 2003-2012 interval, in contrast, is characterized by a
reduction in all schooling premiums. The between-group differences across all schooling
levels declined, as captured by a negative and significant structure effect (-2.9 in column 6 of
Table 6). The total effect of education (combining composition and structure) is slightly
positive but statistically insignificant (column 6 of Table 6), reflecting opposing forces of
similar magnitudes.
              Potential experience turns out to be the main driving force behind Brazil’s inequality
reduction in 1995-2012. Both the endowment and structure effects of potential experience


                                                            
21 This corresponds to the joint total effects of formality status (-1.46), race and gender (-1.86) and geography
(-1.29), according to column 6 of Table 4 (bottom panel).

                                                                                                              20 
 
reported in Table 4 are negative, although the structure effect was much larger in absolute
terms. This large inequality-reducing structure effect comes entirely from the second sub-
period, 2003-2012, reflecting the reduction of the experience premium previously discussed.
A diminished gap between older and younger cohorts has also been documented in other
countries (Behaghel and Greenan, 2010), and been attributed to changes in technology that
are biased towards younger workers.
              Given that the supply of potential experience was essentially unchanged over the
period, one can be reasonably confident that the falling returns to experience in Brazil were
driven by declining demand.22 Beyond that, the deeper causes of this decline lie beyond the
scope of the present paper, and remain a question for future research into Brazil’s
distributional dynamics. A number of plausible hypothesis suggests themselves. Age-biased
technical change à la Behaghel and Greenan (2010) is one. Another is that sharp changes in
terms of trade after 2003 altered the sectoral demand for labor in Brazil (Messina and Silva,
2017). Such a process generates employment and wage opportunities for those workers who
are able to move from “losing” to “gaining” sectors. But worker mobility may be costlier for
experienced workers, because older workers may face more difficulties to retrain, or a higher
opportunity cost in general.
              The premiums associated with unobserved skills, captured in our framework by the
constant term under the structure effect, also fell and contributed to reducing inequality. This
is consistent with a single index model of residual inequality, where the price of unobserved
skills falls if the premium on observable skills declines (Acemoglu, 2002).
              In Appendix Tables A1-A3 we report a number of robustness checks, both for the
whole period, and for each sub-period separately. We show regressions without sampling
weights, using only the male sample, using hourly earnings as the dependent variable and
finally using hourly earnings for full-time workers only (those working more than 20 hours).
Qualitatively, the main results are largely robust to these changes.

5.3 Percentiles and Percentile Ratios
We have also performed the RIF regression decompositions for each percentile of the
earnings distribution, that is letting                         , ∈ 0,1 . In practice, 99 percentiles were used,
and point estimates are presented graphically in Figure 5.23 The curves plotting observed log


                                                            
22Table 1 shows average potential experience declining slightly from 23.07 years in 1995 to 22.32 years in 2012.
23To facilitate the exposition, we exclude from the decomposition the sector effects, which were never found
to be significant in the Gini decompositions, and were not significant either for the percentiles in exercises
available upon request.

                                                                                                             21 
 
earnings differences in Figure 5 are essentially earnings growth incidence curves (see
Ravallion and Chen, 2003), and the curves denoting each of the specific endowment or
structure effects are the corresponding counterfactual growth incidence curves (see Ferreira,
2012).
              The top panel of Figure 5 presents the overall decomposition of observed log income
differences at each percentile into endowment and structure effects. These high-level results
are very consistent with what we learned from the decomposition of the Gini. First, for the
entire period, the structure and endowment components had partially mutually offsetting
effects on earnings inequality: the structure effect is mostly downward-sloping (inequality-
reducing) whereas the endowment effect is upward-sloping along the distribution. Thus,
changes in the distribution of labor force characteristics were generally unequalizing, and the
observed decline in earnings inequality (captured by the growth incidence curves) is driven
by changes in the structure of pay. The only part where structure effects were un-equalizing
was at the very bottom of the distribution, up to the 20th-25th percentile. This feature is only
present in the first sub period, 1995-2003, and is consistent with a minimum wage spike that
lifted earnings substantially around the minimum wage, but not by as much for those earning
less than it.
                                                               [Insert Figure 5 around here]
              Further decomposing the earnings changes at each percentile into detailed structure
and endowment effects (middle panels in Figure 5), we see that the endowment effects
associated with the minimum wage and with education are upward-sloping, and thus
inequality-enhancing, in the first sub-period. 24 Moreover, the minimum wage effect
fundamentally operates up to the 40th percentile, as its impact is less relevant for the top of
the earnings distribution. The same is not true for composition effects associated with
education, which are monotonically increasing after the 20th percentile.
              During the second sub-period only education contributes to the endowment effect
in a way that increases inequality (the paradox of progress effect). By contrast, the minimum
wage presents different endowment and structure effects. The endowment effect during
2003-2012 depresses inequality at the bottom half of the distribution. The structure effect
instead shows a mild inequality enhancing effect up to the 20th percentile, but inequality
reducing from the 20th to the 50th. During this period, the minimum wage rises from 50
percent of median labor earnings in 2003 to 65 percent in 2012. The decomposition suggests
that the minimum wage pulled up the wages of workers in the centiles right below the

                                                            
24   This too is highly consistent with results from the decomposition of changes in the Gini coefficient.

                                                                                                             22 
 
minimum (wage employees whose employers are not complying with the law and low-
earning self-employed), but not the wages of the first centiles of the distribution.
        The structure effect graphs in Figure 5 reveal some additional results. First, between
1995 and 2003, the education and experience structure effects are both U-shaped. Thus, the
structure of pay components for education and experience were inequality-reducing for low-
income workers, but inequality-enhancing for those higher up the distribution. In the case
of education, this is consistent with our earlier observation that returns to completed high-
school fell relative to no education, while the premium for a completed college education
rose relative to high-school, between 1995 and 2003. For the second sub-period, the structure
effects of education and experience were downward-sloping throughout, and thus
unambiguously inequality-decreasing.
        The remaining factors played relatively minor roles, but the gaps associated with
demographic, geographic and informality factors tended to be equalizing, which is in line
with our previous finding for the Gini. It is only when all of these factors are combined that
they gain more importance for the reduction of inequality during 1995-2003 than education
itself. In fact, when we sum endowment and structure effects for each factor (bottom panel
of Figure 5) we can see that education is the sole exception that was inequality-enhancing.
All the other factors contributed to the reduction of inequality. Particularly important was
potential experience, which was a crucial inequality reducer.
        These conclusions, based on visual inspection, are confirmed by a more formal
analysis based on selected percentile ratios. In particular, we look at the log 90/10 percentile
ratio, a measure of top-to-bottom gaps, and at the log 90/50 and log 50/10 ratios, which are
informative of inequality developments at the top and bottom of the distribution,
respectively. Results of the RIF decomposition applied to these three inequality measures are
presented (as log differences) in Table 7.
                                      [Insert Table 7 around here]
        As in Table 3, the top panel of Table 7 shows the evolution of the three inequality
measures in 1995-2012 and in the two sub-periods considered in the analysis, and shows how
structure and endowment effects contributed to the observed patterns. For 1995-2012, the
log difference of the 90/10 range declined by an impressive 0.45 log points, confirming the
sharp inequality reduction in Brazil. This reduction was proportionally more marked at the
bottom of the distribution. The 90/50 ratio decreased from 1.31 to 1.09, while the 50/10
ratio declined by 0.23 log points, from 0.94 to 0.71. Inequality declined during the two sub-
periods and the reduction took place both at the top and at the bottom, but it was particularly


                                                                                             23 
 
strong in the lower half of the distribution, and during 2003-2012. During this period the
90/10 ratio declined by -0.37 log points (of a total of -0.45), and about 76 percent of the
inequality reduction (-0.28) was concentrated in the bottom half of the distribution. The top
panel of Table 7 also confirms our finding from the Gini decomposition that the endowment
effect was always inequality-increasing during the period. The decline of earnings inequality
was driven by changes in the structure of pay.
              The decomposition of the detailed determinants of the evolution of the 90/10
percentile ratio, reported in the lower panels of Table 7, confirms some of the patterns
discussed for the evolution of the Gini coefficient, but places even greater emphasis on the
importance of the reduction in the experience premium. Reductions of the experience
premium explain even more than the observed changes in p90-p10 inequality during 2003-
2012, and compensate for other factors that were inequality-augmenting.
              The reduction of the schooling premium has also a large equalizing role, but this
equalizing force was mostly offset by the composition effect, which was strongly
unequalizing, as seen earlier. Increases in the minimum wage played a smaller, but still
significant role, explaining less than 10 percent of the total reduction of the 90/10 ratio.
Some of the “leveling the playing field” effects also lose importance. Changes in formality
status retain a small equalizing effect that is statistically significant, but geographic, race and
gender factors become generally insignificant.25
              As expected, the minimum wage has much stronger inequality effects at the bottom
half of the distribution, but some impacts at the top half are observed, which is suggestive
of spillover effects that can extend up to median earnings. 26 The contribution of the
minimum wage for inequality reduction is particularly strong in 2003-2012. About 40% of
the p50-p10 inequality reduction during this period is associated with minimum wage
increases.


6. Conclusions
After decades of rising or roughly stable income inequality, the period since macroeconomic
stabilization in 1994 has seen a steady decline in income dispersion in Brazil. While increases
in the volume and improvements in the targeting of social transfers have played a role in that
decline, perhaps its most important driver has been a reduction in inequality in labor earnings:

                                                            
25 The latter is marginally significant but positive, hence unequalizing.
26 See Engbom and Moser (2016) for a discussion of possible mechanisms for these minimum wage spillovers,
related to a dilution of firms’ monopsony power in a search-theoretic setting where matching occurs with
friction.

                                                                                                      24 
 
between 1995 and 2012 the Gini coefficient for earnings fell by 18% and other measures,
such as the Theil index and the p90-p10 ratio, by between 30% and 40%.
        The dominant narrative in the literature attributes this decline primarily to
educational dynamics: a substantial increase in years of schooling for working-age adults has
translated into a rising supply of skills, followed by a decline in the returns to those skills in
the labor market (revealing, presumably, that demand for skills has failed to keep pace with
supply). Our analysis draws on RIF regression-based decompositions to investigate the
relative roles of a broader set of potential determinants including—beside human capital—
changes in minimum wages and formal employment; in demographic characteristics of the
labor force (chiefly race and gender); and in the sectoral and spatial distribution of
employment.
        We find that the decline in earnings inequality between 1995 and 2012 was driven
primarily by changes in the structure of remuneration in the Brazilian labor market, rather
than directly by changes in the distribution of worker characteristics. The main exception to
this was the inequality-augmenting effect of the increase in years of schooling across the
population. This is the so-called “paradox of progress” effect, whereby a rightward
movement in the distribution of years of schooling shifts population density to steeper
segments of the earnings-education profile, leading to wider earnings gaps. Thus, contrary to
the conventional view, the educational upgrade was roughly neutral for inequality dynamics.
The reduction of the schooling premium was strong and did have important equalizing
effects, particularly during 2003-2012, but it was largely offset by the inequality-augmenting
compositional changes.
        The most important driver of the observed inequality dynamics was the reduction in
the experience premium, in particular during 2003-2012. Almost two-thirds (63 percent) of
the reduction in the Gini during this period can be attributed to reductions in the returns to
potential experience. If one considers the p90-p10 earnings ratio instead, the reduction in
the experience premium accounts for even more than the observed changes in inequality,
and was partly offset by other, inequality-augmenting, factors. Since the supply of potential
experience was largely unchanged over the period—because population ageing was offset by
longer educational spells—one can be relatively confident that this large change in returns
was driven by a decline in the demand for more experience workers. The deeper causes of
this reduction in the demand for experience—which is consistent with evidence on “age-
biased technical change” from elsewhere—are beyond the scope of this paper, but invite
further research.


                                                                                               25 
 
       Other changes in pay structure that contributed to declining inequality can be
understood straightforwardly as declines in various different conditional wage premiums:
reductions in the gender wage gap (with women’s earnings rising faster than men’s), the racial
wage gaps (with wages for people of color rising faster than for whites), and the urban-rural
wage gap (with wages rising faster in rural areas). Each of these gaps was, of course, estimated
conditionally on the full set of observable characteristics, including education and experience.
Another gap whose narrowing contributed to the overall earnings equalization was that
between formal (“com carteira”) and informal (“sem carteira”) employees. While these
changes in the structure of the labor market are equilibrium phenomena, which may well
reflect market forces such as an increase in the bargaining power of workers vis-à-vis their
employers, we have argued that they also reflect changes in enforcement patterns by
government institutions.
       The other key institutional variable we considered was the real minimum wage, which
more than doubled over the period, generating a formidable spike in the density function of
earnings by 2012. As suspected, this rise in the minimum wage contributed to falling
inequality in the 2003-2012 sub-period. Its effects were particularly large for the bottom half
of the distribution. Some 40 percent of the reduction of p50-p10 inequality was associated
with increases in the minimum wage. However, minimum wage increases during 1995-
2003—a period characterized by a much softer labor market—triggered non-compliance
with the law, and rising self-employment. During this period rises in the minimum wage were
inequality-enhancing, which emphasize the importance of business cycle considerations for
the effectiveness of minimum wage policy.




                                                                                             26 
 
Figures and tables
    Figure 1: Household incomes and labor earnings in Brazil, 1995-2012.

                             Panel A. Levels.                                                                             Panel B. Inequality (Gini Index).
                                                                                           893.6                              0.59
                      900                                                                                       0.60
                                                                                                                                                             0.57
                             781.5
                      800
                                                                                                                0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.52
         2005 Reals




                                                                                                   Gini Index
                      700                                                                  670.4
                                                          638.4                                                               0.50
                                                                                                                0.50
                      600                                                                  637.1                                                             0.46
                             486.7                                                                              0.45
                      500                                   447.6
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.40
                      400 445.0                              421.5                                              0.40
                            1995     1997   1999   2001   2003     2005    2007   2009   2011                            1995        1997    1999    2001    2003    2005    2007   2009   2011
                                                           Year                                                                                               Year

                             Average Labor          Median Labor            Average Household                                                                        Household per
                             Earnings                                       Per Capita Income                            Labour Earnings             95% CI                                95% CI
                                                    Earnings                                                                                                         Capita Income


                             Panel C. Inequality (Theil Index & P90/P10 Ratio).                                               Panel D. Inequality (P90/P50 & P50/P10 Ratios).
                       1.0                                                                                              1.4    1.36
                                                          0.92
                       0.9                                                                                              1.2
                                                                                                                                                              1.18                           1.02
                       0.8                                0.86                                                          1.0
              1995=1




                                                                                                                Ratio                                         1.05
                                                                                                                               0.94                                                          0.81
                       0.7                                                                  0.66                        0.8

                       0.6                                                                  0.63                        0.6

                       0.5                                                                                              0.4
                             1995    1997   1999   2001   2003     2005    2007   2009   2011                                 1995    1997    1999    2001   2003     2005   2007   2009   2011
                                                            Year                                                                                               Year

                                      Theil Index (1995=0.45)             P90/P10 (1995=10.00)                                              log(p90/p50)                     log(p50/p10)
                                      Labor Earinings                     Labor Earinings                                                   Labor Earinings                  Labor Earinings



    Notes: All measures are calculated over the estimating sample (formal, informal and self-employed of ages 18-65). Negative incomes
    and the 99th and 1st percentiles of earnings are trimmed. Labor earnings refer to monthly earnings reported in the main occupation.
    The household per capita income includes all the incomes perceived by the household members. Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra
    de Domicílios PNAD.




                                                                                                                                                                                                    27 
 
    Figure 2: Schooling and age distributions by year.

    Panel A. Education.


                                                                                     1.00




                                             Fraction in the population aged 18-65
                                                                                     0.80


                                                                                     0.60


                                                                                     0.40


                                                                                     0.20


                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                              0                  5                     10                     15              20
                                                                                                                        Years of Education
                                                                                                                     1995                2003                2012


    Note: The distributions of years of education are calculated for all the individuals over the estimating sample (formal, informal and
    self-employed of ages 18-65). The year 1995 includes 1995 and 1996 PNAD samples, the year 2003 includes 2002 and 2003 PNAD
    sample, and the year 2012 included 2011 and 2012 PNAD sample.



    Figure 3: Minimum Wage and the Distribution of Earnings

                      Panel A. The evolution of real minimum                                                                                        Panel B. Earnings distributions and minimum
                      wage and earnings: 1995-2012.                                                                                                 wage spikes by year.
                                                                                                                            2.03
                2.0                                                                                                                           1.0

                1.8
                                                                                                                                              0.8
                1.6
                                                                                                                            1.43              0.6
                                                                                                                                   kdensity
       1995=1




                1.4
                                                                                       1.26
                1.2                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                            1.14
                1.0                                                                    0.95
                                                                                                                                              0.2
                0.8
                                                                                       0.82

                0.6                                                                                                                           0.0
                   1995    1997   1999       2001                                      2003       2005   2007    2009    2011                            4             5             6            7   8
                                                                                        Year                                                                        log(Earnings).2005 Reals
                          Average Earnings                                            Median Earnings           Minimum Wage                                        1995       2003        2012



    Notes.
    Panel A: Median and average labor monthly earnings are calculated with the estimating sample (formal, informal and self-employed of
    ages 18-65). Negative earnings and the 99th and 1st percentiles of earnings distribution are trimmed. The minimum wage is the
    national monthly minimum wage. All series are deflated using 2005 Consumer Price Index (CPI) from the World Development
    Indicators. Panel B: Kernel density functions for all years use the same bandwidth, 0.7. Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de
    Domicílios PNAD.




                                                                                                                                                                                                          28 
 
    Figure 4: Education and experience premium by year.


                                          Panel A. Education.                                                                       Panel B. Potential Experience.
                                    2.0
                                                                                                                              0.8
        log(Earnings). 2005 Reals




                                                                                                  log(Earnings). 2005 Reals
                                    1.5
                                                                                                                              0.6




                                    1.0                                                                                       0.4




                                    0.5                                                                                       0.2




                                    0.0                                                                                       0.0
                                          0   2    4    6      8     10    12    14     16   18                                     0   4   8   12     16   20    24    28    32     36   40   44

                                                            Years of Education                                                                         Potential Experience
                                                       1995         2003         2012                                                                1995        2003         2012



    Note. Each line represents the predictions of a yearly regression that includes a quartic polynomial in education, a quartic polynomial
    in potential experience, a dummy variable for workers below the minimum wage, two dummies for formality status, two race
    dummies, a gender dummy, four region dummies and an indicator of work in rural areas (see Table 2). The year 1995 includes 1995
    and 1996 PNAD samples, the year 2003 includes 2002 and 2003 PNAD sample, and the year 2012 included 2011 and 2012 PNAD
    sample. Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios PNAD.




                                                                                                                                                                                                29 
 
Figure 5: Decomposing Changes in Earnings by Percentile
                                                                                            Overall

                                            2003-1995                                            2012-2003                                       2012-1995
    log difference    0.60

                      0.40

                      0.20

                      0.00

                     -0.20

                     -0.40
                             10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                           10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

                                                                                           percentile
                                                                Observed difference                        Endowments                Structure


                                                                                       Endowments

                                            2003-1995                                            2012-2003                                       2012-1995
                     0.40
    log difference




                     0.20




                     0.00




                     -0.20
                             10   20   30   40   50   60   70    80   90         10   20   30    40   50    60   70   80   90   10   20   30     40   50   60   70   80   90

                                                                                           percentile
                                                                                           Structure

                                            2003-1995                                            2012-2003                                       2012-1995
                     0.20



                     0.00
    log difference




                     -0.20



                     -0.40



                     -0.60
                             10   20   30   40   50   60   70    80   90         10   20   30    40   50    60   70   80   90   10   20   30     40   50   60   70   80   90
                                                                                           percentile
                                                                                                Total

                                            2003-1995                                            2012-2003                                       2012-1995
                     0.20
    log difference




                     0.00

                     -0.20

                     -0.40

                     -0.60
                             10   20   30   40   50   60   70    80   90         10   20   30    40   50    60   70   80   90   10   20   30     40   50   60   70   80   90

                                                                                           percentile
                                                           Education                       Potential Experience                 Demographics

                                                           Geography                       Informality                          Minimum Wage




Note: The graph shows the generalized kernel-weighted local polynomial Oaxaca decomposition for each centile of the earnings
distribution. See notes in Table 3 for details on the individual effects included in each category.



                                                                                                                                                                               30 
 
Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                                                                  Mean

                                                                          1995                     2003                  2012

    Years of Education                                                    6.31                     7.41                   8.92
    Potential Experience                                                 23.07                    22.51                  22.32
    Below Minimum Wage                                                    0.12                     0.18                   0.16
    Self-Employment                                                       0.27                     0.25                   0.21
    Informal                                                              0.25                     0.27                   0.21
    Formal                                                                0.48                     0.48                   0.57
    White                                                                 0.56                     0.54                   0.48
    Black                                                                 0.43                     0.45                   0.51
    Other                                                                 0.01                     0.01                   0.01
    Female                                                                0.38                     0.40                   0.42
    Rural                                                                 0.16                     0.12                   0.10
    Northeast                                                             0.25                     0.24                   0.24
    North                                                                 0.04                     0.06                   0.06
    Southeast                                                             0.47                     0.46                   0.46
    South                                                                 0.16                     0.16                   0.16
    Center-West                                                           0.07                     0.08                   0.08
    Agriculture, Fishing and Mining                                       0.15                     0.12                   0.09
    Industry                                                              0.15                     0.16                   0.14
    Construction                                                          0.07                     0.08                   0.09
    Services                                                              0.62                     0.64                   0.67
    Earnings in 2005 Reals                                               780.12                   655.01                 870.97
    log(Earnings). 2005 Reals                                             6.22                     6.10                   6.48
Note: All the statistics are calculated over the estimating sample (formal, informal and self-employed of ages 18-65).




                                                                                                                                  31 
 
Table 2: Labor Market Premiums. Marginal Effects

                                                         (1)                            (2)                              (3)
                                                        1995                           2003                             2012
                                              Coeff.        Std. Error        Coeff.       Std. Error          Coeff.       Std. Error
    Years of Education                       0.058**          0.003          0.073**         0.003            0.068**         0.003
    Years of Education^2/100                 -0.884  **       0.098          -1.722 **       0.079            -1.816 **       0.077
    Years of Education^3/1000                 1.389**         0.098          2.002**         0.076            1.900**         0.071
    Years of Education^4/10000               -0.412**         0.031          -0.531**        0.023            -0.475**        0.021
    Potential Experience                      0.073**         0.002          0.071**         0.001            0.048**         0.001
    Potential Experience^2/100               -0.238**         0.014          -0.275**         0.01            -0.184**        0.009
    Potential Experience^3/1000               0.037 **        0.004          0.051 **        0.003            0.036 **        0.003
    Potential Experience^4/10000             -0.002**         0.000          -0.004**        0.000            -0.003**        0.000
    Below Minimum Wage                       -1.020**         0.004          -1.037 **       0.003            -0.941 **       0.003
    Self-employment                           0.078**         0.004          -0.011**        0.003            0.081**         0.003
    Informal                                 -0.133**         0.004          -0.100**        0.003            -0.023**        0.003
    White                                    -0.170  **       0.025          -0.060 **       0.017            -0.027  *       0.013
    Black                                    -0.296**         0.025          -0.156**        0.017            -0.105**        0.013
    Female                                   -0.351**         0.003          -0.297**        0.003            -0.259**        0.002
    Northeast                                -0.211  **       0.005          -0.217 **       0.004            -0.224 **       0.003
    North                                    -0.059**         0.006          -0.101**        0.004            -0.113**        0.004
    Southeast                                 0.067 **        0.004          0.023 **        0.003            -0.019 **       0.003
    South                                    -0.017**         0.005          -0.022**        0.004            -0.008*         0.004
    Rural                                    -0.104**         0.004          -0.054**        0.004            -0.084**        0.004
    Agriculture                              -0.621  **       0.013          -0.403 **       0.012            -0.364 **       0.011
    Fishing                                  -0.581**          0.02          -0.416**         0.02            -0.455**        0.019
    Mining and Quarrying                     -0.344  **       0.024          -0.183 **       0.021             -0.002         0.019
    Manufacturing Industries                 -0.341**         0.012          -0.304**        0.011            -0.260**         0.01
    Electricity, Gas and Water               -0.273**         0.019           -0.03          0.019            -0.081**        0.019
    Construction                             -0.423  **       0.013          -0.354 **       0.012            -0.266**        0.011
    Trade                                    -0.424**         0.012          -0.329**        0.011            -0.308**         0.01
    Hotels and Restaurants                   -0.447**         0.014          -0.367**        0.012            -0.325**        0.011
    Transport and Storage                    -0.212  **       0.013          -0.133 **       0.012            -0.182**        0.011
    Real Estate                              -0.385**         0.015          -0.304**        0.012            -0.270**         0.01
    Public Administration                    -0.403  **       0.013          -0.179 **       0.012            -0.129 **       0.011
    Teaching                                 -0.681**         0.013          -0.430**        0.011            -0.346**        0.011
    Social and Health                        -0.443**         0.014          -0.297**        0.012            -0.258**        0.011
    Community Services                       -0.550  **       0.014          -0.353 **       0.012            -0.288 **       0.011
    Domestic Service                         -0.558**         0.013          -0.388**        0.011            -0.370**        0.011
    Extra-territorial Org.                     0.158          0.161           0.238 *        0.121            0.315 **        0.118
    Constant                                  6.097**          0.03          5.915**         0.022            6.396**         0.018
    Observations                                     214,001                        263,774                          270,053
    R-squared                                           0.62                           0.66                             0.61
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. The
omitted categories are: above minimum wage, formal employees, center-west, other race, male, urban and financial services.




                                                                                                                                        32 
 
    Table 3: Decomposition Results. Changes in Average Earnings.

                                                     2012-1995                      2003-1995                       2012-2003
                                                                 Overall
    Post                                                6.48**                         6.10**                          6.48**
                                                      [0.002]                         [0.002]                         [0.002]
    Pre                                                 6.23**                         6.23**                          6.10**
                                                      [0.002]                         [0.002]                         [0.002]
    Difference                                          0.26**                        -0.12**                          0.38**
                                                      [0.003]                         [0.003]                         [0.002]
    Endowments                                          0.12**                           0                             0.12**
                                                      [0.002]                         [0.002]                         [0.002]
    Structure                                           0.13**                        -0.13**                          0.26**
                                                      [0.002]                         [0.002]                         [0.002]
                                                              Endowments
    Education                                           0.18**                         0.08**                          0.10**
                                                      [0.001]                         [0.001]                         [0.001]
    Potential Experience                               -0.02**                        -0.01**                         -0.00**
                                                      [0.000]                         [0.001]                         [0.000]
    Minimum Wage                                       -0.04**                        -0.06**                          0.02**
                                                      [0.001]                         [0.001]                         [0.001]
    Formality Status                                   -0.00**                        -0.00**                          0.00**
                                                      [0.000]                         [0.000]                         [0.000]
    Race and Gender                                    -0.02**                        -0.01**                         -0.01**
                                                      [0.000]                         [0.000]                         [0.000]
    Region and Urban                                    0.01**                         0.00**                          0.00**
                                                      [0.000]                         [0.000]                         [0.000]
    Economic Sector                                     0.01**                         0.01**                          0.01**
                                                      [0.000]                         [0.000]                         [0.000]
                                                               Structure
    Education                                          -0.26**                        -0.11**                         -0.16**
                                                      [0.006]                         [0.006]                         [0.006]
    Potential Experience                               -0.27**                        -0.07**                         -0.19**
                                                      [0.010]                         [0.012]                         [0.008]
    Minimum Wage                                        0.01**                         -0.00*                          0.02**
                                                      [0.001]                         [0.001]                         [0.001]
    Formality Status                                    0.03**                        -0.01**                          0.04**
                                                      [0.002]                         [0.002]                         [0.002]
    Race and Gender                                     0.06**                         0.04**                          0.02**
                                                      [0.003]                         [0.003]                         [0.003]
    Region and Urban                                   -0.04**                        -0.02**                         -0.02**
                                                      [0.005]                         [0.005]                         [0.004]
    Economic Sector                                     0.16**                         0.13**                          0.04*
                                                      [0.015]                         [0.016]                         [0.014]
    Constant                                            0.44**                        -0.07**                          0.51**
                                                      [0.021]                         [0.022]                         [0.019]
                                                                 Total
    Education                                          -0.08**                        -0.03**                         -0.06**
                                                      [0.006]                        [0.006]                         [0.006]
    Potential Experience                               -0.28**                        -0.09**                         -0.20**
                                                      [0.011]                        [0.012]                         [0.008]
    Minimum Wage                                       -0.03**                        -0.06**                         0.04**
                                                      [0.001]                        [0.001]                         [0.001]
    Formality Status                                    0.02**                        -0.02**                         0.04**
                                                      [0.002]                        [0.002]                         [0.002]
    Race and Gender                                     0.04**                         0.03**                         0.01**
                                                      [0.003]                        [0.003]                         [0.003]
    Region and Urban                                   -0.03**                        -0.02**                         -0.02**
                                                      [0.005]                        [0.005]                         [0.004]
    Economic Sector                                     0.18**                         0.14**                         0.04**
                                                      [0.015]                        [0.016]                         [0.014]
    N                                                 484,054                        477,775                         533,827
    Note: Robust Standard Errors in Brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
    Standard errors are calculated using the delta method. Each category summarizes the contribution of the sum of individual effects.
    Education and experience refer to quartic polynomials in education and experience, respectively, in the underlying regressions.
    Minimum wage refers to a dummy variable that takes value one for individuals below minimum wage. Formality status summarizes
    the contribution of two dummies: informal employee and self-employed. Race and gender capture the interactions between a gender
    and race dummies (‘mestiço’ and Afro-Brazilian, white and others). Region and urban includes the interactions between an indicator
    variable of living in an urban area and region (northeast, north, southeast, south and center-west). Economic sector adds 17 dummies
    for economic sector. Omitted categories in the underlying regressions are: above minimum wage, formal employees, center-west,
    white, male, urban and financial services.




                                                                                                                                      33 
 
    Table 4: Decomposition Results. Changes in Inequality. Gini. 2012-1995.

                                         (1)               (2)           (3)                  (4)               (5)               (6)
                                                                 Overall
    Post                                40.83**          40.83**       40.83**               40.83**          40.83**          40.82**
                                        [0.077]          [0.075]       [0.075]               [0.075]          [0.075]           [0.075]
    Pre                                 49.79**          49.79**       49.79**               49.79**          49.79**          49.77**
                                        [0.071]          [0.071]       [0.071]               [0.071]          [0.071]           [0.071]
    Difference                          -8.96**          -8.96**       -8.96**               -8.96**          -8.96**           -8.95**
                                        [0.104]          [0.104]       [0.104]               [0.103]          [0.103]           [0.103]
    Endowments                           1.27**           4.46**        4.26**                4.21**           4.15**            4.01**
                                        [0.051]          [0.058]       [0.059]               [0.060]          [0.060]           [0.066]
    Structure                          -10.23**         -13.42**      -13.23**              -13.17**         -13.10**          -12.96**
                                        [0.109]          [0.103]       [0.103]               [0.103]          [0.103]           [0.106]
                                                               Endowments
    Education                           1.61**            3.66**        3.81**               3.94**            3.98**           4.11**
                                       [0.053]           [0.054]       [0.055]              [0.056]           [0.056]          [0.060]
    Potential Experience               -0.34**           -0.41**       -0.40**              -0.40**           -0.40**          -0.39**
                                       [0.012]           [0.013]       [0.013]              [0.013]           [0.013]          [0.013]
    Minimum Wage                                          1.21**        1.15**               1.18**            1.15**           1.13**
                                                         [0.031]       [0.030]              [0.031]           [0.030]          [0.029]
    Formality Status                                                   -0.29**              -0.28**           -0.26**          -0.32**
                                                                       [0.011]              [0.011]           [0.011]          [0.012]
    Race and Gender                                                                         -0.24**           -0.29**          -0.27**
                                                                                            [0.012]           [0.012]          [0.012]
    Region and Urban                                                                                          -0.04**          -0.03**
                                                                                                              [0.008]          [0.009]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                            -0.22**
                                                                                                                               [0.022]
                                                                   Structure
    Education                           2.74**            1.62**            0.58*            0.90**            0.75**           -0.16
                                       [0.279]           [0.235]          [0.238]           [0.248]           [0.247]          [0.258]
    Potential Experience               -4.92**           -2.91**          -3.60**           -3.18**           -3.16**          -3.12**
                                       [0.600]           [0.566]          [0.568]           [0.565]           [0.566]          [0.577]
    Minimum Wage                                         -0.16**           -0.04+            0.07**            0.09**           0.07**
                                                         [0.018]          [0.024]           [0.025]           [0.025]          [0.026]
    Formality Status                                                      -1.38**           -1.47**           -1.43**          -1.14**
                                                                          [0.104]           [0.104]           [0.105]          [0.112]
    Race and Gender                                                                         -1.60**           -1.58**          -1.59**
                                                                                            [0.171]           [0.173]          [0.177]
    Region and Urban                                                                                          -1.59**          -1.27**
                                                                                                              [0.289]          [0.285]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                              2.16
                                                                                                                               [1.472]
    Constant                           -8.05**          -11.97**            -8.79**         -7.89**           -6.18**          -7.91**
                                       [0.690]           [0.641]            [0.654]         [0.652]           [0.719]          [1.646]
                                                                    Total
    Education                           4.35**            5.28**             4.40**          4.84**            4.73**           3.95**
                                       [0.285]           [0.239]            [0.242]         [0.252]           [0.252]          [0.263]
    Potential Experience               -5.26**           -3.32**            -4.00**         -3.58**           -3.55**           -3.52**
                                       [0.600]           [0.567]            [0.568]         [0.565]           [0.566]          [0.577]
    Minimum Wage                                          1.05**             1.11**          1.25**            1.24**           1.20**
                                                         [0.037]            [0.039]         [0.040]           [0.040]          [0.040]
    Formality Status                                                        -1.67**         -1.74**           -1.69**           -1.46**
                                                                            [0.103]         [0.102]           [0.104]          [0.111]
    Race and Gender                                                                         -1.84**           -1.88**           -1.86**
                                                                                            [0.173]           [0.175]          [0.180]
    Region and Urban                                                                                          -1.62**           -1.29**
                                                                                                              [0.288]          [0.285]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                              1.94
                                                                                                                               [1.472]
    N                                 485,442           485,442           485,442          485,407           485,407           484,054
    Note: Robust Standard Errors in Brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1% ,5% and 10% levels, respectively. The
    Gini coefficient is expressed in percentage points and goes from 0 (perfect equality) to 100 (perfect inequality). Standard errors are
    calculated with the delta method. See notes in table 3 for details on the individual effects included in each category.



                                                                                                                                          34 
 
    Table 5: Decomposition Results. Changes in Inequality. Gini. 2003-1995.

                                    (1)                 (2)            (3)                    (4)                (5)               (6)
                                                                 Overall
    Post                          46.77**            46.77**         46.77**                46.77**            46.77**          46.74**
                                  [0.073]            [0.073]         [0.073]                [0.072]            [0.072]          [0.072]
    Pre                           49.79**            49.79**         49.79**                49.79**            49.79**          49.77**
                                  [0.079]            [0.078]         [0.078]                [0.078]            [0.078]          [0.078]
    Difference                    -3.01**            -3.01**         -3.01**                -3.01**            -3.01**          -3.03**
                                  [0.108]            [0.107]         [0.106]                [0.106]            [0.106]          [0.106]
    Endowments                     0.02               2.98**          2.99**                 2.99**             2.94**           2.85**
                                  [0.036]            [0.048]         [0.049]                [0.049]            [0.049]          [0.053]
    Structure                     -3.04**            -6.00**         -6.00**                -6.00**            -5.95**          -5.87**
                                  [0.105]            [0.100]         [0.099]                [0.099]            [0.099]          [0.100]
                                                               Endowments
    Education                      0.29**             1.32**          1.42**                 1.47**             1.49**           1.61**
                                  [0.037]            [0.040]         [0.041]                [0.042]            [0.041]          [0.044]
    Potential
                                  -0.27**            -0.33**             -0.33**            -0.32**            -0.32**           -0.32**
    Experience
                                  [0.010]            [0.012]            [0.012]             [0.012]            [0.012]          [0.012]
    Minimum Wage                                      1.99**             1.89**              1.93**             1.89**           1.84**
                                                     [0.034]            [0.032]             [0.033]            [0.032]          [0.032]
    Formality Status                                                     0.01+               0.02**             0.02**             0
                                                                        [0.006]             [0.006]            [0.006]          [0.006]
    Race and Gender                                                                         -0.11**            -0.12**          -0.11**
                                                                                            [0.008]            [0.008]          [0.008]
    Region and Urban                                                                                           -0.03**          -0.03**
                                                                                                               [0.005]          [0.006]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                             -0.14**
                                                                                                                                [0.018]
                                                                 Structure
    Education                      0.98**             3.22**            2.43**               2.74**             2.46**           2.14**
                                  [0.256]            [0.221]           [0.225]              [0.236]            [0.235]          [0.249]
    Potential
                                  -2.21**              0.45               0.03               0.47               0.46              0.69
    Experience
                                  [0.675]            [0.641]            [0.642]             [0.640]            [0.642]          [0.652]
    Minimum Wage                                      0.16**             0.22**              0.34**             0.40**           0.35**
                                                     [0.017]            [0.023]             [0.024]            [0.024]          [0.024]
    Formality Status                                                    -0.93**             -1.03**            -0.96**          -0.81**
                                                                        [0.114]             [0.114]            [0.116]          [0.125]
    Race and Gender                                                                         -1.45**            -1.40**          -1.42**
                                                                                            [0.161]            [0.163]          [0.169]
    Region and Urban                                                                                           -0.84**           -0.70*
                                                                                                               [0.292]          [0.289]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                               0.27
                                                                                                                                [1.548]
    Constant                       -1.80*            -9.82**           -7.75**              -7.07**            -6.08**          -6.40**
                                  [0.758]            [0.715]           [0.733]              [0.722]            [0.790]          [1.749]
                                                                    Total
    Education                      1.27**             4.54**            3.85**               4.21**             3.95**           3.76**
                                  [0.258]            [0.223]           [0.227]              [0.239]            [0.238]          [0.252]
    Potential
                                  -2.48**              0.12               -0.3               0.14               0.14              0.37
    Experience
                                  [0.676]            [0.642]            [0.643]             [0.640]            [0.642]          [0.652]
    Minimum Wage                                      2.15**             2.11**              2.27**             2.30**            2.19**
                                                     [0.038]            [0.040]             [0.041]            [0.041]          [0.040]
    Formality Status                                                    -0.92**             -1.01**            -0.94**           -0.80**
                                                                        [0.114]             [0.114]            [0.116]          [0.125]
    Race and Gender                                                                         -1.55**            -1.52**           -1.53**
                                                                                            [0.161]            [0.164]          [0.169]
    Region and Urban                                                                                           -0.87**           -0.72*
                                                                                                               [0.292]          [0.289]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                                0.12
                                                                                                                                [1.549]
    N                            479,686             479,686            479,686            479,635            479,635           477,775
    Note: Robust Standard Errors in Brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1% ,5% and 10% levels, respectively. The
    Gini coefficient is expressed in percentage points and goes from 0 (perfect equality) to 100 (perfect inequality). Standard errors are
    calculated with the delta method. See notes in table 3 for details on the individual effects included in each category.


                                                                                                                                           35 
 
    Table 6: Decomposition Results. Changes in Inequality. Gini. 2012-2003.

                                          (1)               (2)           (3)                  (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                                 Overall
    Post                                40.83**          40.83**       40.83**              40.83**           40.83**          40.82**
                                        [0.078]          [0.077]       [0.076]              [0.076]           [0.076]          [0.076]
    Pre                                 46.77**          46.77**       46.77**              46.77**           46.77**          46.74**
                                        [0.067]          [0.067]       [0.067]              [0.067]           [0.067]          [0.067]
    Difference                          -5.95**          -5.95**        -5.95**             -5.95**           -5.95**          -5.92**
                                        [0.103]          [0.102]       [0.102]              [0.102]           [0.102]          [0.102]
    Endowments                           1.34**           2.00**         1.86**              1.80**            1.79**           1.78**
                                        [0.040]          [0.050]       [0.051]              [0.051]           [0.051]          [0.054]
    Structure                           -7.29**          -7.95**        -7.81**             -7.74**           -7.74**          -7.71**
                                        [0.100]          [0.094]       [0.094]              [0.094]           [0.094]          [0.094]
                                                              Endowments
    Education                            1.46**           2.86**         2.91**              3.02**            3.02**           3.10**
                                        [0.040]          [0.043]       [0.044]              [0.045]           [0.045]          [0.047]
    Potential Experience                -0.11**          -0.14**        -0.13**             -0.14**           -0.13**          -0.13**
                                        [0.009]          [0.012]       [0.011]              [0.011]           [0.012]          [0.011]
    Minimum Wage                                         -0.72**        -0.70**             -0.72**           -0.71**          -0.67**
                                                         [0.033]       [0.032]              [0.033]           [0.032]          [0.032]
    Formality Status                                                    -0.21**             -0.20**           -0.19**          -0.23**
                                                                       [0.010]              [0.010]           [0.010]          [0.011]
    Race and Gender                                                                         -0.17**           -0.21**          -0.19**
                                                                                            [0.009]           [0.010]          [0.009]
    Region and Urban                                                                                            0.01             0.01
                                                                                                              [0.005]          [0.005]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                            -0.10**
                                                                                                                               [0.014]
                                                                   Structure
    Education                            1.62**          -2.12**           -2.37**          -2.39**           -2.25**          -2.91**
                                        [0.293]          [0.240]           [0.241]          [0.254]           [0.253]          [0.263]
    Potential Experience                -2.67**          -3.30**           -3.57**          -3.59**           -3.56**          -3.75**
                                        [0.515]          [0.475]           [0.478]          [0.478]           [0.479]          [0.488]
    Minimum Wage                                         -0.37**           -0.31**          -0.30**           -0.35**          -0.31**
                                                         [0.023]           [0.030]          [0.031]           [0.032]          [0.032]
    Formality Status                                                       -0.53**          -0.53**           -0.57**          -0.43**
                                                                           [0.102]          [0.102]           [0.103]          [0.108]
    Race and Gender                                                                          -0.11             -0.15            -0.14
                                                                                            [0.174]           [0.176]          [0.180]
    Region and Urban                                                                                          -0.76**           -0.58*
                                                                                                              [0.280]          [0.275]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                              1.92
                                                                                                                               [1.502]
    Constant                            -6.25**          -2.15**             -1.04+          -0.82             -0.11            -1.51
                                        [0.621]          [0.562]             [0.573]        [0.577]           [0.644]          [1.635]
                                                                     Total
    Education                            3.08**           0.74**              0.54*          0.63*             0.77**            0.19
                                        [0.296]          [0.244]             [0.246]        [0.259]           [0.257]          [0.268]
    Potential Experience                -2.78**          -3.44**             -3.70**        -3.72**           -3.70**           -3.89**
                                        [0.515]          [0.475]             [0.478]        [0.478]           [0.479]          [0.488]
    Minimum Wage                                         -1.10**             -1.00**        -1.02**           -1.06**           -0.98**
                                                         [0.040]             [0.043]        [0.045]           [0.045]          [0.044]
    Formality Status                                                         -0.75**        -0.73**           -0.75**           -0.65**
                                                                             [0.101]        [0.101]           [0.102]          [0.106]
    Race and Gender                                                                          -0.28             -0.35*           -0.33+
                                                                                            [0.176]           [0.177]          [0.182]
    Region and Urban                                                                                          -0.76**           -0.57*
                                                                                                              [0.279]          [0.275]
    Economic Sector                                                                                                              1.82
                                                                                                                               [1.502]
    N                                  535,040           535,040             535,040        535,024          535,024           533,827
    Note: Robust Standard Errors in Brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1% ,5% and 10% levels, respectively. The
    Gini coefficient is expressed in percentage points and goes from 0 (perfect equality) to 100 (perfect inequality). Standard errors are
    calculated with the delta method. See notes in table 3 for details on the individual effects included in each category.




                                                                                                                                          36 
 
    Table 7: Decomposition Results. Changes in log (p90/p10), log(p90/p50), and log(p50/p10).

                                            2003-1995                        2012-2003                                     2012-1995
                                  p90-        p90-           p50-     p90-      p90-                p50-          p90-       p90-           p50-
                                  p10          p50           p10       p10       p50                p10           p10         p50           p10
                                                                    Overall
    Post                          2.17**       1.18**       0.99**    1.80**    1.09**              0.71**       1.80**       1.09**        0.71**
                                 [0.007]      [0.009]      [0.009]   [0.004]   [0.019]             [0.023]      [0.004]      [0.023]       [0.023]
    Pre                           2.25**       1.31**       0.94**    2.17**    1.18**              0.99**       2.25**       1.31**        0.94**
                                 [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.004]   [0.005]   [0.009]             [0.008]      [0.005]      [0.003]       [0.003]
    Difference                   -0.08**      -0.14**       0.05**   -0.37**   -0.09**             -0.28**      -0.45**      -0.23**       -0.22**
                                 [0.008]      [0.012]      [0.010]   [0.007]   [0.023]             [0.027]      [0.006]      [0.023]       [0.024]
    Endowments                    0.29**       0.09**       0.20**    0.12**    0.08**              0.04**       0.37**       0.14**        0.23**
                                 [0.005]      [0.002]      [0.003]   [0.003]   [0.003]             [0.002]      [0.003]      [0.005]       [0.003]
    Structure                    -0.37**      -0.22**      -0.15**   -0.49**   -0.17**             -0.32**      -0.82**      -0.37**       -0.45**
                                 [0.006]      [0.012]      [0.010]   [0.006]   [0.025]             [0.028]      [0.007]      [0.028]       [0.026]
                                                                  Endowments
    Education                     0.16**       0.07**       0.09**    0.21**    0.12**              0.09**       0.35**       0.17**        0.19**
                                 [0.004]      [0.002]      [0.001]   [0.003]   [0.003]             [0.002]      [0.003]      [0.004]       [0.003]
    Potential                    -0.03**      -0.01**      -0.01**   -0.01**   -0.01**             -0.01**      -0.03**      -0.02**       -0.02**
    Experience
                                 [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]   [0.001]          [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]       [0.001]
    Minimum Wage                  0.17**       0.04**       0.14**    -0.06**         -0.01**      -0.04**       0.09**       0.02**        0.07**
                                 [0.003]      [0.001]      [0.003]   [0.002]          [0.001]      [0.002]      [0.003]      [0.001]       [0.002]
    Formality Status             -0.00**       0.00**      -0.01**    -0.01**         -0.01**       0.01**      -0.01**      -0.02**        0.01**
                                 [0.000]      [0.001]      [0.000]   [0.000]          [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.001]      [0.001]       [0.000]
    Race and Gender              -0.01**      -0.00**      -0.01**    -0.02**         -0.01**      -0.01**      -0.03**      -0.01**       -0.03**
                                 [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]   [0.001]          [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.001]      [0.001]       [0.001]
    Region and Urban              0.00**      -0.00**       0.00**     -0.00           0.00**       -0.00*       0.00**       -0.00*        0.00**
                                 [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.001]   [0.000]          [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.001]       [0.001]
                                                                   Structure
    Education                    -0.19**       0.08**      -0.27**    -0.31**         -0.10**      -0.20**      -0.48**       -0.00        -0.48**
                                 [0.016]      [0.015]      [0.013]   [0.020]          [0.018]      [0.021]      [0.014]      [0.015]       [0.019]
    Potential                    -0.14**      -0.11**       -0.03     -0.41**         -0.26**      -0.15**      -0.56**      -0.37**       -0.18**
    Experience
                                 [0.037]      [0.043]      [0.025]      [0.033]       [0.027]      [0.034]      [0.038]      [0.027]       [0.029]
    Minimum Wage                   0.01        0.01**       -0.00       -0.11**       -0.04**      -0.08**      -0.09**      -0.02**       -0.06**
                                 [0.004]      [0.001]      [0.004]      [0.004]       [0.006]      [0.007]      [0.003]      [0.005]       [0.006]
    Formality Status             -0.04**      -0.08**       0.04**       0.04**        -0.02*       0.06**        0.00       -0.09**        0.09**
                                 [0.008]      [0.006]      [0.004]      [0.005]       [0.008]      [0.004]      [0.004]      [0.007]       [0.004]
    Race and Gender               0.08**       -0.02*       0.10**       0.03**         0.01        0.02**       0.11**       -0.02*        0.13**
                                 [0.007]      [0.009]      [0.005]      [0.009]       [0.008]      [0.006]      [0.008]      [0.009]       [0.005]
    Region and Urban              0.03*         0.03         0.01       -0.04**        -0.03*       -0.01        -0.01        -0.00         -0.00
                                 [0.016]      [0.018]      [0.012]      [0.016]       [0.015]      [0.009]      [0.015]      [0.019]       [0.006]
    Constant                     -0.12**       -0.13*        0.01        0.31**        0.26**        0.05        0.20**       0.14**         0.06
                                 [0.043]      [0.063]      [0.036]      [0.043]       [0.058]      [0.081]      [0.046]      [0.052]       [0.059]
                                                                        Total
    Education                     -0.03*       0.15**      -0.18**      -0.09**        0.02        -0.11**      -0.13**       0.16**       -0.29**
                                 [0.013]      [0.014]      [0.014]      [0.020]       [0.019]      [0.021]      [0.015]      [0.017]       [0.021]
    Potential                    -0.17**      -0.13**      -0.05+       -0.42**       -0.26**      -0.15**      -0.59**      -0.39**       -0.20**
    Experience
                                [0.038]      [0.043]       [0.024]      [0.033]      [0.027]      [0.034]       [0.038]      [0.027]      [0.029]
    Minimum Wage                 0.18**       0.04**        0.13**       -0.17**      -0.05**      -0.12**        0.01*        -0.00       0.01+
                                [0.003]      [0.002]       [0.004]      [0.004]      [0.006]      [0.006]       [0.004]      [0.006]      [0.007]
    Formality Status             -0.04**      -0.07**       0.03**       0.04**       -0.03**      0.07**        -0.01+       -0.10**      0.10**
                                [0.008]      [0.006]       [0.004]      [0.005]      [0.008]      [0.005]       [0.004]      [0.007]      [0.004]
    Race and Gender              0.06**       -0.03**       0.09**        0.01         -0.00        0.01+        0.07**       -0.03**      0.10**
                                [0.007]      [0.009]       [0.006]      [0.010]      [0.009]      [0.006]       [0.008]      [0.009]      [0.005]
    Region and Urban              0.04*        0.02          0.01        -0.04**      -0.03*        -0.01         -0.00        -0.01        0.00
                                [0.016]      [0.018]       [0.012]      [0.016]      [0.015]      [0.009]       [0.015]      [0.019]      [0.006]
    Observations                479,635      479,635       479,635      535,024      535,024      535,024       485,407      485,407      485,407
    Note: Standard Errors in Brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Standard
    errors are bootstrapped with 100 replications. The ratios are calculated as the log difference between the effect at the 90th percentile
    and the effect at the 10th percentile (50th and 10th, 90th and 50th, respectively). See notes in table 3 for details on the individual effects
    included in each category.



                                                                                                                                                     37 
 
References

Acemoglu, Daron (1998) “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technological
       Change and Wage Inequality”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1055-1089.

Acemoglu, Daron (2002) “Technical change, Inequality and the Labour Market”, Journal of Economic
       Literature, 40, 7-72.

Alvarez, Jorge, Felipe Benguria, Niklas Engbom and Christian Moser (2016): “Firms and the Decline
          of Earnings Inequality in Brazil”, Columbia Business School working paper.

Autor, David, David Dorn and Gordon Hanson (2013): “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
        Effects of Import Competition in the United States”, American Economic Review, 103 (6):
        2121-2168.

Autor, David, Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane (2003) “The Skill Content of Recent Technological
        Change: An Empirical Exploration”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4): 1279-1334.

Azevedo, João Pedro, María E. Dávalos, Carolina Diaz-Bonilla, Bernardo Atuesta and Raul A.
        Castañeda (2013) “Fifteen Years of Inequality in Latin America: How Have Labor Markets
        Helped?” Policy Research Working Paper 6384, World Bank.

Barros Ricardo, Mirela Carvalho, Samuel Franco and Rosane Mendonça (2010) “Markets, the state
         and the dynamics of inequality in Brazil.” in: L.F. Lopez-Calva and N. Lustig (eds): Declining
         Inequality in Latin America: A decade of progress? Washington (DC): Brookings Institution and
         UNDP.

Behaghel, Luc and Nathalie Greenan. (2010) “Training and Age-Biased Technical Change”, Annals of
         Economics and Statistics. pp. 317-342.

Blinder, Alan S (1973) “Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates”, Journal of
         Human Resources, 8: 436-455.

Bound, John and George E. Johnson (1992) “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An
        Evaluation of Alternative Explanations”, American Economic Review, 82 (3): 371-92.

Bourguignon, François, Francisco Ferreira and Nora Lustig (2005): The microeconomics of income
        distribution dynamics in East Asia and Latin America. Washington, DC: Oxford University Press
        and World Bank Publications.

Card, David and John E. DiNardo (2002) “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
        Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles” Journal of Labor Economics, 20 (4): 733-783.

Card, David and Thomas Lemieux (2001) “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to College
        for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 2001; 116 (2):
        705-746.

Corseuil, Carlos. H, Rita Almeida and Pedro Carneiro (2012) “Inspeção do trabalho e evolução do
          emprego formal no Brasil”, Texto Para Discussão 1688, IPEA, Rio de Janeiro.

Cruz, Gabriela F. da, and Rudi Rocha (2016) “Efeitos do FUNDEF/B sobre Frequência Escolar,
        Fluxo Escolar e Trabalho Infantil: Uma Análise com Base nos Censos de 2000 e 2010”,
        Texto para Discussão 029, Instituto de Economia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,
        Rio de Janeiro.

                                                                                                    38 
 
DiNardo, John E., Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux (1996) “Labor Market Institutions and
        the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach”, Econometrica. 64 (5):
        1001-44.

Engbom, Niklas and Christian Moser (2016): “Earnings Inequality and the Minimum Wage: Evidence
       from Brazil”, Columbia Business School working paper.

Ferreira, Francisco H. G. (2012): “Distributions in Motion: Economic Growth, Inequality, and
          Poverty Dynamics”, Chapter 13 in P. Jefferson (ed.) Oxford Handbook of the Economics of
          Poverty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ferreira, Francisco, Sergio Firpo and Julian Messina (2016): “Understanding Recent Dynamics of
          Earnings Inequality in Brazil”, Chapter 8 in B.R. Schneider (ed.) New Order and Progress:
          Development and Democracy in Brazil. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ferreira, Francisco, Phillippe G. Leite and Julie A. Litchfield (2008) “The rise and fall of Brazilian
          inequality: 1981–2004”, Macroeconomic Dynamics, 12 (S2): 199-230.

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux (2009), “Unconditional Quantile Regressions”,
          Econometrica, 77 (3): 953-973.

Fortin, Nicole M., Thomas Lemieux and Sergio Firpo (2011), “Decomposition methods in
         economics.” Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 4, 1-10. (Amsterdam: Elsevier).

Friedberg, Leora (2003) “The Impact of Technological Change on Older Workers: Evidence from
         Data on Computer Use”. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56 (3): 511-529.

Gardeazabal, Javier, and Arantza Ugidos (2004). “More on identification in detailed wage
        decompositions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (4): 1034-1036.

Gasparini, Leonardo, Sebastián Galiani, Guillermo Cruces and Pablo Acosta (2011), “Educational
         upgrading and returns to skills in Latin America: Evidence from a supply-demand
         framework, 1990-2010.” IZA Discussion Paper 6244 and Policy Research Working Paper
         WPS 5921, the World Bank.

Hamermesh, Daniel (2004): “Labor Demand in Latin America and the Caribbean: What does it tell
       us?”, Chapter 11 in J. Heckman and C. Pagés (eds.): Law and Employment: Lessons from
       Latin America and the Caribbean. Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press.

Jacobson, Margaret and Filippo Occhino (2012). Labor’s Declining Share of Income and Rising
         Inequality, Economic Commentary number 13. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy and Brooks Pierce (1993): “Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns
         to Skill”, Journal of Political Economy, 101: 410-442.

Katz, Lawrence F. and David H. Autor (1999) “Changes in the wage structure and earnings
        inequality”, in: O.C. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics Vol. 3A,
        1463–555. (Amsterdam: Elsevier).

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy (1992) “Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987: supply and
         demand factors”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107: 35-78.

Knight, John B. and Richard H. Sabot (1983) “Educational Expansion and the Kuznets Effect”,
         American Economic Review, 73 (5):1132-1136.


                                                                                                   39 
 
Koning, Jaap de and Arie Gelderblom (2004) “ICT and Older Workers: No Unwrinkled
        Relationship”, International Journal of Manpower, 27 (5): 467-490.

Lam, David (1999) “Generating Extreme Inequality: Schooling, Earnings, and Intergenerational
       Transmission of Human Capital in South Africa and Brazil”, Research Report 99-439.
       Population Studies Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Lemieux, Thomas (2006). “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy Data,
        or Rising Demand for Skill?,” American Economic Review, vol. 96(3), pages 461-498, June.

López-Calva, Luis Felipe and Nora Lustig (2010) Declining Inequality in Latin America: A decade of
        progress? Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Lustig, Nora, Luis F. López-Calva, and Eduardo Ortiz-Juárez. (2013). “Declining Inequality in Latin
         America in the 2000s: The Cases of Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico.” World Development 44
         (C): 129–41.

Messina, Julian and Joana Silva (2017). Wage Inequality in Latin America. Understanding the Past to Prepare
         for the Future. Washington, DC: World Bank Publications.

Ñopo, Hugo (2012) New century, old disparities: Gender and ethnic earnings gaps in Latin America and the
       Caribbean, Washington, DC: World Bank Publications.

Oaxaca, Ronald (1973) “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets”, International
        Economic Review 14 (3): 693-709.

Oaxaca, Ronald and Michael R. Ransom (1999) “Identification in Detailed Wage Decompositions”,
         Review of Economics and Statistics, 81 (1): 154-157.

Piketty, Thomas (2014): Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.

Ravallion, Martin and Shaohua Chen (2003): “Measuring Pro-Poor Growth”, Economics Letters, 78:
         93-99.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012): The Price of Inequality: How today’s Divided Society Endangers Our Future. New
           York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.

World Bank (2016): Taking on Inequality: Poverty and Shared Prosperity Report 2016. Washington, DC:
        World Bank Publications.

Yun, Myeong-Su (2005) “A Simple Solution to the Identification Problem in Detailed Wage
       Decompositions”, Economic Inquiry, 43: 766–772.




                                                                                                        40 
 
APPENDIX


    Table A.1: Robustness Decomposition Results. Changes in Inequality. Gini. 2012-1995.

                                   (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)                  (5)
                                                   Monthly
                                                   Earnings           Monthly                           Hourly Earnings full
                               Monthly                                                    Hourly
                                                   Without            Earnings                          time workers (20-80
                               Earnings                                                  Earnings
                                                   Sampling            Males                                  hours)
                                                   Weights
                                                              Overall
    Post                         40.83**             41.20**           39.99**             41.74**             40.79**
                                 [0.075]            [0.065]             [0.094]            [0.075]             [0.078]
    Pre                          49.79**             49.87**           48.66**             50.12**             49.83**
                                 [0.071]            [0.071]             [0.086]            [0.069]             [0.072]
    Difference                    -8.96**            -8.67**            -8.67**            -8.38**              -9.04**
                                 [0.103]            [0.096]             [0.128]            [0.102]             [0.106]
    Endowments                     4.15**             4.57**             3.60**             3.03**              3.57**
                                 [0.060]            [0.059]             [0.075]            [0.057]             [0.061]
    Structure                    -13.10**           -13.23**           -12.27**           -11.41**             -12.61**
                                 [0.103]            [0.098]             [0.126]            [0.106]             [0.107]
                                                            Endowments
    Education                     3.98**              4.03**             3.49**            3.25**                3.83**
                                 [0.056]            [0.053]             [0.069]           [0.056]               [0.060]
    Potential Experience         -0.40**             -0.37**            -0.43**           -0.36**               -0.43**
                                 [0.013]            [0.013]             [0.017]           [0.012]               [0.014]
    Minimum Wage                  1.15**              1.37**             1.04**            0.71**                0.71**
                                 [0.030]            [0.029]             [0.034]           [0.019]               [0.022]
    Formality Status             -0.26**             -0.20**            -0.23**           -0.20**               -0.16**
                                 [0.011]            [0.009]             [0.013]           [0.011]               [0.011]
    Race and Gender              -0.29**             -0.27**            -0.10**           -0.25**               -0.28**
                                 [0.012]            [0.011]             [0.011]           [0.012]               [0.012]
    Region and Urban             -0.04**               0.01             -0.16**           -0.12**               -0.10**
                                 [0.008]            [0.010]             [0.012]           [0.010]               [0.009]
                                                             Structure
    Education                     0.75**              0.50*              1.32**             0.43                 1.14**
                                 [0.247]            [0.233]             [0.277]           [0.272]               [0.262]
    Potential Experience         -3.16**             -3.28**            -3.42**           -4.00**               -3.50**
                                 [0.566]            [0.527]             [0.819]           [0.586]               [0.585]
    Minimum Wage                  0.09**               0.04               0.04            -0.29**               -0.29**
                                 [0.025]            [0.022]             [0.025]           [0.031]               [0.025]
    Formality Status             -1.43**             -1.34**            -1.18**           -0.75**               -1.06**
                                 [0.105]            [0.094]             [0.130]           [0.107]               [0.102]
    Race and Gender              -1.58**             -1.50**            -0.76**           -0.88**               -1.09**
                                 [0.173]            [0.165]             [0.111]           [0.168]               [0.170]
    Region and Urban             -1.59**             -1.66**            -1.81**            -0.39                 -0.61*
                                 [0.289]            [0.299]             [0.358]           [0.288]               [0.298]
    Constant                     -6.18**             -5.99**            -6.44**           -5.53**               -7.22**
                                 [0.719]            [0.671]             [0.986]           [0.753]               [0.748]
                                                               Total
    Education                     4.73**              4.53**             4.81**            3.68**               4.98**
                                [0.252]             [0.233]             [0.284]           [0.278]              [0.268]
    Potential Experience         -3.55**             -3.65**            -3.86**            -4.35**              -3.93**
                                [0.566]             [0.529]             [0.820]           [0.586]              [0.585]
    Minimum Wage                  1.24**              1.41**             1.08**            0.42**               0.42**
                                [0.040]             [0.038]             [0.044]           [0.037]              [0.034]
    Formality Status             -1.69**             -1.53**            -1.42**            -0.95**              -1.22**
                                [0.104]             [0.094]             [0.129]           [0.105]              [0.100]
    Race and Gender              -1.88**             -1.77**            -0.86**            -1.13**              -1.36**
                                [0.175]             [0.165]             [0.114]           [0.171]              [0.173]
    Region and Urban             -1.62**             -1.66**            -1.98**            -0.51+               -0.71*
                                [0.288]             [0.299]             [0.357]           [0.287]              [0.297]
    N                           485,407             485,407            287,390            482,368              457,735
    Note: Robust Standard Errors in Brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels,
    respectively. Standard errors are calculated with the delta method. The Gini coefficient is expressed in percentage points
    and goes from 0 (perfect equality) to 100 (perfect inequality). Part-time workers in column 5 are those working less than
    20 hours in the reference week. See notes in table 3 for details on the individual effects included in each category.




                                                                                                                            41 
 
    Table A.2: Robustness Decomposition Results. Changes in Inequality. Gini. 2003-1995.


                                      (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)               (5)
                                                                                                                 Hourly
                                                  Monthly Earnings
                                   Monthly                                 Monthly             Hourly         Earnings full
                                                  Without Sampling
                                   Earnings                             Earnings Males        Earnings        time workers
                                                      Weights
                                                                                                              (20-80 hours)
                                                               Overall
    Post                            46.77**              47.05**              45.96**            48.23**            47.74**
                                    [0.072]              [0.068]              [0.090]            [0.075]            [0.078]
    Pre                             49.79**              49.87**              48.66**            50.12**            49.83**
                                    [0.078]              [0.071]              [0.094]            [0.076]            [0.079]
    Difference                      -3.01**               -2.82**              -2.69**            -1.89**            -2.09**
                                    [0.106]              [0.098]              [0.130]            [0.107]            [0.111]
    Endowments                       2.94**               3.28**               2.65**             2.10**             2.35**
                                    [0.049]              [0.049]              [0.063]            [0.047]            [0.051]
    Structure                       -5.95**               -6.10**              -5.34**            -3.99**            -4.45**
                                    [0.099]              [0.089]              [0.120]            [0.101]            [0.103]
                                                           Endowments
    Education                         1.49**              1.41**               1.26**             1.30**             1.50**
                                     [0.041]             [0.042]              [0.053]            [0.044]            [0.048]
    Potential Experience             -0.32**              -0.31**              -0.35**            -0.30**            -0.33**
                                     [0.012]             [0.012]              [0.015]            [0.011]            [0.013]
    Minimum Wage                      1.89**              2.20**               1.80**             1.26**             1.33**
                                     [0.032]             [0.032]              [0.037]            [0.022]            [0.025]
    Formality Status                  0.02**              0.05**               0.05**             0.05**             0.04**
                                     [0.006]             [0.005]              [0.007]            [0.005]            [0.005]
    Race and Gender                  -0.12**              -0.12**              -0.03**            -0.12**            -0.12**
                                     [0.008]             [0.008]              [0.005]            [0.008]            [0.008]
    Region and Urban                 -0.03**              0.05**               -0.07**            -0.09**            -0.06**
                                     [0.005]             [0.008]              [0.008]            [0.007]            [0.006]
                                                              Structure
    Education                         2.46**              2.73**               3.05**             2.38**             2.71**
                                     [0.235]             [0.217]              [0.260]            [0.253]            [0.253]
    Potential Experience               0.46                1.09+                1.65+              -0.36              -0.14
                                     [0.642]             [0.568]              [0.921]            [0.673]            [0.673]
    Minimum Wage                      0.40**              0.41**               0.30**             0.27**             0.26**
                                     [0.024]             [0.022]              [0.024]            [0.030]            [0.024]
    Formality Status                 -0.96**              -0.90**              -0.76**            -0.40**            -0.66**
                                     [0.116]             [0.103]              [0.143]            [0.118]            [0.114]
    Race and Gender                  -1.40**              -1.64**              -0.58**            -1.17**            -1.28**
                                     [0.163]             [0.158]              [0.102]            [0.162]            [0.163]
    Region and Urban                 -0.84**              -1.55**              -1.62**            -0.75*             -0.81**
                                     [0.292]             [0.305]              [0.358]            [0.303]            [0.310]
    Constant                         -6.08**              -6.24**              -7.38**            -3.95**            -4.53**
                                     [0.790]             [0.704]              [1.089]            [0.834]            [0.835]
                                                                Total
    Education                         3.95**              4.14**               4.31**             3.67**             4.21**
                                     [0.238]             [0.221]              [0.264]            [0.257]            [0.257]
    Potential Experience               0.14                0.79                 1.29               -0.66              -0.47
                                     [0.642]             [0.568]              [0.922]            [0.673]            [0.673]
    Minimum Wage                      2.30**              2.60**               2.10**             1.53**             1.59**
                                     [0.041]             [0.039]              [0.044]            [0.038]            [0.035]
    Formality Status                 -0.94**              -0.85**              -0.71**            -0.35**            -0.61**
                                     [0.116]             [0.103]              [0.143]            [0.118]            [0.114]
    Race and Gender                  -1.52**              -1.76**              -0.61**            -1.29**            -1.40**
                                     [0.164]             [0.159]              [0.103]            [0.163]            [0.163]
    Region and Urban                 -0.87**              -1.50**              -1.69**            -0.84**            -0.87**
                                     [0.292]             [0.305]              [0.358]            [0.303]            [0.310]
    N                               479,635              479,635              289,598            478,798            451,938
    Note: Robust Standard Errors in Brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels,
    respectively. Standard errors are calculated with the delta method. The Gini coefficient is expressed in percentage
    points and goes from 0 (perfect equality) to 100 (perfect inequality). Part-time workers in column 5 are those working
    less than 20 hours in the reference week. See notes in table 3 for details on the individual effects included in each
    category.




                                                                                                                           42 
 
    Table A.3: Robustness Decomposition Results. Changes in Inequality. 2012-2003.

                                      (1)                   (2)                 (3)              (4)                    (5)
                                                  Monthly Earnings         Monthly                            Hourly Earnings
                                   Monthly                                                    Hourly
                                                  Without Sampling         Earnings                           full time workers
                                   Earnings                                                  Earnings
                                                        Weights              Males                              (20-80 hours)
                                                                Overall
    Post                            40.83**             41.20**             39.99**           41.74**                40.79**
                                    [0.076]             [0.065]             [0.096]           [0.076]                [0.079]
    Pre                             46.77**             47.05**             45.96**           48.23**                47.74**
                                    [0.067]             [0.068]             [0.084]           [0.070]                [0.073]
    Difference                       -5.95**             -5.85**             -5.97**          -6.49**                -6.95**
                                    [0.102]             [0.094]             [0.127]           [0.103]                [0.107]
    Endowments                       1.79**               1.99**             1.57**            1.61**                 1.94**
                                    [0.051]             [0.051]             [0.066]           [0.047]                [0.052]
    Structure                        -7.74**             -7.83**             -7.54**          -8.11**                -8.88**
                                    [0.094]             [0.088]             [0.116]           [0.100]                [0.101]
                                                           Endowments
    Education                        3.02**               3.25**             2.80**            2.55**                 2.94**
                                    [0.045]             [0.045]             [0.057]           [0.045]                [0.050]
    Potential Experience             -0.13**             -0.13**             -0.16**          -0.12**                -0.14**
                                    [0.012]             [0.012]             [0.014]           [0.010]                [0.012]
    Minimum Wage                     -0.71**             -0.77**             -0.73**          -0.43**                -0.51**
                                    [0.032]             [0.032]             [0.038]           [0.020]                [0.024]
    Formality Status                 -0.19**             -0.14**             -0.19**          -0.18**                -0.12**
                                    [0.010]             [0.009]             [0.013]           [0.011]                [0.010]
    Race and Gender                  -0.21**             -0.19**             -0.10**          -0.18**                -0.22**
                                    [0.010]             [0.009]             [0.008]           [0.009]                [0.010]
    Region and Urban                  0.01               -0.02**             -0.06**          -0.03**                -0.02**
                                    [0.005]             [0.005]             [0.008]           [0.006]                [0.006]
                                                               Structure
    Education                        -2.25**             -2.85**             -2.30**          -2.54**                -2.17**
                                    [0.253]             [0.234]             [0.285]           [0.287]                [0.276]
    Potential Experience             -3.56**             -4.30**             -4.99**          -3.58**                -3.31**
                                    [0.479]             [0.441]             [0.682]           [0.522]                [0.518]
    Minimum Wage                     -0.35**             -0.43**             -0.29**          -0.68**                -0.66**
                                    [0.032]             [0.029]             [0.032]           [0.038]                [0.031]
    Formality Status                 -0.57**             -0.54**             -0.52**          -0.43**                -0.49**
                                    [0.103]             [0.093]             [0.129]           [0.109]                [0.103]
    Race and Gender                   -0.15                0.19               -0.15            0.34+                   0.25
                                    [0.176]             [0.167]             [0.114]           [0.175]                [0.177]
    Region and Urban                 -0.76**              -0.14               -0.22             0.36                   0.18
                                    [0.280]             [0.291]             [0.351]           [0.287]                [0.296]
    Constant                          -0.11                0.24                0.94            -1.58*                -2.69**
                                    [0.644]             [0.591]             [0.869]           [0.706]                [0.698]
                                                                 Total
    Education                        0.77**               0.39+               0.50+             0.01                  0.77**
                                    [0.257]             [0.235]             [0.291]           [0.290]                [0.280]
    Potential Experience             -3.70**             -4.44**             -5.15**          -3.69**                -3.45**
                                    [0.479]             [0.441]             [0.683]           [0.522]                [0.518]
    Minimum Wage                     -1.06**             -1.20**             -1.02**          -1.11**                -1.17**
                                    [0.045]             [0.043]             [0.049]           [0.042]                [0.039]
    Formality Status                 -0.75**             -0.68**             -0.71**          -0.60**                -0.61**
                                    [0.102]             [0.094]             [0.127]           [0.108]                [0.102]
    Race and Gender                  -0.35*                  0               -0.25*             0.16                   0.04
                                    [0.177]             [0.167]             [0.116]           [0.177]                [0.179]
    Region and Urban                 -0.76**              -0.16               -0.28             0.33                   0.16
                                    [0.279]             [0.291]             [0.351]           [0.286]                [0.296]
    N                               535,024             535,024             312,910          532,750                503,761
    Note: Robust Standard Errors in Brackets. **, * and + denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels,
    respectively. Standard errors are calculated with the delta method. The Gini coefficient is expressed in percentage
    points and goes from 0 (perfect equality) to 100 (perfect inequality). Part-time workers in column 5 are those working
    less than 20 hours in the reference week. See notes in table 3 for details on the individual effects included in each
    category.




                                                                                                                              43 
 
