                                             WPS8081


Policy Research Working Paper               8081




  A Review of the Anthropological Literature
             on the Civil Service
                              Colin Hoag
                             Matthew Hull




Development Research Group
Impact Evaluation Team
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8081


  Abstract
 This paper reviews anthropological literature on the topic                         bureaucratic decision making, scrutinizing how institu-
 of how and why civil services function as they do. The                             tional goals manifest in specific practices. The third section
 paper considers the formal and informal rules that structure                       considers how sociocultural structures bear on bureaucratic
 bureaucratic practice, including the effects of institutional                      practice, including the question of how organizational
 history or culture. The review examines how bureaucrats                            history and culture might complicate efforts at institu-
 understand or experience their work, such as the rules                             tional reform. The fourth section engages with questions
 that guide them; the clients, bosses, or employees with                            of knowledge production, ignorance, and indeterminacy,
 whom they interact; and their own actions. Finally, the                            reviewing recent literature that questions the presumed
 review considers what methodological or ethical challenges                         role of bureaucracies and states as producers of knowledge.
 are posed by the study of bureaucracies. The first section                         The fifth section explores the conceptual and practical
 explores normative expectations of organizational prac-                            methodological challenges faced by field researchers at
 tice and how they shape scholars’ accounts of the nature                           institutions, and points toward key areas for future research.
 of bureaucratic power. The second section focuses on



  This paper is a product of the Impact Evaluation Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The commissioning
  researcher may be contacted at drogger@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    A	Review	of	the	Anthropological	
     Literature	on	the	Civil	Service	
                 Colin Hoag
                Matthew Hull


.           	
Introduction

       Scholarly literature on bureaucracies (institutions, complex organizations, and the civil

service) is diverse across disciplines and over time. Fields such as organizational studies, public

administration, sociology, political science, and anthropology have all contributed to our

understanding of bureaucracies. Taken together, the body of work is massive. This review

examines social science literature on bureaucracy primarily within anthropology, but including

some work in related fields. The questions that orient it are those that orient the authors of those

studies. Put in general terms, they are the following: What factors determine why bureaucracies

work in the ways they do? Do bureaucrats determine institutional practice or are they controlled

by institutional rules and regulations? How do the effects of bureaucracies relate to their stated

aims? What factors other than formal rules and regulations (e.g., institutional history or culture)

influence bureaucrats? How do bureaucrats understand or experience their work – the rules and

reforms that guide them, the clients, bosses, or employees with whom they interact, and their own

actions? What methodological or ethical challenges are posed by the study of bureaucracies?

       These questions are addressed in this review across five different thematic sections. The

first section, entitled “Ideal Types, Institutional Purpose, and the Fragmentary Nature of

Bureaucratic Organizations,” explores normative expectations of organizational practice and how

this shapes scholars’ accounts of the nature of bureaucratic power. Its aims are two-fold. First, it

reviews scholarly discussion of the Weberian “ideal type" and their relationship to institutional

goals; second, it examines those concerns against accounts of the coherence or fragmentation of

people and administrative units within bureaucracies. The second section, entitled, “From Policy

to Practice: The Significance of Discretion and Social Context for Organizational Success,” carries

forward the concern regarding institutional purpose and coherence from the first section to


                                                 2
examine how institutional goals manifest in specific bureaucratic practices. Focused on

bureaucratic decision-making, it considers the ways in which rules are understood and followed

by bureaucrats, including the significance of discretion and the factors that influence its

application. The third section, “The Culture of Organizations and the Culture of Reforms,” extends

the discussion of how socio-cultural structures bear on bureaucratic practice by analyzing the

relationship between organizational function and organizational culture. This topic relates to the

question of how such a culture (whether “of” or “enveloping” the bureaucracy) might complicate

efforts at institutional reform and how the history of institutions or nations shapes them in the

present. The fourth section, entitled “The Nature of Bureaucratic Knowledge,” engages with

questions of knowledge production, ignorance, and indeterminacy. It reviews recent literature in

social sciences that questions the presumed role of bureaucracies and states as producers of

knowledge, casting light on the importance of ignorance to institutional function. This literature

has also recently explored the ways in which indeterminacy and ambiguity texture bureaucratic

practices—in particular those at the “street level”—and how temporal and material conditions of

institutional life can shape bureaucratic practice. The fifth section, “Methodological and Ethical

Challenges to Studying Institutions,” explores the methodological challenges faced by field

researchers at institutions, both conceptual and practical. Finally, the paper concludes by

synthesizing these overarching themes and pointing toward key areas for future research.

       Before turning to these themes, however, it would be useful to consider the intellectual

trajectories that gave rise to the particular set of literatures under review here. Anthropology’s

early and enduring interest in the exotic and non-Western has meant that anthropologists have been

relatively quiet on the topic of bureaucracy when compared with sociologists and political

scientists. A number of developments in the field are changing this of late, and the anthropology



                                                3
of bureaucracy is in a period of expansion and maturation (Heyman 2012). On the one hand,

debates over the nature of the state have led anthropologists to call for an examination of the

everyday practices of state functionaries (Bear and Mathur 2014; Bierschenk and Olivier de Sardan

2014; Blundo and Olivier de Sardan 2008; Gupta and Ferguson 2002; Hansen and Stepputat 2001;

Heyman 1995, 2004; Trouillot 2003), rather than focus on narratives about the state from ordinary

people (Das and Poole 2004; Gupta 1995; Taussig 1997) and those produced by the state (Mitchell

1999; Scott 1998), or to accept the “vulgar” Marxist notion that the state is merely a tool for

maintaining relations of production.1 The ascendancy of development and aid institutions as

objects of anthropological concern has also encouraged anthropologists to make a similar

transition, in this case from an examination of the institutional discourses that were found to

obscure the political underpinnings of development aid and their effects in local communities

(Escobar 1993; Ferguson 1990), to an examination of the everyday practices and self-

representational work of the donor and recipient institutions themselves (Anders 2005; James

2015; Lea 2008; Li 2007; Mosse 2005; Rottenburg 2009). Third, the rise of “audit cultures”

(Strathern 2000) in the neoliberal academy has prompted anthropologists to reflect critically on

the institutional practices in which they themselves participate (Brenneis 1994, 1999; Lederman

2006). Finally, the analytical tools developed by philosophers and sociologists of science to

examine knowledge production in the natural sciences (Callon 1986; Haraway 1989; Latour 1987;

Latour and Woolgar 1979; Star and Griesemer 1989) have invigorated anthropologists’ attention

to the production of expertise and knowledge elsewhere (Carr 2010; Choy 2011; Mathews 2011),2




1
  Marx and Engels state in the Communist Manifesto that: “The executive of the modern state is but a committee for
managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie” (1999 [1848]:5).
2
  Anthropologists’ reflexive critique of their own discipline’s knowledge production practices (e.g., Clifford and
Marcus 1986) is not unrelated to this development.

                                                        4
dovetailing with emergent interests in materiality, documents, and documentation (Hull 2012a,

2012b; Riles 2006) in ways that make institutions ideal research sites.

       An emphasis throughout nearly all of literature is on the importance of attending to the

everyday practices of institutions. This contrasts with the earliest anthropology of bureaucracy,

such as by Michael Herzfeld (1992) and Don Handelman (1981), which was less interested in

practices than in the overarching symbolic order that made bureaucracy “thinkable.” The

significance of this move is profound. As Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan (2009) puts it with respect

to the state in Africa, for example, “It is easy to get the feeling that, for decades, journalists,

politicians and many researchers, both Africans and Africanists, have been engaged in a relentless

search for the ‘essence’ of the African state while neglecting to carry out a concrete analysis of

administrations, public services, bureaucratic system and relations between civil servants and the

users of state services” (2009:39). Taken together, these developments signal a general trend

toward using anthropological methods of participant observation to understand how bureaucracies

work; what concepts organize them materially, semiotically, and temporally; and what

implications they have for the world around us.




Ideal Types, Institutional Purpose, and the Fragmentary Nature of
Bureaucratic Organizations
       This section traces a line through a set of conversations, beginning with Weber (1946),

about the ideal qualities of bureaucracy and the lived reality of bureaucracies that are riven with

conflict and heterogeneity, which fundamentally calls into question the notion that institutions

have a coherence of purpose. How authors treat this countervailing movement—between a

depiction of bureaucracies as defined by order and as defined by disorder—sheds light on their


                                                  5
distinct understandings of bureaucratic power. Because of Max Weber’s tremendous influence on

the field still today, one cannot help but begin with his (1946) famous analysis of bureaucracy.

Weber stated that bureaucracy was marked by rationalization of human action through clearly

delineated hierarchy and protocols; thus organized, bureaucracy served as a dispassionate form of

social organization able to carry out matters of the state. The growth of a class of bureaucrats,

however, marked a distinct rupture in the social fabric: their regimentalization of matters of the

state meant that they had ever-greater control over access to state resources. This “power position”

of bureaucracy dooms citizens to life in an “iron cage,” he said, as this class of bureaucrats comes

to control more than even the sovereign. The ideal types of bureaucratic organization that Weber

described set up paradoxes that later organizational theorists would seize upon as an extremely

productive strawman (Hoag 2014): the more rules are enforced, the less they are followed

(Gouldner 1954); rules set out to achieve goals become goals in themselves, and ultimately subvert

those original goals (Merton 1936, 1968) or are executed by people with no knowledge of the

context (Crozier 1964); “informal” bureaucratic norms turn out to be critical to achieving formal

goals (Barnard 1938; Blau 1955; Selznick 1966), and so on.3 Later generations of authors writing

in anthropology showed how attempts to homogenize the practice of bureaucratic policy create

more opportunities for heterogeneous interpretation (Sandvik 2011); how rules seem never specific

enough to guide practice clearly for a local context (Scherz 2011); and how people known for their

warmth and hospitality become cold automatons (Herzfeld 1992). These paradoxes convey the

paradoxical place that bureaucracy occupies within Western discourse more broadly: orderly and




3
  Interestingly, like the Manchester School anthropologists writing against static, ahistorical structural functionalism
in African social analysis (e.g., Gluckman, Epstein), the students of Robert K. Merton (e.g., Blau, Selznick, and
Crozier) all looked to the dysfunctions, internal tensions, and cohesions of institutions as moments of organizational
change. See Burawoy (1979), Perrow (1986), Heyman (2004), and Hull (2013) for helpful reviews of this and other
work in organization studies.

                                                           6
important, and yet horrifically, comically absurd, a position perhaps captured most evocatively by

Franz Kafka (1946, 1993, 1998).

       This paradox has generated at least two distinct conceptions of bureaucracy’s political

effects. Some characterizations evince the Frankenstein-like quality of bureaucracies—creatures

designed by reason but ultimately yielding something monstrous and out of control—as emblems

of the perils and contradictions of modernity’s obsession with classification and documentation.

One might see Kafka’s work in such a light, but also that of Bowker and Star (2005), who show

how people’s identities get “torqued” by the inflexible categories of medical diagnoses or South

African Apartheid; of James (2015), who documents the unintended consequences of relief aid in

Haiti based on typologies of trauma or need; or by McKay (2012), who shows how transnational

interventions to introduce documentary measures aimed at improving public health led to a

proliferation of paper as well as of diagnoses in a Mozambican clinic. Another current in the

literature, which overlaps this one, emphasizes the ways that bureaucracy can depoliticize what

are fundamentally political processes. An early and notable example is Hannah Arendt’s (1977)

famous analysis of former Nazi officers on trial at the Nuremberg Trials, which explained that

bureaucracy generates “rule by nobody” through the physical and cognitive separation of decision-

makers from those they decide upon. Others, writing often from a Foucauldian perspective, show

how the discourses and bureaucratic practices of development (Ferguson 1990), refugee assistance

(Sandvik 2011), child protection services (Scherz 2011), child welfare and poverty alleviation

(Gupta 2012), and others convert political questions into technical ones. In these cases, authors

have tended to find that bureaucracies ultimately reinforce the existing political order, even though

bureaucrats and clients might assert themselves at some level (see also Telesca 2015), a tacit—if

only partial—affirmation of Weber’s “iron cage.”



                                                 7
         Thus, Weber’s work is both illuminating in itself, but also a key reference point for

questioning how institutions work. His description represents the prevailing normative view of

bureaucracy. Though much can be learned by refuting normative ideal types, an additional goal

should be to break free of its cognitive framing and refuse it outright. To this end, we might pose

a fundamental question: What is the purpose of an institution? A key assumption about

bureaucracies is that they are supposed to work (Hoag 2011)—that they generate order from chaos

(Lea 2012). This shapes the way bureaucracies are conceived of by scholars, prompting them to

see bureaucrats as interesting only for the extent to which they either do or do not obey rules—and

why. For example, while bureaucrats might be said to “provide services” and researchers might

seek to explore whether or how they do so, bureaucrats themselves might envision their workday

as a series of tasks or a logging of hours (Anders 2010). While institutions are indeed charged with

carrying out tasks, they are also a life-world populated by actual buildings, specific objects and

people with anxieties and dreams. Indeed, a similar point can be made even for entire ministries.

While one might accept at face value that a ministry exists to “carry out its charge,” we might also

know that its true genesis lies in a patronage network (Bayart et al. 1999). In some impoverished

countries, it could be argued that bureaucracies “work” when they are merely a form of public

employment.4 The acceptance of institutions’ self-presentation is not only a legacy of Weber’s

(1946) work, but also of the success of that self-presentation: the formalities, the rules, the forms,

the signage, the uniforms—all of these communicate the coherence of institutional purpose and

legitimacy (Mitchell 1999; Sharma and Gupta 2006; Riles 2000; cf. Hull 2012b:26). The point

here is two-fold: the nature and locus of bureaucratic power appears differently depending on



4
 One might also note here the structural functionalist literature exploring what Robert Merton (1968) called the
“manifest” and “latent” functions of social institutions (e.g., Blau 1955). All bureaucracies and bureaucratic
practices can be said to have both stated purposes and de facto purposes.

                                                         8
whether one takes a normative or non-normative view; and holding normativity at bay even just

for a moment is important to seeing the lived world of a bureaucracy.

       In addition to this point about the normativity of ideal types, a second theme can be drawn

out of the literature from anthropology: that of the fragmentary nature of institutions. A common

theme in recent anthropology of bureaucracy is that government, development, and other

institutions are heterogeneous rather than monolithic, riven with conflict and instability, and

staffed by people who vary by more than simply their hierarchical position (Bierschenk and Olivier

de Sardan 2014; Blundo 2014; Herzfeld 2005; Hull 2012b; Mathews 2011; Mosse 2005; Li 2007;

Robbins 2000; Willott 2014; see also Warner and Low 1976; cf. Scott 1998). Indeed, while the

public might envision a totality, bureaucrats themselves might experience instead a set of

fragmented units, social groups, or even floors of a building (Vike 2012). This insight emerges in

anthropology partly from the influential work on the state, which challenged the notion that the

state is “a thing” and instead proposed that it is merely an idea—an effect of discourses and

practices—and therefore has no singular purpose (Mitchell 1999; Abrams 1988). Ethnographic

treatments of bureaucratic practice have partially affirmed this perspective, demonstrating the

contingency, partiality, and materiality of bureaucratic knowledge (e.g., Dery 1998; Hoag 2010;

Hull 2012b; Mathews 2011; Mosse 2005).

       These insights may be somewhat biased, however: the bulk of deep ethnography of

institutions has focused on street-level, service-oriented bureaucracies to the neglect of mid- and

upper-level officials. One reason for this is that street-level workers are the functionaries of the

state with whom conventional anthropological subjects (i.e., the subaltern) most commonly

engage. Understanding the social worlds of such bureaucrats therefore helps anthropologists to

make sense of existing anthropological studies on the ways that the state impacts “everyday



                                                 9
people.” Less attention has been given to middle- and upper-level workers. This may be changing

with the recognition that, for institutions to control society at large, they must first control the

people within them (Chalfin 2010; Anders 2010), a point that underscores the potential importance

of investigating hierarchically higher perspectives. Some work has been done to this end. Tess Lea

(2008) finds that mid-level health professionals in Northern Australia see it as their duty and

responsibility to help the Aboriginal people to whom they provide services, Their middle-class,

bleeding-heart liberalism, she shows, even compels them to promote rhetoric about those

communities which they know to be untrue in order to advance their efforts to “help” (also see

Ferguson 1990). Another examination of middle management in the anthropological research is

that of Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan’s (2009) work on the civil service in Niger.5 While inquiring

into the origins and effects of corruption in interviews with heads of department, he finds a “culture

of impunity.” The heads of department felt unable to discipline employees in their charge for fear

of retaliation. They explained that employees who were well connected, whether through political

party affiliation or otherwise, might protest the discipline and the department head could be given

the common punishment of being re-assigned to another, less desirable post. Because people have

a “hold over each other,” he says, both vertically and horizontally, few see an interest in asserting

themselves. In effect, low-level employees have found ways to level the hierarchy, and this has

serious negative implications for institutional function.




5
 Olivier de Sardan is founder and head of the LASDEL institute in Niamey, Niger, which has supported a very
important body of ethnographic work on the state in Africa (Blundo and Olivier de Sardan 2008; Blundo and Le
Meur 2009; Bierschenk and Olivier de Sardan 2014).

                                                      10
From Policy to Practice: The Significance of Discretion and Social Context
for Organizational Success
           The macro-scale themes described in the previous section surrounding power, hierarchy,

and the coherence of bureaucracies, come alive in a specific, micro-scale theme that has been a

staple of bureaucracy studies and which is covered in this section: discretion. Understandably,

much social science of institutions has been concerned with the question of whether the practices

of bureaucrats follow the stated policies of the bureaucracy and, if not, why that is so. This is what

Hoag (2011, 2014) has called “the policy-practice problematic.” It has been particularly salient in

service delivery contexts, where scholars have sought to understand how bureaucrats’ emotions or

biases impact the application of policy (Graham 2002; Fulgerud 2004).6 On the one hand, Marxist

approaches have found that class interests manifest themselves in the dissemination and

understanding of official policy through the cultivation of bureaucratic worldviews that serve

superordinate powers (Heyman 1995), while authors drawing on culturalist and cognitivist

frameworks find that bureaucratic logics of classification and insider-outside taxonomies facilitate

indifference or power-laden discretion on the part of bureaucrats (Handelman 1981; Herzfeld

1992), if sometimes haphazardly (Gilboy 1991).

           As Hull (2012a, 2012b) has pointed out, anthropology historically made its way into

organizational studies through scholars who believed it could help to explain “informal” processes

that might dictate the operation of organizations somewhat outside the purview of formal rules

(Baba 2009; Warner and Low 1976; see also Garsten and Nyqvist 2013). This notion was further

developed by sociologists such as Peter Blau, who stated that “informal organizations” (i.e.,

bureaucratic practices and cultures that fall outside of the “formal” organizational structure) are



6
    This, of course, assumes that bureaucrats know the laws they are supposed to carry out (Hunter et al. 2016).

                                                           11
equally a part of the “formal organization”: whether they “exactly follow official rules or directly

violate them, they are part of the bureaucratic organization” (Blau 1955: 2-3).7

        At the heart of this question regarding discrepancy between policies and practices is the

concept of discretion: the leeway provided to bureaucrats to interpret how and when to apply a

rule. Given that Lipsky (1981) and others (e.g., Blau 1955; Scherz 2011) have shown how

discretion is not a betrayal of the universal rule but rather a necessary artifact of bureaucratic

practice, we can affirm that discretion is not in a zero-sum relationship with rules (Satzewich

2015). More rules can in fact engender what Jane Guyer (2005) has called a “coral reef of

formalities” in her writing on how people in Nigeria navigate the rules of financial transactions to

find value. That is, because rules can never be specific enough to account for the myriad

possibilities of context (Hoag 2011), additional rules can have the opposite of their intended effect,

proliferating the types of practices that can be deemed legitimate interpretations of the rule (McKay

2012; Sandvik 2011). Paradoxically, bureaucrats require discretion in order to follow the rules

because the rigidly executed rule could very possibly be “wrong” (i.e., not in the spirit of the law)

in certain contexts. Managers are keenly aware of this (Satzewich 2015). Such a phenomenon is

captured well by John (2014), who explores “the difference between the aim of the public servant

and the aims of the public” in cases of Freedom of Information (FoI) requests in Scotland. There,

the professional demands of bureaucrats can come into conflict with the stated goals of their

institution (see also Nyqvist 2013, 2015), and bureaucrats go to great pains to weigh the benefit of

access and transparency with the benefits of the state. Blundo (2014) and Hamani (2014) also

demonstrate how informal and improvisational practices of bureaucrats in Senegal and Niger,




7
 The notion is complicated, however, by those who point out the importance of repetitive rule-following (or,
“proceduralism,” as Sharma and Gupta (2006) phrase it) is central to the performance of institutional power.

                                                        12
respectively, enable them and their institutions to navigate competing demands from factions of

the state or society.

        The question that flows from this insight about discretion concerns whether the “personal”

interests or biases of bureaucrats intervene upon bureaucratic decisions. After all, bureaucracies

are embedded within a cultural, political, and economic context. They are not hermetically sealed

off from society (Warner and Low 1976; see also Baba 2009). In scholarly and lay conversation,

the figure of the bureaucrat can sometimes overwhelm the ethnographic reality of bureaucrats’

individual practices and identities of others. Like scientists, they are expected to carry out their

charge with objectivity and political neutrality (Hoag 2011). But it should be no surprise that

bureaucrats have emotions (Graham 2002; Fuglerud 2004) and moral quandaries about who should

get in (Gilboy 1991). Indeed, restating this risks a re-inscription of the ideals of bureaucratic

dispassion. In sum, bureaucrats are people (Lea 2008) and beyond revealing the inadequacy of

their stereotypes, we should accept it as a basic premise. Bureaucrats themselves are members of

that society: they are mothers and brothers and football players (Anders 2010), and they might

move throughout their day from quintessentially “bureaucratic” tasks, such as filling a form, to

“non-bureaucratic” ones, such as driving to the field or heading to lunch. Consider the “young

professionals” described by Mathur (2014) who are part-time employees officially hired by NGOs

to which government work has been outsourced. They wear knock-off brand clothing to work and

do not fit the mold of “civil servant” either in appearance or even contractually.

        Three important volumes from an African context are helpful in this regard, shedding light

on the everyday practices of civil servants, the reappropriations, transformations, and enduring

legacies of colonial civil services, and the question of corruption (Blundo and Olivier de Sardan

2006; Blundo and Le Meur 2009; Bierschenk and Olivier de Sardan 2014). The contributors to


                                                 13
Blundo and Olivier de Sardan (2006) focus specifically on corruption. They seek to complicate a

normative view of corruption, partly in response to long-standing and controversial narratives

about (neo-)patrimonialism in the African state (Medard 1982; Olivier de Sardan 2014), showing

how corrupt practices can be networked into the social practices of the institution and society at

large rather than merely aberrant violation of a specific legal code. They show that networks of

patronage insinuate the state, and that the everyday sociality of the civil service can compel people

to take bribes for fear of being seen as a threat to others in the institution. A strong moral obligation

to share one’s resources with kin, as found in some places in Africa, can also compel bureaucrats

to use their connections to assist others (Anders 2010). Even if one dislikes the “slippery slope” of

seeing corruption for anything less than illegal, the authors make a strong case that a normative

assumption about legality can obscure our view of what actually happens within institutions. The

work also suggests the importance of exploring local conceptions of “institutional success,”

“failure,” and “corruption” when attempting to discern why an institution departs from expected

or desired practice. Along similar lines, the contributors to Blundo and Le Meur (2009) explore

“good governance” by examining what the concept means in specific contexts. That is, rather than

assess whether an institution works, they assess how an institution works: when clients are deemed

to legitimately deserve services, how norms and rules for the workplace are established or

reformed, and how services are concretely rendered. Gerhard Anders (2009), for example, shows

how bureaucrats in the Malawian civil service navigate a complex field of rules and obligations

(e.g., from kin, supervisors, and fellow bureaucrats) in assessing whether an act constitutes

“corruption”, switching continuously from one normative register to another. David Mosse’s study

of development praxis in India (2005), however, shows that the question of whether practices

conform to policies could be backward. The development practitioners featured in his book mostly



                                                   14
labor to produce interpretations of policy in reports that justify their practices ex post facto, fitting

them into fashionable development rubrics, such as “participatory development.”




The Culture of Organizations and the Culture of Reforms
        Inquiry into the culture of organizations has often been linked to an interest in

understanding organizational change and, in particular, why organizations might be resistant to

reforms due to conservative aspects of organizational culture. This section follows this thread

through the literature: How do organizations change? What do we know about how efforts to

reform institutions fare, and how those reforms are understood or received by bureaucrats at

various levels of the hierarchy? How have reforms associated with neoliberalism (i.e., increased

privatization of previously public responsibilities, reductions in budgets and consolidation of

posts) affected the civil service in the developing world, and what factors shape how they have

been received? What do we know about how various management paradigms (e.g., New Public

Management) have shaped the operation of bureaucracies?

        A first point worth making is that the interest among students of organizational culture to

understand how “organizational culture” might complicate reform efforts implies that culture is by

definition conservative and that an organization has only one culture. While it can be used as a

short-hand term for the general habits of people at a bureaucracy, it should be noted that, for

anthropologists, culture is dynamic, contested, and multiple. Some studies that have sought to

discern links between national culture and institutional forms have risked a kind of broad-brush

culturalism (Bayart 2009; Bayart et al. 1999; Chabal and Daloz 1999). A second point is that

reforms themselves are cultural—that is, they entail norms, ways of speaking and interpreting, and

a politics. For example, Peter Fleming (2013) shows that a push to encourage employees to “be

                                                   15
themselves” at work is more than a mundane slogan or a corrective for earlier managerial

approaches that promote overly rigid, Weberian, rational-bureaucratic modes. Such a push to

embrace the “person” of the bureaucrat engages in a particular managerial ideology—a historically

specific corporate culture. Offered as an “opportunity to display real selves (‘warts and all’) in the

realm of work as a moment of freedom” (2013:69), Fleming concludes this may be (or be perceived

as) simply a way to blur the work-life distinction.

        Thirdly, the notion that a reform flounders because of resistant organizational culture also

presumes that a given reform makes sense. Often initiated by the very upper echelons of the civil

service—political appointees who come and go with the political winds (Segatti et al. 2014)—or

by outsiders (regional governance bodies, foreign lenders), reforms can lack the local knowledge

that would make them tractable.8 Ignorant of local context or “supply-driven,” they might be

doomed from the beginning (Moshonas 2014). “Culture-thwarted” reforms also imply that

bureaucrats are conscious of the reform’s existence. In some cases, a civil servant might not even

be aware that reforms are in progress, particularly in institutions that have a history of repeated

reforms (Segatti et al. 2014). Consider this passage by Anders (2010:7):

        From the perspective of individual civil servants, the civil service reform did not constitute
        a grand and comprehensive plan but only one aspect of their daily lives, experienced as
        mundane practices, such as getting one’s pay-check, securing a salary advance or leaving
        work early to take care of private business.


        In the end, what analyses of organizational culture might be after is an understanding of

the ways that history configures how bureaucrats act in the present. Vike’s (2013) analysis of a

municipal social welfare office in Norway shows that the social democratic optimism of the 1950s


8
 In interesting counterpoint, Ilana Feldman (2010) shows that the day-to-day work of administration can be largely
cut off from broader changes. In the case she examines, Palestinian civil servants endure through dramatic socio-
political upheavals simply by attending to the mundane practices of their work, which ultimately provides a stable
foundation for the maintenance of organizational function over time.

                                                        16
in that country was institutionalized in the professional identity and organizational autonomy of

social workers, a legacy that carried through to the present even as it was subdued by an emphasis

on a new set of efficiency-oriented managerial ideals in the 1990s. Egalitarian ideals enshrined in

a strong municipal system upon which the central government came to rely for controlling the

costs of delivered services meant that managerial reforms emanating from the central government

were difficult to implement. In an even more material sense, Deborah Posel (2000) has shown the

legacy of history on the South African civil service through its transition from Apartheid. Under

Apartheid, the civil service was largely used as a tool benefitting whites from rural areas, but at

the transition this situation changed. Huge numbers of white civil servants were retrenched or

offered early retirement to make way for previously disenfranchised groups. But because whites

had held positions of privilege within the system for so long, they also had the majority of the

administrative skills, meaning that many management posts still today are filled by white acting

appointments until suitable non-white candidates can be found or developed.9

        Olivier de Sardan (2009) puts forward a theory of African bureaucracy by examining its

historical construction during the colonial and postcolonial period, contrasted with the rise of

bureaucratic states in Europe. He points out that, whereas the figure of the bureaucrat in Europe is

one who applies a rule with excessive rigidity, in Africa the bureaucrat is more often seen as

capricious and abusive. This, he says, is a product of a specific colonial trajectory. State

bureaucracies in Europe came into being with the advent of principles of citizenship and

democracy, whereas in colonial Africa they developed alongside the despotism and violence of

colonial rule. Colonial state administration was transferred to African civil servants, often those



9
 Similarly, in Lesotho (Khaketla 1971), Malawi (Anders 2010), and elsewhere, the civil service has been a key tool
for political patronage and job creation in the postcolonial period, partly explaining why reforms ushered in by
Bretton Woods institutions were seen as such a threat to some civil servants.

                                                        17
who had previously worked within these despotic administrations and they carried forward the

capriciousness and abusiveness. In counterpoint, however, Hull (2012b) points out that the

“haunting” of the postcolonial present by the colonial past might at times be overstated. Certainly,

at the Capital Development Agency in Islamabad, Pakistan where he conducted field research, the

continuities of colonial administration were overshadowed by the many innovations made during

the postcolonial period, necessitated by new contradictions and demands specific to the time.

       A central object of critique in development studies since the 1990s has been Structural

Adjustment programs, which have been accused of undermining state capacity. Ayee (2001), for

example, shows that a Civil Service Performance Improvement Program in Ghana from 1995

aimed to improve efficiency and service delivery through restructuring, but manifest primarily in

salary restructuring and retrenchments. More recent work in anthropology has sought to

complicate this “easy” narrative of neoliberal process. A special issue of The Cambridge Journal

of Anthropology by Bear and Mathur (2014), for example, sets out to “redefine the public good,”

seeking to harness the power of that concept supposedly at the heart of the civil service for a just

end rather than rule out state bureaucracies as merely tools for the powerful. They contend that a

set of concepts, such as “transparency” and “human rights” have ensnared ordinary people around

the world in bureaucratic practices and have rendered invisible the bureaucracies’ ethical positions.

Their overarching conclusion is that the neoliberal reforms which accompany those concepts do

not simply make bureaucracies more or less effective, but rather “generat[e] new kinds of intimate

relations with the state” (Bear and Mathur 2014: 22). For example, Qureshi (2014) found that the

marketization of an HIV/AIDS health program in Pakistan led the Ministry of Health officials into

uneasy arrangements with outside NGOs, turning their attention to learning how to manage

contracts with these NGOs rather than educate their own employees to carry out the needed tasks.


                                                 18
In short, rather than straightforwardly serving a single political agenda, neoliberal reforms first

and foremost generate new social networks that we know little about.




The Nature of Bureaucratic Knowledge
       While bureaucracies are sometimes portrayed as consummate producers of knowledge,

generating data on the minutiae of their subjects and enabling state surveillance (Foucault 1978;

Scott 1998), the nature of that knowledge has only recently come under serious scrutiny. This

section reviews two aspects of this question: what bureaucrats and states know of their subjects

and how that knowledge is produced or embodied.

       As already noted above, institutions are fragmented: bureaucrats do not know everything

their superiors know and vice versa. The production of knowledge about their subjects—whether

people or things—is similarly open-ended. The anthropological literature on bureaucracy building

off Lipsky (1981) has shown that bureaucrats “streamline” decision-making to render persons

legible, drawing on templates or stereotypes that enable them to make difficult choices; clients, we

learn, play upon, undermine, or attempt to “fit” within these stereotypes (Cabot 2014; Silver 2010;

Ticktin 2006). Bureaucrats’ perceptions of the world are shaped by previous histories of encounter

as well as the structure or conditions of their work. Officials have a more mature or entrenched set

of expectations to graft upon the encounter, having had repeated interaction with subjects in a

single context. This is exemplified by the systems of meaning that they develop to manage the

indeterminacy of that context (Heyman 1995, Hoag 2010), determining a course of action based

on a routinized assessment of the subject (Gilboy 1990; Smith 2016). Satzewich’s (2015:79) study

of immigration officials in Canada quotes one visa officer as saying, “I don’t agonize over

decisions… If you agonize over decisions, this is not the right job for you.” The quote illustrates

                                                19
the conditions under which bureaucratic decisions are made: bureaucrats work under time and

other constraints and, even in relatively consequential roles such as immigration, where a visa

given or denied could have serious ramifications for the client. One manager interviewed at the

same office suggested that the worst kind of visa officer was one who could not make a decision.

         Bureaucrats also seek to protect their organizations from public they might see as

threatening (Hoag 2010)—or, indeed, to promote the well-being of those they are charged with

helping (Lea 2008)—and that bureaucrats can take seriously the notion that they bear the

responsibility of executing the law (Alpes and Spire 2013). While bureaucrats might close

epistemic gaps through routinized practices, surely other gaps emerge when the contradictions of

their decision-making formula begin to surface. Anthropologists would therefore be wise not to

presume that bureaucrats are robotic—not only do they risk drawing on stereotyped notions of

bureaucrats, but they foreclose important ethnographic ground. Moreover, deciding by a formula

does not mean that there is only one formula, nor does it mean that formulae and their origins are

uninteresting (Hoag 2010; Cabot 2012).

         According to modernist depictions of the state as a mechanism for the production of a

legible populace, knowledge is uncovered and leveraged for the purposes of control (Scott 1998).10

Bureaucracy, in such a framing, is the quintessential enterprise for the production of these

statistics. In light of the critique of these monolithic images of the state and organizations

generally, recent work has begun to uncover the roles that ignorance, ambiguity, and

indeterminacy play in shaping bureaucratic practice (Best 2012; Hoag 2014; James 2015; Mathews

2011), as well as the way in which state knowledge might be co-produced (Jasanoff 2004) through


10
  As I have pointed out elsewhere, bureaucratic practice resembles scientific practice (Hoag 2011) and it is therefore
no coincidence that the “modest witness” (Shapin and Schaeffer 1985; Haraway 1997) resembles Weber’s
dispassionate bureaucrat. Efforts to show the ways in which bureaucracies are embroiled with broader social
processes can therefore draw flame from authors in science and technology studies (Longino 1990; Daston 2009).

                                                         20
the negotiated interactions of bureaucrats, publics, technology, and powerful political actors

(Hetherington 2012; Hull 2012b). Andrew Mathews’ (2011; see also Dery 1998) work on Mexican

state forestry programs shows how state knowledge and power is predicated, paradoxically, on the

production of ignorance—knowing what not to know or say. Thedvall (2012) similarly concludes

that it is by withholding and strategically concealing the political content of meetings that

bureaucrats are able to achieve goals in the crafting of EU policy from various national member

states’ interests. In addition, Don Brenneis (2009) has shown how the “objectivity” necessary to

“following the rule” is not necessarily pre-ordained but rather is worked out in practice by a

community of bureaucrats (and possibly others) who together develop acceptable modes of

impartiality to guide their work (see also Hull 2012b on the production of collective agency in

spite of the individualizing tendencies of the stamps and signatures that mark files).

       A related point here has to do with anticipation, or orientation toward the future. Despite

the importance of time to the structuring of bureaucratic worlds, it has been given scant attention

in the literature on bureaucracy, except as simply a resource that nefarious bureaucrats can capture

(Sellerberg 2008; Smart and Smart 2006; Verdery 1996). What are the origins of bureaucracies’

particular temporal regimes? On the one hand, waiting and delays are the inevitable outcomes of

the forms of distributed responsibility inherent in hierarchical organizations. Because authority is

parceled out among various positions within the hierarchy, the greater part of individuals within

the organization – that is, those at lower levels – do not possess the authority to sign off on all of

the tasks they may be presented with (Hull 2012b). Waiting is also potentially the result of local

cultures or practices within bureaucracies – that is, both the laziness commonly accorded

bureaucrats and the deliberate obstruction put to self-serving ends, such as the solicitation of

bribes. Delay can have to do with what Robert K. Merton (1968) called “goal displacement,” the



                                                 21
application of rules for their own sake, without overarching goals in mind. There are many

possibilities that should be better understood. But, as noted above, much of bureaucracy studies

has been focused on the practice—the action. If we were to reorient ourselves according to a

different assumption—that the bulk of bureaucratic time is comprised of waits and not of actions—

what might we see?

       Finally, bureaucratic work is structured materially – not simply by the resources available

in the Marxian sense of materiality—but in the more immediate and mundane sense. Hull’s work

is critical here. Focused on files and other “graphic artifacts,” he shows the importance of looking

at the documents that populate bureaucracies rather than looking through them (see Kafka 2009).

That is, anthropologists have tended to use documents only as discursive, reading the content with

their critical interpretive faculties, but they have seldom stopped to consider what their material

form might say about that content or about bureaucratic practice at large (but see Marie-Jacob

2007). Richard Harper’s (1998) book, as well as work in the sociology of science (Latour 2005,

1998) are significant exceptions. Tracing the “careers” of documents, as he explains it and as Hull

(2012b) shows in great detail, can shed light on hierarchy, bureaucratic processes, bureaucrats’

ideas about the importance of specific practices. As Hull (2012b) points out, so much of

bureaucratic practice is inscribed upon paper that, “if you want to understand bureaucratic

activities, follow the paper” (2012b:22). Harper describes how the transformation of documents

from one form to another has significant implications for how it is understood or whether it is even

read by people at various positions within the organization.




                                                22
Methodological and Ethical Challenges to Studying Institutions
       The trend toward increased attention to everyday bureaucratic practices could be taken as

a delayed response to Laura Nader’s (1972) famous injunction to anthropologists to “study up.”

Nader criticized anthropologists’ neglect to study the “culture of the power” in favor of the culture

of powerless—peasants, workers, etc.—and suggested that an anthropology of the powerful would

challenge colonial tendencies within the discipline. The functionaries of bureaucratic institutions,

however, are not necessarily or straightforwardly “up” (Hoag 2011). While they might occupy

positions of power by virtue of having discretionary authority, the ability to delay, or privileged

knowledge about the bureaucratic process, they are certainly subject to limits. Moreover, they

might be poor or working class (Moshonas 2014); they might be from a racial minority; they might

be women—in sum, the directionality of “studying up” is not always clear. Instead, it would be

better said that anthropologists of bureaucracy study “sideways” or “obliquely” (Garsten and

Nyqvist 2014; Hannerz 2006).

       At any rate, this position still poses challenges to anthropological methods of observation.

Garsten and Nyqvist’s (2013) volume treats many of these issues of method and ethics in great

detail. A first point worth noting is the strange fact that anthropological practice often shares

certain qualities of organizational practice (also see Riles 2006, 2000; Strathern 2006; Brenneis

2006; Hull 2012a, 2012b). George Marcus and Douglas Holmes (Holmes 2012; Holmes and

Marcus 2005; Deeb and Marcus 2011) have proposed a research methodology that embraces this

analytical similarity and attempts to draw upon it by setting up “para-sites”—research settings that

resemble academic spaces and can enable a collaborative process of knowledge making familiar

to both anthropologist and informant. While Deeb and Marcus point to some of the limits of this

method for studying the highest echelons of institutions, as their key informant-cum-collaborator



                                                 23
foreclosed certain avenues of thought based on his own perspectives as to what anthropology was

about. But it could still hold promise for mid-level employees.

       Other, more practical methodological issues can arise, as well. One concerns the

boundaries of the organization. As noted above, institutions should be seen as part of a larger social

context. Should research activities take place strictly within the confines of the work day, or do

researchers also seek to understand the lives of workers outside those confines?

Methodological issues intersect with ethical issues raised by studying bureaucracies, particularly

around questions of access. When access is granted, employees at lower levels in the hierarchy

might understand the terms of access differently from the supervisor, or might perceive that the

supervisor has “commanded” the employee to disclose information. Informing potential

informants of the terms of research will be important, so that people who fear for their jobs do not

feel pressured in one way or another. This is a methodological issue as much as it is an ethical one,

given the ways this granting of access might shape the nature of information given. A second issue

has to do with the fact that research will be taking place during working hours – that is, research

activities might impinge upon the ability of an employee to get his-her work done. These issues

are particularly important at organizations that are under review or under the threat of cuts.

Employees might be familiar with “consultants” from evaluation companies reviewing the

activities, productivity, and organization of the bureaucracy. Employees might perceive a scholarly

researcher as serving such a downsizing agenda and therefore distrust them or tailor answers to

avoid being sacked. That is, researchers’ aims might be misunderstood and information given that

does not advance the aims of the research.

       Finally, anthropologists can also find themselves roped into the work of the organization

under study (Jensen 2013). As with most fieldsites, anthropologists are often seen as experts on



                                                 24
the topic they are studying. This means that anthropologists of the civil service should be prepared

to navigate that issue, which has a bearing on rapport. An outright rejection to provide one’s

opinion can have negative consequences on the research, with informants seeing the anthropologist

as overly secretive. While this is true in all research contexts, lender-funded researchers in complex

organizations must be particularly aware of its implications. Approaches to these issues will surely

vary by the type of organization, but should be thought through beforehand.




Conclusion and Areas for Future Research
       The anthropology of bureaucracy is undergoing a period of expansion and maturation,

opening up new domains of research. Whereas previous work on the state and civil service was

focused either on the symbolic foundations of bureaucracy or the ways that the state was perceived

and discussed by everyday people, the last decade has seen a shift toward understanding how

functionaries of the state perceive and go about their everyday work. Despite the fact that

“bureaucracy” and the civil service have not been key topics for anthropologists until recently, the

foregoing review demonstrates the diversity of approaches and findings. Concern with the

Weberian “ideal type” and its failed realization in practice drew attention to the fragmentation of

states and institutions, calling into question the coherence of purpose that was assumed by earlier

anthropologies of the state, while at the same time illuminating diverging perspectives on the

nature of bureaucratic power. This normative appraisal of whether bureaucratic practices conform

to policies endured, however, partly because the concept of “discretion” served as fertile ground

for anthropologists attuned to the ways that culture and society shape how humans interpret what

is right or wrong, and partly because of enduring interest in the ways that informal practices make

formal policies workable. These social and cultural forces figured prominently in discussions about

                                                 25
institutional reform, which have figured culture to mean “resistance to change” while failing to

account for the cultural aspects of reforms themselves. A new avenue of research has focused on

the nature of bureaucratic knowledge, refusing to take for granted that institutions are merely

engines for surveillance and seeking to describe how indeterminacy, ignorance, and the materiality

of institutional knowledge configure state practices. Finally, methodological and ethical challenges

presented by the anthropology of bureaucracy continue to be discussed and debated.

       There are five key gaps in the literature that demand more research. First, more work is

needed on the significance of various bureaucratic forms. Hull (2012b), for example, has

demonstrated how files, maps, and other documents or documentary practices shed light on aspects

of bureaucratic power and process. This has opened up entirely new territory, compelling

anthropologists to explore these phenomena in other contexts or via other materials, including

databases and other digital platforms. This point applies to other kinds of social forms as well,

such as meetings (Schwartzman 1987; Telesca 2015; Thedvall 2012). With its cultural conventions

surrounding space, temporality, and hierarchy, the meeting is fertile ground for anthropologists.

       A second point, related to the first, regards the spatial and temporal forms of institutions.

As noted above, time is critical to bureaucratic process—both with regard to the sequencing of

protocols (“within 30 days, you must submit…”) and delays—and yet neglected as an object of

inquiry. The production of bureaucratic space, too, has gone relatively unexplored. What kinds of

hierarchy are embedded in the spatial layout of offices? How do bureaucrats relate the movement

of orders and rules to their institution’s organogram? What about when they originate from outside

the organization?




                                                26
       Third, more comparative work is needed to assess how standard concepts or practices travel

across local or cultural contexts, such as Blundo and Le Meur’s (2009) examination of “good

governance.” If concepts are received differently, what is the reason behind that difference?

       Fourth, more work should be done to understand the career trajectories of individual

bureaucrats, including their professional lives before, during and after their time within a particular

public organization. Do patterns in these trajectories exist? If so, in what ways do they shape

bureaucratic operations?

       Finally, cross-hierarchy studies are few. As noted above, anthropologists have mostly

focused on street-level, service-provision bureaucrats—a small subset of bureaucratic workers in

the civil service, which could also include accountants, cleaners, interns, and others in mid- and

upper-level positions. While this review has presented studies focused on middle management,

they are few in number. Even fewer are analyses that take a holistic view of bureaucratic processes

and work across specific “levels” of the organization. Given the fragmentary nature of institutions

described above, this is critical work: How do institutions carry on without falling apart

completely?




                                                  27
     Bibliography
Alpes, Maybritt Jill, and Alexis Spire. 2014. “Dealing with Law in Migration Control The Powers of
     Street-Level Bureaucrats at French Consulates.” Social & Legal Studies 23 (2): 261–74.
Anders, Gerhard. 2005. “Good Governance as Technology: Towards an Ethnography of the Bretton
     Woods Institutions.” In The Aid Effect: Giving and Governing in International Development,
     edited by David Mosse and David Lewis, 37–60. London: Pluto Press.
———. 2008. “The Normativity of Numbers: World Bank and IMF Conditionality.” PoLAR: Political
     and Legal Anthropology Review 31 (2): 187–202.
———. 2009. “Like Chameleons: Civil Servants and Corruption in Malawi.” In The Governance of
     Daily Life in Africa: Ethnographic Explorations of Public and Collective Services, edited by
     Giorgio Blundo and Pierre-Yves Le Meur, 119-142. Leiden: Brill.
———. 2010. In the Shadow of Good Governance: An Ethnography of Civil Service Reform in Africa.
     Brill, Leiden. https://openaccess.leidenuniv.nl/handle/1887/18537.
Ayee, Joseph R. A. 2001. “Civil Service Reform in Ghana: A Case Study of Contemporary Reform
     Problems in Africa.” African Journal of Political Science / Revue Africaine de Science Politique
     6 (1): 1–41.
Baba, Marietta L. 2009. “W. Lloyd Warner and the Anthropology of Institutions: An Approach to the
     Study of Work in Late Capitalism.” Anthropology of Work Review 30 (2): 29–49.
Barnard, Chester. 1938. The Functions of the Executive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bayart, Jean-Franc ̧ ois. 2009. The State in Africa: The Politics of the Belly. Translated by Mary Harper.
     2nd ed. Malden, MA: Polity.
Bayart, Jean-Franc  ̧ ois, Stephen Ellis, and Beatrice Hibou. 1999. The Criminalization of the State in
     Africa. Oxford: James Currey.
Bear, Laura, and Nayanika Mathur. 2015. “Introduction: Remaking the Public Good: A New
     Anthropology of Bureaucracy.” Cambridge Anthropology 33 (1): 18–34.
Bear, Laura. 2015. Navigating Austerity: Currents of Debt Along a South Asian River. Stanford, CA:
     Stanford University Press.
Bernstein, Anya, and Elizabeth Mertz. 2011. “Introduction Bureaucracy: Ethnography of the State in
     Everyday Life.” PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review 34 (1): 6–10.
Best, Jacqueline. 2012. “Bureaucratic Ambiguity.” Economy and Society 41 (1): 84–106.
Bierschenk, Thomas. 2014. “Sedimentation, Fragmentation and Normative Double-Binds in (West)
     African Public Services.” In States at Work: Dynamics of African Bureaucracies, edited by
     Thomas Bierschenk and Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan, 221-247. Leiden: Brill.
Bierschenk, Thomas, and Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan. 2014a. “Ethnographies of Public Services in
     Africa: An Emerging Research Paradigm.” In States at Work: Dynamics of African Bureaucracies,
     edited by Thomas Bierschenk and Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan, 35–65. Leiden: Brill.
Bierschenk, Thomas, and Jean-Pierre Olivier de Olivier de Sardan, eds. 2014b. States at Work:
     Dynamics of African Bureaucracies. Leiden: Brill.
Blau, Peter. 1955. The Dynamics of Bureaucracy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Blundo, Giorgio. 2014. “Seeing Like a State Agent: The Ethnography of Reform in Senegal’s Forestry
     Services.” In States at Work: Dynamics of African Bureaucracies, edited by Thomas Bierschenk
     and Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan, 69–90. Leiden: Brill.
Blundo, Giorgio, and Pierre-Yves Le Meur, eds. 2009. The Governance of Daily Life in Africa:
     Ethnographic Explorations of Public and Collective Services. Leiden: Brill.
Blundo, Giorgio, and Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan, eds. 2006. Everyday Corruption and the State:
     Citizens and Public Officials in Africa. London: Zed Books.

                                                      28
Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Susan Leigh Star. 1999. Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its
     Consequences. Boston, MA: The MIT Press.
Brenneis, Donald. 1994. “Discourse and Discipline at the National Research Council: A Bureaucratic
     Bildungsroman.” Cultural Anthropology 9 (1): 23–36.
———. 1999. “New Lexicon, Old Language: Negotiating the ‘Global’ at the National Science
     Foundation.” In Critical Anthropology Now: Unexpected Contexts, Shifting Constituencies,
     Changing Agendas, edited by George E. Marcus, 123–46. Santa Fe, NM: School for Advanced
     Research.
Burawoy, Michael. 1979. “The Anthropology of Industrial Work.” Annual Review of Anthropology 8
     (January): 231–66.
Cabot, Heath. 2014. On the Doorstep of Europe: Asylum and Citizenship in Greece. Philadelphia:
     University of Pennsylvania Press.
Callon, Michel. 1986. “Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: Domestication of the Scallops
     and the Fishermen of St. Brieuc Bay.” In Power, Action and Belief: A New Sociology of
     Knowledge?, edited by John Law, 196–223. London: Routledge.
Carr, E. Summerson. 2010. “Enactments of Expertise.” Annual Review of Anthropology 39: 17–32.
Chabal, Patrick, and Jean-Pascal Daloz. 1999. Africa Works: Disorder as Political Instrument. London:
     James Currey.
Chalfin, Brenda. 2010. Neoliberal Frontiers: An Ethnography of Sovereignty in West Africa. Chicago,
     IL: University of Chicago Press.
Choy, Timothy K. 2011. Ecologies of Comparison: An Ethnography of Endangerment in Hong Kong.
     Experimental Futures : Technological Lives, Scientific Arts, Anthropological Voices. Durham,
     NC: Duke University Press.
Crozier, Michel. 1964. The Bureaucratic Phenomenon. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Das, Veena, and Deborah Poole, eds. 2004. Anthropology in the Margins of the State. Santa Fe, NM:
     School for Advanced Research.
Daston, Lorraine. 1992. “Objectivity and the Escape from Perspective.” In The Science Studies Reader,
     edited by Mario Biagioli, 110–23. New York, NY: Routledge.
de Sardan, Jean-Pierre Olivier. 2014. “Abandoning the Neo-Patrimonialist Paradigm.” The Politics of
     Governance: Actors and Articulations in Africa and Beyond 3: 75.
Deeb, Hadi Nicholas, and George E Marcus. 2011. “In the Green Room: An Experiment in
     Ethnographic Method at the WTO.” PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review 34 (1): 51–
     76. Dery, David. 1998. “‘Papereality’ and Learning in Bureaucratic Organizations.”
     Administration & Society 29 (6): 677–89.
Escobar, Arturo. 1994. Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World.
     Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Feldman, Ilana. 2008. Governing Gaza: Bureaucracy, Authority, and the Work of Rule, 1917-1967.
     Chapel Hill, NC: Duke University Press.
Ferguson, James, and Akhil Gupta. 2002. “Spatializing States: Toward an Ethnography of Neoliberal
     Governmentality.” American Ethnologist 29 (4): 981–1002.
Fleming, Peter. 2013. “When Life Goes to Work: Authenticity and Managerial Control in the
     Contemporary Firm.” In Organisational Anthropology: Doing Ethnography in and Among
     Complex Organisations, edited by Christina Garsten and Anette Nyqvist, 58-71. London: Pluto
     Press.
Fuglerud, Oivind. 2004. “Constructing Exclusion: The Micro‐Sociology of an Immigration
     Department.” Social Anthropology 12 (1): 25–40.

                                                   29
Garsten, Christina, and Anette Nyqvist, eds. 2013. Organisational Anthropology: Doing Ethnography
    in and among Complex Organisations. London: Pluto Press.
Gilboy, Janet A. 1991. “Deciding Who Gets In: Decision-Making by Immigration Inspectors.” Law &
    Society Review 25 (3): 571–99.
Gouldner, Alvin. 1954. Patterns of Industrial Bureaucracy. New York, NY: Free Press.
Graham, Mark. 2002. “Emotional Bureaucracies: Emotions Civil Servants, and Immigrants in the
    Swedish Welfare State.” Ethos 30 (3): 199–226.
Gupta, Akhil. 1995. “Blurred Boundaries: The Discourse of Corruption, the Culture of Politics, and the
    Imagined State.” American Ethnologist 22 (2): 375–402.
———. 2012. Red Tape: Bureaucracy, Structural Violence, and Poverty in India. Durham, NC: Duke
    University Press.
Hamani, Oumarou. 2014. “‘We Make Do and Keep Going!’ Inventive Practices and Ordered
    Informality in the Functioning of the District Courts in Niamey and Zinder (Niger).” In States at
    Work: Dynamics of African Bureaucracies, edited by Thomas Bierschenk and Jean-Pierre Olivier
    de Sardan, 145–74. Leiden: Brill.
Handelman, Don. 1981. “The Idea of Bureaucratic Organization.” Social Analysis 5: 5–23.
Hannerz, Ulf. 2007. “Studying Down, Up, Sideways, Through, Backwards, Forwards, Away and at
    Home: Expansive Discipline.” In Locating the Field: Space, Place and Context in Anthropology,
    edited by Peter Collins and Simon Coleman. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Hansen, Thomas Blum, and Finn Stepputat. 2001. “Introduction: States of Imagination.” In States of
    Imagination: Ethnographic Explorations of the Postcolonial State, edited by Thomas Blum
    Hansen and Finn Stepputat, 1–38. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Haraway, Donna. 1989. Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the World of Modern Science.
    New York, NY: Routledge.
Haraway,                         Donna                          Jeanne.                         1997.
    Modest−Witness@Second−Millennium.FemaleMan−Meets−OncoMouse:                   Feminism        and
    Technoscience. New York, NY: Routledge.
Harper, Richard H.R. 1998. Inside the IMF: An Ethnography of Documents, Technology and
    Organisational Action. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Herzfeld, Michael. 1992. The Social Production of Indifference: Exploring the Symbolic Roots of
    Western Bureaucracy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
———. 2005. “Political Optics and the Occlusion of Intimate Knowledge.” American Anthropologist
    107 (3): 369–76.
Hetherington, Kregg. 2011. Guerrilla Auditors: The Politics of Transparency in Neoliberal Paraguay.
    Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Heyman, Josiah. 2012. “Deepening the Anthropology of Bureaucracy.” Anthropological Quarterly 85
    (4): 1269–77.
Heyman, Josiah McC. 1995. “Putting Power in the Anthropology of Bureaucracy: The Immigration and
    Naturalization Service at the Mexico-United States Border.” Current Anthropology 36 (2): 261–
    87.
———. 2004. “The Anthropology of Power-Wielding Bureaucracies.” Human Organization 63 (4):
    487–500.
Hoag, Colin. 2010. “The Magic of the Populace: An Ethnography of Illegibility in the South African
    Immigration Bureaucracy.” PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review 33 (1): 6–25.
———. 2011. “Assembling Partial Perspectives: Thoughts on the Anthropology of Bureaucracy.”
    PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review 34 (1): 81–94.


                                                    30
———. 2014. “Dereliction at the South African Department of Home Affairs: Time for the
     Anthropology of Bureaucracy.” Critique of Anthropology 34 (4): 410–28.
Hull, Matthew S. 2012. “Documents and Bureaucracy.” Annual Review of Anthropology 41 (1): 251–
     67.
———.2012b. Government of Paper: The Materiality of Bureaucracy in Urban Pakistan. Berkeley,
     CA: University of California Press.
Hunter, Caroline, Joanne Bretherton, Simon Halliday, and Sarah Johnsen. 2016. “Legal Compliance in
     Street-Level Bureaucracy: A Study of UK Housing Officers.” Law & Policy 38 (1): 81–95.
Jacob, Marie‐Andrée. 2007. “Form‐Made Persons: Consent Forms as Consent’s Blind Spot.” PoLAR:
     Political and Legal Anthropology Review 30 (2): 249–68.
James, Erica Caple. 2012. “Witchcraft, Bureaucraft, and the Social Life of (Us)aid in Haiti.” Cultural
     Anthropology 27 (1): 50–75. Jasanoff, Sheila, ed. 2004. States of Knowledge: The Co-Production
     of Science and Social Order. London: Routledge.
Jensen, Jacob Krause. 2013. “Counter-Espionage: Fieldwork among Culture Experts in Bang &
     Olufsen.” In Organisational Anthropology: Doing Ethnography in and Among Complex
     Organisations, edited by Christina Garsten and Anette Nyqvist, 43-57. London: Pluto Press.
John, Gemma. 2015. “Ways of Knowing: Freedom of Information, Access to Persons and ‘Flexible’
     Bureaucracy in Scotland.” Cambridge Anthropology 33 (1): 65–80.
Kafka, Ben. 2009. “Paperwork: The State of the Discipline.” Book History 12 (1): 340–53.
Kafka, Franz. 1948. The Great Wall of China: Stories and Reflections. Translated by Willa Muir and
     Edwin Muir. New York, NY: Schocken.
———. 1993. “Before the Law.” In Franz Kafka: Collected Stories, 173–75. New York, NY:
     Everyman’s Library.
———. 1998. The Castle. Translated by Mark Harman. New York, NY: Schocken Books.
Khaketla, B. Makalo. 1972. Lesotho, 1970: An African Coup under the Microscope. Berkeley, CA:
     University of California Press.
Latour, Bruno. 1987. Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society.
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1999. Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
     University Press.
———. 2005. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press.
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. 1979. Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Scientific Facts.
     Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Lea, Tess. 2008. Bureaucrats and Bleeding Hearts: Indigenous Health in Northern Australia. UNSW
     Press.
———. 2012. “When Looking for Anarchy, Look to the State: Fantasies of Regulation in Forcing
     Disorder within the Australian Indigenous Estate.” Critique of Anthropology 32 (2): 109–24.
Lederman, Rena. 2006. “The Perils of Working at Home: IRB ‘Mission Creep’ as Context and Content
     for an Ethnography of Disciplinary Knowledges.” American Ethnologist 33 (4): 482–91.
Lipsky, Michael. 1980. Street-Level Bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the Individual in Public Services. New
     York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Longino, Helen E. 1990. Science as Social Knowledge: Values and Objectivity in Scientific Inquiry.
     Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. 1999. The Communist Manifesto. Boston, MA: St. Martin’s Press.



                                                    31
Mathews, Andrew S. 2011. Instituting Nature: Authority, Expertise, and Power in Mexican Forests.
     Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Mathur, Nayanika. 2012. “Transparent-Making Documents and the Crisis of Implementation: A Rural
     Employment Law and Development Bureaucracy in India.” PoLAR: Political and Legal
     Anthropology Review 35 (2): 167–85.
———. 2015. Paper Tiger: Law, Bureaucracy and the Developmental State in Himalayan India.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McKay, Ramah. 2012. “Documentary Disorders: Managing Medical Multiplicity in Maputo,
     Mozambique.” American Ethnologist 39 (3): 545–61.
Merton, Robert K. 1968. Social Structure and Social Theory. New York, NY: Free Press.
Mitchell, Timothy. 1999. “Society, Economy, and the State Effect.” In State/Culture: State-Formation
     after the Cultural Turn, edited by George Steinmetz, 76–97. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Moshonas, Stylianos. 2014. “The Politics of Civil Service Reform in the Democratic Republic of
     Congo.” The Journal of Modern African Studies 52 (2): 251–76.
Mosse, David. 2005. Cultivating Development: An Ethnography of Aid Policy and Practice. New York,
     NY: Pluto Press.
Nader, Laura. 1972. “Up the Anthropologist—Perspectives Gained from Studying Up.” In Reinventing
     Anthropology, edited by Dell Hymes, 284–311. New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Nyqvist, Anette. 2013. “Access to All Stages?: Studying through Policy in a Culture of Accessibility.”
     In Organisational Anthropology: Doing Ethnography in and Among Complex Organisations,
     edited by Christina Garsten and Anette Nyqvist, 91-105. London: Pluto Press.
———. 2015. “Insecurity in an Orange Envelope: National Pension System Reform in Sweden.”
     PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review 38 (2): 265–78.
Olivier de Sardan, Jean-Pierre. 2009. “State Bureaucracy and Governance in Francophone West Africa:
     An Empirical Diagnosis and Historical Perspective.” In The Governance of Daily Life in Africa:
     Ethnographic Explorations of Public and Collective Services, edited by Giorgio Blundo and
     Pierre-Yves Le Meur, 39–72. London: Brill.
———. 2015. “Practical Norms: Informal Regulations within Public Bureaucracies (in Africa and
     Beyond).” Real Governance and Practical Norms in Sub-Saharan Africa. London: Routledge.
Perrow, Charles. 1986. Complex Organizations: A Critical Essay. 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw
     Hill.
Posel, Deborah. 1999. “Whiteness and Power in the South African Civil Service: Paradoxes of the
     Apartheid State.” Journal of Southern African Studies 25 (1): 99–119.
Qureshi, Ayaz. 2015. “The Marketization of HIV/AIDS Governance: Public–Private Partnerships and
     Bureaucratic Culture in Pakistan.” Cambridge Anthropology 33 (1): 35–48.
Riles, Annelise. 2000. The Network Inside Out. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
———. 2006. Documents: Artifacts of Modern Knowledge. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
     Press.
Robbins, Paul. 2000. “The Practical Politics of Knowing: State Environmental Knowledge and Local
     Political Economy.” Economic Geography 76 (2): 126–44.
Rottenburg, Richard. 2009. Far-Fetched Facts: A Parable of Development Aid. Translated by Allison
     Brown and Tom Lampert. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sandvik, Kristin Bergtora. 2011. “Blurring Boundaries: Refugee Resettlement in Kampala—between
     the Formal, the Informal, and the Illegal.” PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review 34
     (1): 11–32. d



                                                    32
Satzewich, Vic. 2015. Points of Entry: How Canada’s Immigration Officers Decide Who Gets in.
      Vancouver: UBC Press.
Scherz, China. 2011. “Protecting Children, Preserving Families: Moral Conflict and Actuarial Science
      in a Problem of Contemporary Governance.” PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review
      34 (1): 33–50.
Schwartzman, Helen B. 1987. “The Significance of Meetings in an American Mental Health Center.”
      American Ethnologist 14 (2): 271–294.
Segatti, Aurelia, Colin Hoag, and Darshan Vigneswaran. 2012. “Can Organisations Learn without
      Political Leadership? The Case of Public Sector Reform among South African Home Affairs
      Officials.” Politique Africaine 128: 121–42.
Sellerberg, Ann-Mari. 2008. “Waiting and Rejection: An Organizational Perspective.” Time & Society
      17 (2–3): 349–62.
Selznick, Philip. 1949. TVA and the Grass Roots: A Study of the Sociology of Formal Organizations.
      Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1985. Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle and the
      Experimental Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sharma, Aradhana, and Akhil Gupta. 2009. The Anthropology of the State: A Reader. John Wiley &
      Sons.
Silver, Lauren J. 2010. “Spaces of Encounter: Public Bureaucracy and the Making of Client Identities.”
      Ethos 38 (3): 275–96.
Smart, Alan, and Josephine Smart. 2008. “Time-Space Punctuation: Hong Kong’s Border Regime and
      Limits on Mobility.” Pacific Affairs 81 (2): 175–93.
Smith, Sarah A. 2016. “Migrant Encounters in the Clinic: Bureaucratic, Biomedical, and Community
      Influences on Patient Interactions with Front-Line Workers.” Social Science & Medicine 150
      (February): 49–56.
Star, Susan Leigh, and James R. Griesemer. 1989. “Institutional Ecology, `Translations’ and Boundary
      Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39.”
      Social Studies of Science 19 (3): 387–420.
Strathern, Marilyn, ed. 2000. Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in Accountability, Ethics and the
      Academy. New York, NY: Routledge.
Taussig, Michael. 1997. The Magic of the State. New York, NY: Routledge.
Telesca, Jennifer E. 2015. “Consensus for Whom? Gaming the Market for Atlantic Bluefin Tuna
      through the Empire of Bureaucracy.” Cambridge Anthropology 33 (1): 49–64.
Thedvall, Renita. 2013. “Punctuated Entries: Doing Fieldwork in Policy Meetings in the EU.” In
      Organisational Anthropology: Doing Ethnography in and Among Complex Organisations, edited
      by Christina Garsten and Anette Nyqvist. London: Pluto Press.
Ticktin, Miriam. 2006. “Where Ethics and Politics Meet.” American Ethnologist 33 (1): 33–49.
Trouillot, Michel Rolph. 2003. Global Transformations: Anthropology and the Modern World. New
      York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Verdery, Katherine. 1996. What Was Socialism, and What Comes Next? Princeton, NJ: Princeton
      University Press.
Vike, Halvard. 2013. “The Instrumental Gaze: The Case of Public Sector Reorganisation.” In
      Organisational Anthropology: Doing Ethnography in and Among Complex Organisations, edited
      by Christina Garsten and Anette Nyqvist, 120-137. London: Pluto Press.
Warner, William Lloyd, and Josiah Orne Low. 1976. The Social System of the Modern Factory: The
      Strike: A Social Analysis. Vol. 4. New York: Greenwood Press.


                                                    33
Weber, Max. 1946. “Bureaucracy.” In From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, edited by H.H. Gerth
    and C. Wright Mills, 196–244. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Willott, Chris. 2014. “Factionalisim and Staff Success in a Nigerian University: A Departmental Case
    Study.” In States at Work: Dynamics of African Bureaucracies, edited by Thomas Bierschenk and
    Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan, 91–112. Leiden: Brill.




                                                   34
Bureaucracy Lab | Literature Review of Anthropological Literature on Bureaucracy
A product of the Strengthening Research on the Civil Service Initiative

This literature review aims to describe the anthropological literature on the civil service. It was
put together by academic anthropologists under the auspices of the Strengthening Research in
the Civil Service initiative (SRCS). The SRCS aims to develop the evidence base for public
sector reform by understanding the characteristics of public officials and the systems and
organizations in which they work. The project will develop improved methods of data
collection and analysis on the civil service, based on a complementary set of quantitative and
qualitative approaches. The Bureaucracy Lab is an initiative of the World Bank to bring
together its work on the design and operation of public sector organizations.

For further information on these initiatives, please contact                     Zahid    Hasnain
(zhasnain@worldbank.org), Daniel Rogger (drogger@worldbank.org).




                                                  35
