                                                   WPS8017


Policy Research Working Paper                     8017




         Gender-Neutral Inheritance Laws,
       Family Structure, and Women’s Status
                     in India
                              Sulagna Mookerjee




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8017


  Abstract
 This paper examines whether economic empowerment                                   this can be driven by a shift in the family structure from
 of women improves their autonomy within their marital                              traditional joint families to nuclear households. Such
 household, and investigates the mechanism, by exploiting                           a change is consistent both with the increase in wom-
 variation from a legal reform aimed at improving wom-                              en’s decision-making authority, which they can exert to
 en’s inheritance rights in India. Results suggest that the                         move out of the joint household, as well as with men’s
 reform increased women’s participation in decision-making                          incentives, since men have weaker financial links with
 but at the expense of the older generation of household                            their parents post-reform. Second, even within joint fam-
 members and not at the expense of their husbands. Two                              ilies, the amendments empowered young couples at the
 channels are proposed to explain this phenomenon. First,                           expense of the older generation of household members.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author
  may be contacted at sulagna.mookerjee@georgetown.edu.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
 Gender-Neutral Inheritance Laws, Family Structure, and
               Women’s Status in India
                           Sulagna Mookerjee*




JEL Classification: J12, J16, K11, O12
Keywords: Inheritance, Women Welfare, Family Economics, Intrahousehold
Bargaining




*Sulagna Mookerjee is an Assistant Professor of Economics at Georgetown
University School of Foreign Service in Qatar; her email address is
sulagna.mookerjee@georgetown.edu. The author is grateful to the editor, two
anonymous referees, Joshua Kinsler, Gregorio Caetano, Neşe Yildiz, Umair
Khalil, and David Slichter for their insightful comments and feedback.
Women’s health, education, autonomy, and economic outcomes have been a major
concern for policymakers in India over the past few decades (Das Gupta and Bhat
1997, Kingdon 2002, Borooah 2004). Beyond the intrinsic importance of
guaranteeing women basic human rights, it is widely believed that social rights and
economic independence among women leads to other desirable outcomes, such as
higher economic productivity, and improved health status and educational attainment
for children (Qian 2008, Luke and Munshi 2011, Chattopadhyay and Duflo 2004,
Duflo 2012). To the extent that women’s social status is tied to their financial worth,
gender-neutral employment and asset ownership rights are key to improving their
socioeconomic outcomes. Property and inheritance laws are of particular consequence
in a predominantly rural society like India, since they crucially determine access to
land, the primary source of wealth and opportunities for productive activities (Mearns
1999, Roy and Tisdell 2002). Moreover, cultural conservatism often makes it difficult
for married women to participate in the labor market, thereby making them extremely
reliant on gifts and bequests received from their natal families to increase their net
worth in their marital households.
    A long-standing and widely prevalent cultural institution in India, in fact, results
in a particularly weak bargaining position for young women in their marital
households. For generations, the most common family type has been a ‘joint’ family
where men reside with their parents and extended family in the same household, and
women move into their husband’s home post-marriage. These family elders are
important decision-making agents in a joint family setup (Anderson and Eswaran
2009, Sen et al. 2006). Therefore, any policy that seeks to strengthen women’s status
within their marital households must be able to improve their bargaining positions not
only with respect to their husbands but also with respect to the other members of the
husband’s family such as his parents. A potential way of achieving this would be to
contribute to the recent trend1 toward smaller ‘nuclear’ families consisting of just the
couple and their children, thereby eliminating the possibility of the extended family
playing dominant decision-making roles in the household.
    This paper shows that a reform aimed at increasing women’s inheritance
succeeded in improving their autonomy in their marital households, precisely by


     1. Allendorf (2013) documents that there has been an increasing trend toward nuclear households
in recent years.

                                                 2
precipitating a shift in family structure from joint families to nuclear households.
Between 1976 and 1994, five states in India amended their inheritance laws to
eliminate existing gender discrepancies such that men and women were treated
equally.2 I exploit the spatial and time variation in the implementation of these
amendments to examine the effect of gender-neutral inheritance laws on the
autonomy of married women, and the mechanism through which this effect occurs. I
show that the reform led to a significant improvement in women’s autonomy; treated
women are significantly more likely to have a say in household decisions and to visit
health clinics and markets without requiring permission or escorts, by about three
percentage points. This is similar in spirit to Roy (2008) and Heath and Tan (2014)3
and consistent with their results. However, my paper differs in the interpretation of
these results by providing an insight into the actual dynamics of intrahousehold
bargaining. Contrary to previous literature that has typically interpreted changes in
women’s autonomy in the context of a spousal bargaining model (Maitra 2004,
Lancaster et al. 2006, Heath and Tan 2014), I show that the husbands of the women
exposed to the reform also have higher participation in decision-making; instead, a
significant reduction in bargaining power seems to occur for the other members of the
marital household, typically the husband’s parents. Crucially, a robustness check
performed on women belonging to the religious groups excluded from the purview of
the reform shows no such effect for them while a placebo test supports my
identification strategy—I find no evidence of differential trends in outcomes across
reform and non-reform states, prior to the amendments. Thus, I demonstrate that a
policy originally intended to transfer resources from men to women has, in fact,
resulted in an intergenerational transfer of decision-making authority within the
household because of the family structure prevailing in the Indian context.
    I provide evidence for two channels through which such intergenerational transfer
of autonomy occurs. First, in joint families, the potential increase in the wife’s wealth
post-reform could have shifted bargaining power from the older household members
to the couple. Second, the reform might have resulted in a shift in the prevailing
family structure itself, from joint to nuclear households—this would be in line with


    2. Both central and state governments have legislative authority over inheritance laws in India.
    3. While Roy (2008) discusses variables related to freedom of movement only, I also focus on
outcomes denoting participation in decision-making. Heath and Tan (2014) also perform a similar
analysis but primarily focus on labor-force participation. Harari (2014) studies a similar question in the
context of Kenya.

                                                    3
the findings of Luke and Munshi (2011), which documents that a relative increase in
women’s income can loosen ties with ancestral families. A nuclear household setup
being more conducive to women exerting authority and making decisions relatively
early in their marriage, such a switch would lead to higher autonomy for women.
Interestingly, this shift can occur through the effect of the reform on both the wife’s
and the husband’s inheritance. The potential increase in the wife’s inheritance can
either empower her enough to demand to split away from the joint marital home or
give the couple the financial resources to set up their own household. Additionally,
since men now face the likelihood of a decline in the share of property that they
inherit from their family, their incentives to stay on with the extended family might be
reduced. Supporting this hypothesis, I show that there was indeed a shift in family
structure from joint to nuclear households following the amendment, among couples
married post-reform. Part of this switch seems to be driven precisely by those men
whose share of family income is adversely affected by the reform. Moreover, even
among couples residing in joint households, both husbands’ and wives’ autonomy
increase post reform. This demonstrates that, given the prevailing social structure, it is
crucial to account for the presence of the extended family as decision-making agents
when analyzing intrahousehold bargaining in the Indian context.
   In the light of prior research showing that mothers’ status in joint families
crucially impacts the health of their children (Coffey et al., 2015), this finding
suggests that the reform could have major positive repercussions within joint
households beyond improving women’s decision-making authority. However, women
seem to have become more likely to decide on household matters jointly with their
husbands rather than on their own, making it hard to assess the welfare implications.
The reform has indeed improved women’s autonomy, but one needs to exercise
caution while interpreting this as an overall welfare improvement, since part of the
effect of the reform on autonomy is driven through the switch away from joint
families which have important benefits of their own.




                        I. BACKGROUND OF INHERITANCE LAWS

Inheritance rights in India for Hindus, Sikhs, Budhists, and Jains (henceforth referred
to as Hindus only for brevity) were governed by the Hindu Succession Law since


                                            4
1956. It made a distinction4 between joint family property (ancestral property or any
property or assets held jointly by the extended family, e.g., land) and individual
property (anything acquired by an individual on his own within his lifetime).
Daughters had equal rights to their father’s individual property once a Hindu male
died intestate (i.e., without a will), but they did not have rights to the joint family
property. Sons, however, enjoyed a right to joint family property by birth and were
regarded as belonging to the “Hindu coparcenary.” Being coparceners implied that
their share of the property could not be willed away, and they alone could demand a
division of the ancestral property while older coparceners were alive. Since the
proportion of people in India who died without making a will is very high, 5 most of
the property settlements were made in accordance with the HSA, and women ended
up inheriting significantly less than men, if at all. In a report on the property rights of
women from May 2000, the Law Commission on India states that “Discrimination
against women is so pervasive that it sometimes surfaces on a bare perusal of the law
made by legislature itself. This is particularly so in relation to laws governing the
inheritance/succession of property amongst the members of a Joint Hindu family.”.
    In order to eliminate this gender inequality inherent in the HSA, five states
amended the law such that the daughter of a coparcener too would become a
coparcener by birth thereby placing daughters on an equal footing with sons. The
amendment was passed by Kerala in 1976, Andhra Pradesh in 1986, Tamil Nadu in
1989, and Maharashtra and Karnataka in 1994.6 Interestingly, the amendments
applied only to women who were unmarried at the time that they were implemented.
The HSA was amended nationwide in 2005 in the same spirit as those in the
aforementioned states.7
    The importance of the policy has made it a popular topic of research. Firstly, some
researchers have looked into whether it actually resulted in an increase in inheritance
for women. Deininger, Goyal, and Nagarajan (2013) and Deininger et al. (2013)


     4. The inheritance laws in India were state-specific, and there were two main schools of law—the
Mitakshara and the Dayabhaga. This distinction was made by Mitakshara, which prevailed in most of
the country but not by Dayabhaga, which prevailed in Bengal and Assam and treated all property as
individual property (Agarwal 1994, Roy 2008).
     5. Deininger, Goyal, and Nagarajan (2013) cites this proportion to be 65%.
     6. The state of Kerala differed from the other states in the sense that it abolished the joint family
property system altogether in favor of every family member holding individual shares. The results are
robust to removing Kerala from the sample. Appendix table S.1 shows these results.
     7. My results are unchanged if I eliminate women married post-2005 from the sample. These
results are reported in table S.1.

                                                    5
establish that the amendment significantly increased women’s likelihood to inherit in
both rural and urban settings.8 A second set of papers examine the effect of this law
on a range of women’s outcomes such as freedom of movement (Roy 2008),
education (Roy 2015, Deininger, Goyal, and Nagarajan 2013), labor force
participation (Heath and Tan 2014), domestic abuse (Amaral 2014), female child
mortality (Rosenblum 2015), and marital conflict (Anderson and Genicot 2015). I
contribute to this second strand by providing the first insight into the mechanism
through which the reform affects the actual bargaining dynamics within the
household, which is crucial for policy recommendations. I also add to the literature on
decision-making within the extended family, which particularly underscores the
importance of intergenerational bargaining (Bertrand et al. 2003, Coffey et al. 2015,
Debnath 2015).




                                 II. EMPIRICAL SPECIFICATIONS

In this section, I outline my empirical models.9 My identification strategy exploits the
fact that the reform applied only to those women in reform states who were married
after the amendment was implemented and only to Hindu women. An interesting
feature of these state amendments is that they were often implemented
retrospectively.10 This helps allay endogeneity concerns such as potential selection in
the timing of marriage; as long as women were not married at the time that the law
was deemed to have come into effect, they would be exposed to the reform
irrespective of whether they had purposely delayed their marriage to occur after the
act was passed.11

                                      Primary Specification

Let yist be an outcome variable for woman i in state s married in year t. I discuss my
outcome variables explicitly in the next section, but as an example, yist takes the value

     8. In contrast, Roy (2015) finds that inheritance for women does not go up but that dowry
increases.
     9. I explain the specifications in the context of the overall effect of the reform on autonomy, but
the specifications used in the subsequent investigation of the channels for such effects are identical.
     10. For instance, in Andhra Pradesh the act received the assent of the President and was formally
passed in May 1986 but was deemed to have come into effect from September 1985.

      11. As evident from appendix table S.5, my results are not driven by women married within the
first few years after the implementation of the reform.

                                                   6
1 if woman i reports being allowed to go to the market alone or having a say in major
purchase decisions in her household, and 0 otherwise (i.e., in case she reports negative
outcomes). Let St be a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if a woman belongs to
one of the reform states, and Aft be a dummy for whether she was married after the
amendment took place in her state.12 So, Aft * St takes the value 1 if a woman lives in
a reform state and has been married after the reform, and 0 otherwise. Since I do not
observe where the respondents were born, I assume that the state of residence is the
same as the state of birth, and property rights are therefore governed by the law
existing in her state of residence.13 The primary econometric model that I estimate is

yist   0  1 Aft * Stist   2 X ist   s   t   ist       (1)

where αs is a state-fixed effect, αt is a year-of-marriage fixed effect (to capture cohort
effects), and Xist is a set of controls that includes age and education level of the
women, caste, and a dummy variable for residence in a rural area.
    I estimate this difference-in-difference model separately for Hindus and non-
Hindus, since the reform is relevant only for Hindus. My coefficient of interest is β1,
which captures the additional ‘benefit’ of being exposed to the reform, comparing
women who were married before and after the law change in the reform states with
those in non-reform states who have been married for the same number of years. It is
expected to be positive and significant for the Hindu women, and insignificantly
different from zero for the non-Hindu women.
    The difference-in-difference model is my primary specification, but I also
estimate a triple-difference specification for the entire sample, the additional
difference arising from a comparison of Hindu women with their non-Hindu
counterparts. The implicit assumption here is that any state-cohort-specific trend
should affect both religious groups in the same way. The model is

Yist   0   1 Aft * St * H ist   2 Aft * Stist   3 St * H ist   4 Aft * H ist
                                                                                          (2)
          5 H ist   6 X ist   s   t   ist



     12. .Aft is 0 by definition for women in the non-reform states.
     13. There are substantial linguistic barriers to cross-state migration in India—almost every state
has its own language. My results are unchanged if I control for the native language of the respondent as
presented in appendix table S.2. I also perform a robustness check by restricting my sample to non-
migrants, and find qualitatively similar results. This is also supported by Rosenzweig and Stark (1989),
which reports that most female migration in India happens only as a result of marriage.

                                                              7
where H is a dummy variable for being Hindu, and the coefficient of interest in this
specification is γ1.

                                                     Placebo Test

In order to ensure that I am not picking up a spurious effect, I run a falsification test
where I estimate the model assuming the reform took place earlier than it actually did.
                                                   
I estimate a specification similar to (1), but Aftist is now a dummy variable taking the

value 1 if a woman lives in the reform state s and has been married after the year
d   , where d is the year the reform actually took place in state s (i.e., t  d   ), and
0 otherwise. The model is


Yist   0  1 Aft  * Stist   2 X ist   s   t   ist       (3)

This is estimated off the subsample of women not actually exposed to the reform so

that neither the treatment group nor the control group in this specification is actually

treated. For additional robustness, I estimate this specification multiple times for all τ

from one to ten. This placebo test addresses the remaining threat to identification: that

the state-cohort trends are different across the reform and non-reform states and for

the two religious groups. For instance, one might argue that the relevant religious

groups in the reform states always had a more progressive attitude toward women,

which was why they introduced the amendment in the first place, which would imply

that the coefficient δ1 should be positive and significant for the Hindu sample. A

coefficient insignificantly different from zero for both religions would ensure that

there were indeed no such differential state-cohort trends for either religious group

and that the improved autonomy for the Hindu women can be attributed to the law

amendments.




                                                                8
                                           III. DATA

The data I use is the National Family Health Survey (NFHS) conducted in 2005-06,
which is a large survey of representative households from all 29 states of India. The
survey includes a Household Schedule which provides a list of members in each
household and basic socioeconomic information such as religion, caste, wealth status,
and durable goods ownership. In addition, a Women’s Schedule provides the
information needed to pin down the treatment status—state of residence, year of
marriage, and religion—for all women between the ages of 15 and 49 in each
household. It also provides information on sociodemographic variables such as years
of education, work status, husband’s education and occupation, and on variables
denoting status within the household such as participation in own healthcare and
household decision-making, and requiring permission to go somewhere or maintain
contact with friends and family.
    The outcome variables that are based on questions related to mobility are dummy
variables denoting: (i.) whether the woman is allowed to go to a health clinic by
herself; and (ii.) whether she is allowed to go to the market by herself. Outcome
variables based on questions related to bargaining power within the marriage are
dummies denoting whether she has a say in (either alone or jointly with her husband):
(iii.) how the husband’s money is spent; (iv.) her own healthcare decisions; (v.) big
household purchase decisions; (vi.) small household purchase decisions; and (vii.)
decisions about visiting her family and friends.
    Table 1 shows summary statistics. There are 93,274 married women in the data
overall who constitute my primary sample. Women in reform and non-reform states
are similar in average age and age at marriage. Women in the reform states have
higher years of education on average than women in non-reform states, and this is
particularly the case for the cohorts of women married post-reform,14 who are
younger. The reform states have a slightly higher proportion of Hindu women at 80%
compared to 75% in the non-reform states. The second and third panels show the
proportion of women who report a positive outcome (e.g., allowed to go to market
alone, has say in healthcare decision) for the key outcome variables. The second panel
is for the entire sample; since women in the reform states married pre-reform are

    14. Deininger, Goyal, and Nagarajan (2013) and Roy (2015) find evidence of this. Higher
education is potentially one of the channels for the reform, but excluding education level from the
regressions leaves my results almost unchanged.

                                                9
much older on average than those married post-reform, and age is an important
determinant of autonomy, the third panel reports these proportions restricting age to
the same range, between 25 and 35, and thus provides a flavor of the difference-in-
difference results. Conditioning on this age bracket, women in the reform states have
better outcomes if they were married after the amendments. There is also a greater
difference in autonomy between the reform and non-reform states for this age range,
compared to the overall sample. On average, 64% women participate in decision-
making, and 60% women enjoy unrestricted visits to the health clinic and market.

                                    IV. RESULTS

In this section, I present the reduced-form results for the effect of the amendments on
women’s mobility and decision-making outcomes and establish that women exposed
to the reform have higher autonomy.

                                   Primary Results

Table 2 presents the difference-in-difference estimates for each of the outcome
variables discussed in the previous section. The coefficient corresponding to Aft * St
is β1 from specification (1) and captures the effect of being exposed to the reform.
Hindu women are significantly more likely to have a say in their healthcare and other
household decisions if they belong to the reform states and were married post-reform.
For instance, ‘treated’ Hindu women are 2.6% more likely to have a say in own
healthcare decisions, and 3.3% more likely to participate in household purchase
decisions. They are also 4.9% more likely to have a say in visits to family and
relatives, which is very pertinent because a married woman’s relationship with her
natal family, as approved by her in-laws, is likely to be directly affected by her
potential of inheriting property. As expected, non-Hindu women do not share these
positive outcomes since the reform does not apply to them. For the outcome variables
related to mobility, the coefficients for the Hindu sample are still positive and
significant with treated Hindu women being 3.6% more likely to visit the market and
2% more likely to visit health clinics alone. Estimates for the non-Hindu sample,
however, are significantly negative, which might be indicative of the reform states
actually having worse pre-reform trends than the non-reform states in terms of
women’s freedom of movement. As expected, older women and women in urban


                                          10
areas have higher autonomy, for both religions, as do women who have had some
level of education compared to those who have never been to school.

          The results from the triple-difference specification (reported in table S.3 in the
supplemental appendix) point in a similar direction. We see from the first column that
women actually exposed to the reform have significantly better outcomes; the
coefficients are in fact larger in magnitude compared to the difference-in-difference
coefficients for all outcomes. The second column shows that the reform did not have a
significant effect on the outcomes for the non-Hindus, barring the mobility variables.
The third column indicates that, among the women married pre-reform, there is no
significant difference between the Hindu and the non-Hindu women in the reform
states.

                                    Results of Placebo Tests

Table 3 documents the results of the placebo tests. The coefficients reported are δ1
from specification (3) for the Hindu and non-Hindu samples based on different cutoffs
for additional robustness—each row represents a specification with treatment group
defined as women married after a certain number of years prior to the reform. For
simplicity, the outcome variable I use here is an average of all the decision-making
and mobility outcomes;15 for comparison, the first row reports the coefficients from
using this aggregated outcome variable in my initial diff-in-diff specification, which
are positive and significant for Hindus and insignificant for non-Hindus. The
coefficients for the Hindu women are quite close to zero and statistically insignificant,
supporting the common trends assumption for difference-in-difference. The non-
Hindu coefficients are insignificant for most specifications but not all. This also
suggests that the estimates from the diff-in-diff specification are more credible than
triple difference, since the difference in trends between Hindus and non-Hindus were
not always parallel across reform and non-reform states, violating the triple difference
assumption. Moreover, as discussed earlier, the non-Hindu counterparts of the
‘treated’ women in the reform states, though identical to the ‘non-treated’ non-Hindu
women for all the decision-making outcomes, appear to fare worse in terms of the




    15. Appendix table S.4 shows the coefficients for all outcome variables for the case where τ = 10.

                                                  11
mobility outcomes16 (as seen in table 2); so the difference-in-difference coefficients
are also more conservative than the triple-difference coefficients.




                V. INVESTIGATING CHANNELS FOR INCREASED AUTONOMY

Building on the finding that the amendment elevated women’s status in the reform
states, I now explore the effect of the reform on the actual bargaining dynamics within
the household. For the decision-making outcome variables, a woman reports not only
whether she has a say in the decision but exactly who makes the decisions. The
possible answers are she alone, her husband alone, both she and her husband, and
‘others’ in the family. The richness of the data thus allows me to create different
outcome variables denoting different family members having a say in each decision,
alone or jointly.
    The inclusion of the other family members in the data as possible decision-makers
reflects the typical family structure and social norms prevailing in India. The
traditional family structure in India is a ‘joint’ family, where men reside in the same
household with their parents and extended family (e.g., uncles, brothers) and women
relocate to their husband’s house post-marriage. The joint family structure often
persists as a result of the family holding property such as estates or land jointly, which
serves as the means of livelihood of all the men in the family. In such a setting, young
women married into the family are expected to do the bidding of the family elders.17
Indeed, the data shows that the proportion of joint families where these others make
the decisions can be as high as 27% for some outcomes.18 Over the last two
generations, this traditional family system has gradually given way to smaller
‘nuclear’ families, consisting of a married couple and their children. Such a nuclear
setup is more conducive to women having a voice in household decisions relatively
early on in their marriage.

     16. This could be because the reform might have made the younger non-Hindu women, who have
worse outcomes in general as part of the religious minority, perceive themselves as facing more
constraints as a result of the improvement in autonomy of their Hindu contemporaries.
     17. The idea that in joint families the wife loses decision-making power not only to the husband
but also to the older generation has been pointed out by Debnath (2015), Khalil and Mookerjee
(forthcoming), Coffey et al. (2015), and by Sen, Rastogi, and Vanneman (2006) in the sociology
literature.
     18. I define joint households as those where the respondents co-reside with the husbands’ parents.
Less than 1% of women in nuclear households report that ‘others’ make decisions. This strongly
suggests that the other decision- makers are primarily the parents-in-law.

                                                 12
    I use the diff-in-diff specification (1) to estimate the effect of the reform on the
participation in decision-making by each household member. Table 4 shows the
results.19 Post-reform, the wife is more likely to have a say in decisions jointly with
her husband but less likely to be the solo decision-maker. The husband’s decision-
making participation also increases, and the household members whose decision-
making power declines are actually the ‘other’ group, mostly comprising the
husbands’ parents. This finding is in direct contrast to the other papers that have
examined the effect of the reform on women’s autonomy; while mostly agnostic about
the channels through which the reform empowers women, the most common
perception has been that such a reform would improve the wife’s bargaining power at
the cost of her husband’s (Roy 2008, Heath and Tan 2014). Contrary to such a spousal
transfer of authority, I show that the couple as a whole is empowered at the expense
of the older generation of household members.

    There are a number of reasons why this might be the case. First, the wife’s
potential inheritance could empower both her and her husband relative to the ‘other’
family members. A second reason is that the reform might have reduced the
likelihood of couples residing in the same household with the others, which would
trivially make the couple the sole decision-making unit in their household. In other
words, the reform might have had a direct effect on family structure itself, resulting in
a partition of large joint families into smaller nuclear households. I discuss these
channels below.

                                      Bargaining Channel

This channel is similar in spirit to previous research (Roy 2008, Heath and Tan 2014)
but is more reflective of a coalition type bargaining framework, where bargaining
power shifts from other household members to the couple post reform. In joint
families, the husband serves as the key link between the wife and his family; for
instance, his parents can access his wife’s wealth only through him, and they can
benefit from her home production only if he decides to stay on in the joint household
with them. On the other hand, the husband has considerable influence on his family,
which he can exert on behalf of his wife to ensure that she is treated well in the

    19. The coefficients reported are only for the Hindu sample, and they show the effect of being
exposed to the reform on the decision-making participation for various members of the household. The
coefficients for the non-Hindu sample are mostly insignificant.

                                                13
marital household. Thus the reform can empower both the wife, whose bargaining
power increases as a direct result of the increase in her perceived worth, and the
husband, who can exploit his crucial position in the family structure as the link
between his wife and extended family.

                                         Partition Channel

The partition channel works through a shift in family structure away from joint
households into smaller nuclear setups, following the reform. First, if the older
members in joint families indeed impose more restrictions and curtail mobility and
decision-making, women would have a preference for residing away from the
husband’s extended family, and those exposed to the reform would be better able to
realize this preference. This could be either as a manifestation of their greater
autonomy as a consequence of their increased financial worth, or because the wife’s
potential inheritance enables these couples to be able to afford to set up their own
nuclear households. Such splitting away from the extended family setup would
trivially empower the couple relative to the other household members, by eliminating
them as potential decision-makers.
   The partition channel need not work only through the impact of the reform on
wives’ increased inheritance—it could alternately be driven by a potential weakening
of husbands’ financial ties with their ancestral families in the reform states, owing to
the effect of the reform on men through their sisters. Since their sisters now have a
birthright as well, the reform entails a smaller share of joint property for men in these
states. This could result in men whose occupations are dependent on the share of
family property (such as agriculture) having less incentive to stay on in a joint family
setup post reform and opting to move out.20 Since families that have joint or ancestral
property have a greater propensity to live in joint family set-ups, it would precisely be
men in these households who potentially have their incentives to stay on at home
curtailed by the reform. It is important to note that the reform also reduces the father’s
nominal (individual) share; so, even if men were to expect their fathers to will them a
larger proportion of this nominal property if they cohabited with the extended




   20. Note that this is not a theoretical prediction but an empirically testable hypothesis.

                                                   14
family,21 their incentive to do so declines post-reform since the amount of money at
the father’s disposal to bequeath is smaller.
    Testing the bargaining channel amounts to finding evidence that, within a
particular type of family setup, women exposed to the reform have better autonomy
outcomes. Examining the partition channel involves finding evidence that the
following key patterns hold:

    (a) A preference for nuclear households: Women in nuclear families should have
    higher autonomy than those in joint ones.

    (b) Partition driven by an increase in wives’ inheritance: Couples in reform states
    married after the reform should be less likely to be residing in joint families.

    (c) Partition driven by a decrease in husbands’ inheritance: Men in the reform
    states should switch to nuclear households if their income streams are potentially
    constrained by the reform.

    In the next section, I empirically examine whether both these channels are in
operation. I do not make any claims about the relative importance of the two. I first
provide evidence for the partition channel and then explore whether the bargaining
channel is in effect as well.




                          VI. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FOR CHANNELS

The NFHS data allows me to determine the family status of each married woman
(joint or nuclear). I observe a list of all the members of each household in the
Household Schedule of the data, and whether each of them is a usual resident in the
household, which lets me identify which women live in the same establishment with
family elders (i.e., a joint family for my purposes). A joint family is defined as a
family where a parent-in-law of a woman is present in the household;22 the dummy



     21. Botticinni and Siow (2003) shows that parents would want to leave bequests to those children
who reside with them.
     22. For instance, the woman identifies herself as the daughter-in-law of the household head or the
woman reports she is the wife of the head and the parents of the household head are usual residents in
the same establishment.

                                                 15
variable joint takes the value 1 if this is the case and 0 otherwise. 30.8% of the
married women in the sample belong to joint families, by this definition.

                             Evidence for Partition Channel

(a) Is a nuclear family better for autonomy?

First, I test whether a nuclear family does, in fact, entail better autonomy outcomes
for women than a joint family setup. Table 5 shows the coefficient for the joint
dummy from regressions of each of the outcome variables on a binary indicator
denoting a joint household, controlling for age, education, caste, location (urban or
rural), year-of-marriage fixed effects, and state fixed effects. For both Hindus and
non-Hindus, residing in a joint family has a negative significant effect on a woman’s
autonomy. Since I shall go on to show that the amendment has an effect on family
structure itself in the reform states, one might worry that this contaminates these
coefficients which are based on the entire sample. Appendix table S.6 reports the
same coefficients for the subsample of women in reform states only—they are
qualitatively identical (i.e., negative and significant for both religious groups).

       A possible endogeneity problem that one might be concerned about here is
that women who are married into nuclear families might differ from those in joint
families in their temperament and attitude toward authority. For instance, they may be
less submissive or more desirous of asserting themselves. However, the data shows
that women in joint families are in fact socioeconomically advantaged compared to
those belonging to nuclear families. As table 2 illustrates, autonomy is found to be
strongly positively correlated with socioeconomic characteristics such as years of
education. Assuming that unobservable characteristics mirror these observable
determinants of autonomy, this would suggest that the estimates for the effect of
residing in a joint family on autonomy are not entirely driven by the sample of women
in joint households being negatively selected or predestined for worse autonomy
outcomes; in fact, these coefficients may even be biased downward in magnitude.
Khalil and Mookerjee (forthcoming) and Debnath (2015) provide a detailed analysis
of the effect of residing with the extended family on the autonomy of young brides,
and find a large negative effect.

(b) Are treated women more likely to reside in nuclear households?

                                            16
Next, I examine whether the potential increase in the wife’s inheritance results in
partition of joint households by checking for higher rates of migration among couples
in reform states married post-reform. Table 6 shows the coefficient for being exposed
to the reform on the outcome variable joint.23 The first column shows that Hindu
women who were ‘treated’ are significantly less likely by about 4.3% to reside in joint
families, while the second column shows that there is no such effect for the non-
Hindu women. A placebo test identical to specification (3), which assumes that the
amendments occurred a couple of years prior to their actual implementation, shows no
such significant effect for the ‘treated’ Hindu women. This suggests that the
significantly lower propensity of Hindu women to reside in joint families post-reform
is not simply a function of some such pre-existing trend in the reform states and can in
fact be attributed to the amendments.

(c) Is part of the effect driven by the negative effect on men’s inheritance?

Finally, I explore whether this shift in household structure is partially driven by the
detrimental effect of the reform on men’s inheritance. These are the men with sisters
who were eligible to benefit from the reform. Unfortunately, the NFHS data doesn’t
allow me to calculate the number of siblings of each man since I do not observe any
siblings who are not residents of the same household. To overcome this shortcoming,
I make use of the Rural Economic and Demographic Survey (REDS) conducted in
1999. The REDS data provides information on household structure that is similar to
the NFHS but also contains additional information on all the children of household
heads who are not residents of the household. In particular, it provides the exact years
of marriage of any daughters of the household head, thereby allowing me to identify
whether these women, and in turn their brothers, are actually exposed to the reform.
The partition channel predicts that men are more likely to leave the household if they
have sisters who are treated but not if they have only untreated sisters, in which case
their inheritance is not affected. Appendix table S.7 shows results from the REDS
data for sons of household heads who are over 18 years of age; Hindu boys are around
four percent more likely to reside away from home if they have a treated sister (i.e., a
sister who is unmarried or was married after the reform), or if they have a sibling who
is entitled to equal inheritance (i.e., a brother or a treated sister) but not if they have an

    23. The specification for these regressions is the same as before, equation (1).


                                                   17
untreated sister (i.e., a sister who was married before the reform). All coefficients are
insignificant for non-Hindus, to whom the reform doesn’t apply.

                              Evidence for Bargaining Channel

To provide evidence for the bargaining channel, I estimate the change in participation
in decision-making for different family members separately for each kind of family,
joint and nuclear. If the effect of the reform is acting entirely through the change in
family composition, then within each family type, women exposed to the reform
should not be reporting better outcomes. However, if the potential inheritance that a
woman brings in additionally elevates her position within the family, we should
observe an improvement in bargaining power for the treated women within each
family type.
    The top panel of table 7 reports the results for the subsample of women who are in
joint marital families (i.e., who have any person of an older generation residing in
their marital household).24 The columns represent mutually exclusive decision-
makers: the respondent only, her husband only, the couple together, or others in the
household. The coefficients are consistent with what the bargaining channel would
predict: couples are significantly more likely to have a say in decisions post-reform,
and the others are significantly less likely. Admittedly, since the reform changes the
incentives of couples to stay on in a joint family framework, there could be some
selection; however, such selection potentially works against these results. As argued
above, women who have a higher preference for autonomy or an enhanced capacity to
exert their authority are now more likely to have moved out of joint households and
so the composition of couples in joint families now shifts toward those with a higher
tolerance for co-residing with other potential decision-makers. Therefore, the
coefficients that I estimate are possibly lower bounds for the true effects. The reform
primarily increases the likelihood of the couple jointly making decisions, consistent
with the couple bargaining collectively with the other household members; however,
in terms of solo decision-making, the reform benefits men rather than women.25


     24. The sample is restricted to women who have been married into the household (i.e., wives,
sisters-in-law, and daughters-in-law of household heads). Other respondents, such as those who
identify as daughters and sisters of the head, are excluded from the sample since the data does not
provide information about their marital families.
     25. Section V discusses the intuition behind why men benefit despite their inheritance being
negatively affected; however, in line with section VI (c), the reform might also be shifting the

                                                18
    Finally, the bottom panel reports the results for the subsample of women in
nuclear households. The proportion of such households where ‘others’ make the
decisions is a negligible 1% compared to over 20% in the joint sample. Conditional
on nuclear residence, the reform has a modest positive effect on couples’ joint
autonomy—the coefficient is significant for two of the outcome variables but much
smaller compared to those for joint households. However, the improvement in joint
decision-making for the wives is offset by the reduction in their solo decision-making
authority. Note that selection concerns should similarly imply that these coefficients
are biased upward, since women who can exercise a choice to move away with their
husbands from a joint marital household should in fact be predisposed toward better
autonomy outcomes. The bargaining mechanism of increasing the woman’s
importance within her marital family therefore seems to be more prominent among
joint families. One explanation of this is that, to the extent that divorces are rare26 but
that separation of the couple from the joint households is an easier and more likely
outcome after the amendments, the reform led to a higher gain in bargaining power of
the couple with respect to the extended family relative to the extent to which wives
were empowered vis-à-vis husbands in nuclear homes. Another explanation is that, to
the extent that women in nuclear families are more likely to hail from nuclear
households themselves, their natal households are less likely to hold joint or ancestral
property compared to joint households; now, since the main impact of the reform
derives from joint and not individual property, it might not have had a sufficiently
large effect on the inheritance of these women in the first place.

                        VII. DISCUSSION AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

The preceding section shows that the positive effect of the reform on women’s
autonomy is achieved, to a considerable extent, through a shift in family structure
from traditional joint setups to smaller nuclear households. Conditional on family
structure, however, most of the results are driven by the women in the joint families.
Moreover, the reform increased the likelihood of women making decisions jointly
with their husbands but it might even have depressed their probability of solo
decision-making.

composition of men in joint households toward sole inheritors rather than ones with siblings who are
also likely to exert greater influence on their parents.
     26. The divorce rate for ever-married women in my sample is 0.54%.


                                                19
   To the extent that the primary target of such gender-neutral reforms is to improve
the welfare of women, the amendment definitely achieved this aim in the reform
states. Having a say in their household decisions is a fundamental right for married
women, and increased exercise of this right is an unambiguous positive effect of the
reform. That this comes about mainly through joint decision-making cannot
necessarily be construed as an adverse effect; the increased participation of husbands
in making decisions might reflect either that their own preferences are more aligned
with their wives rather than their extended family post-reform or that they have
greater interest or concern about their wife’s health, whereabouts, and home
production. However, to the extent that the law was intended to redress gender
imbalances, the finding that the husbands gain greater decision-making authority
compared to wives suggests that the amendment failed to reduce gender discrepancies
in decision-making participation within the household, resulting instead in an
intergenerational transfer of authority.
   The change in family structure serving as an important channel for increased
autonomy warrants a cautious interpretation of the overall effect of the reform on
women. While a joint family structure places restrictions on women like lower
autonomy and lower participation in the labor market (Khalil and Mookerjee
forthcoming, Debnath 2015), it also has some benefits. It is an important form of
social security, especially among those who are economically disadvantaged. Older
women in the joint household provide subsidized childcare (Desai and Jain 1994),
while the presence of additional household members seems to reduce spousal violence
(Khalil and Mookerjee forthcoming). So a shift into nuclear families, though
accompanied by improved autonomy, may have serious welfare costs of its own.
Moreover, a lot of the increased bargaining power for married women post-reform is
compensated by a reduction in that of older family members; this indicates that the
increased autonomy that younger women get would in fact be offset by a reduction in
decision-making authority for their older selves. An overall welfare analysis would
then involve an assessment of the relative importance of wielding authority in the
household at younger versus older ages.
   Finally, we need to consider the potential efficacy of such a reform in the context
of the current social structure. As more and more families reside in nuclear rather than
joint setups, the capacity of the partition channel to improve women’s outcomes
shrinks. The effect of the reform in terms of strengthening the woman’s position
                                           20
within her household is also weaker in nuclear setups. This implies that, in a situation
where the traditional joint family is rare, such a reform would have little ability to
accomplish an improvement in women’s outcomes. There is, however, a caveat: on
average, the joint families which are more likely to be fragmented into nuclear ones
are, so far, the less wealthy ones. Over time, as more men decide to move out of their
joint setups, the difference in wealth, asset ownership, or educational attainment
between nuclear and joint families will be reduced. This would entail that the direct
benefit of a pro-female reform (i.e., actually inheriting more) will accrue to a greater
proportion of women in nuclear households.




                                  VIII. CONCLUSION

The amendment to the Hindu Succession Act was a significant step toward gender
equality in India. I find evidence that women exposed to the reform did report more
favorable autonomy outcomes. However, I show that the reform also increased the
bargaining power of the husbands of the treated women; in fact, the husbands
benefitted more than their wives at the expense of other household members. This
indicates that a framework in which each household comprises of only the married
couple is not sufficient to analyze the effect of such an increase in women’s income
potential since other members of the family residing in the same household also wield
decision-making power. A significant decline in the bargaining power of these other
family members hints at a possible effect of the reform on family structure itself—a
channel hitherto unexplored in the literature. I find that this shift away from the
traditional joint family system is responsible for the improvement in women’s
autonomy to a considerable extent. Since a joint family structure has benefits of its
own, a comprehensive appraisal of the overall welfare implications of the reform is
not trivial. However, women getting to have a say in personal and household
decisions is an unambiguously desirable outcome, and if this was among the goals
that the policymakers sought to achieve by placing men and women on an equal
footing in terms of potential inheritance, the reform succeeded in attaining it. The
ensuing change in family composition was perhaps an unforeseen consequence that
nevertheless helped in improving women’s outcomes and autonomy, and further



                                          21
research is needed in order to assess whether the reform increases the overall lifetime
welfare of women who were exposed to it.




                                     REFERENCES

Agarwal, B. 1994. A field of one’s own: gender and land rights in South Asia,
        volume 58. Cambridge University Press,
Allendorf, K. 2013. “Going Nuclear? Family Structure and Young Women Health in
        India, 1992–2006.” Demography 50 (3): 853–880.
Amaral, S. 2014. “Do Improved Property Rights Decrease Violence against Women
        in India?” Available at SSRN 2504579.
 Anderson, S., and M. Eswaran. 2009. “What Determines Female Autonomy?
        Evidence from Bangladesh.” Journal of Development Economics 90 (2):179–
        91.
Anderson, S., and G. Genicot. 2015. “Suicide and Property Rights in India. Journal of
        Development Economics 114: 64–78.
[Bertrand, M. S. Mullainathan, and D. Miller. 2003. “Public Policy and Extended
        Families: Evidence from Pensions in South Africa.” The World Bank
        Economic Review 17 (1): 27–50.
Borooah, V.K. 2004. “Gender Bias among Children in India in Their Diet and
        Immunisation against Disease. Social Science & Medicine 58 (9): 1719–31.
Botticini, M., and A. Siow. 2003. “Why Dowries? The American Economic Review 93
        (4): 1385–98.
Chattopadhyay, R., and E. Duflo. 2004. “Women As Policy Makers: Evidence from a
        Randomized Policy Experiment in India.” Econometrica 72 (5): 1409–43.
Chiappori, P., and Y. Weiss. 2007. “Divorce, Remarriage, and Child Support.”
        Journal of Labor Economics 25 (1): 37–74.
Coffey, D., R. Khera, and D. Spears. 2015. “Intergenerational Effects of Womens
        Status: Evidence from Joint Indian Households.” Technical report, Working
        Paper.
Das Gupta, M., S. Lee, P. Uberoi, D. Wang, L. Wang, and X. Zhang. 2000. “State
        Policies and Women’s Autonomy in China, The Republic of Korea, and India,
        1950-2000: Lessons from Contrasting Experiences.” Working paper.
Das Gupta, M., and P.N.M. Bhat. 1997. “Fertility Decline and Increased
        Manifestation of Sex Bias in India.” Population studies 51 (3): 307–15.
Debnath, S. 2015. “The Impact of Household Structure on Female Autonomy in
        Developing Countries.” The Journal of Development Studies 51 (5): 485–502.
Deininger, K., A. Goyal, and H. Nagarajan. 2013. “Women’s Inheritance Rights and
        Intergenerational Transmission of Resources in India. Journal of Human
        Resources 48 (1): 114–41.
Deininger, K., S. Jin, H. Nagarajan, F. Xia, et al. 2013. “How Far Does the
        Amendment to the Hindu Succession Act Reach? Evidence from Two-
        Generation Females in Urban India. In 2013 Annual Meeting, August 4-6,
        2013, Washington, DC, number 151432. Agricultural and Applied Economics
        Association.



                                          22
Desai, S., and J. Devaki. 1994. “Maternal Employment and Changes in Family
        Dynamics: The Social Context of Women’s Work in Rural South India.”
        Population and Development Review 115–36.
Duflo, E. 2012. “Women Empowerment and Economic Development.” Journal of
        Economic Literature 50 (4): 1051–79.
Gandhi Kingdon, G. 2002. “The Gender Gap in Educational Attainment in India:
        How Much Can Be Explained?” Journal of Development Studies 39 (2): 25–
        53.
Harari, M. 2014. “Women Inheritance Rights and Bargaining Power: Evidence from
        Kenya.” Department of Economics of MIT 1–47.
Heath, R., and T. Xu. 2014. “Intrahousehold Bargaining, Female Autonomy, and
        Labor Supply: Theory and Evidence from India.” Unpublished manuscript.
Khalil, U., and S. Mookerjee. Forthcoming. “Patrilocal Residence and Women’s
        Welfare: Evidence from South Asia.” Economic Development and Cultural
        Change.
Lancaster, G., P. Maitra, and R. Ray. 2006. “Endogenous Intra-Household Balance of
        Power and Its Impact on Expenditure Patterns: Evidence from India.
        Economica 73 (291): 435–60.
Luke, N., and K. Munshi. 2011. “Women As Agents of Change: Female Income and
        Mobility in India.” Journal of Development Economics 94 (1): 1–17.
Maitra, P. 2004. “Parental Bargaining, Health Inputs and Child Mortality in India.”
        Journal of Health Economics 23 (2): 259–91.
Mearns, R. 1999. Access to land in rural India: policy issues and options, volume
        2123. World Bank Publications.
Mobarak, A.M., R. Kuhn, and C. Peters. 2007. “Marriage Market Effects of a Wealth
        Shock in Bangladesh.” Yale University Working Paper.
Qian, N. 2008. “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-
        Specific Earnings on Sex Imbalance.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
        123 (3): 1251–85.
Rosenblum, D. 2015. “Unintended Consequences of Women Inheritance Rights on
        Female Mortality in India.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 63
        (2): 223–48.
Rosenzweig, M.R., and O. Stark. 1989. “Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and
        Marriage: Evidence from Rural India.” The Journal of Political Economy
        905–26.
Roy, K.C., and C. A. Tisdell. 2002. “Property Rights in Women’s Empowerment in
        Rural India: A Review. International Journal of Social Economics 29 (4):
        315–34.
Roy, S. 2008. “Female Empowerment through Inheritance Rights: Evidence from
        India.” London School of Economics, London.
———. 2015. “Empowering Women? Inheritance Rights, Female Education and Dowry
        Payments in India.” Journal of Development Economics 114: 233–51.
Sen, M., S. Rastogi, and R. Vanneman. 2006. “Disempowered by Whom? Gender vs.
        Generation in Family Decision Making.” Unpublished manuscript,
        Department of Sociology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD.




                                        23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Gender-Neutral Inheritance Laws, Family Structure, and
               Women’s Status in India
                                   Sulagna Mookerjee∗




                                       Appendix




  ∗
    Sulagna Mookerjee is an Assistant Professor of Economics at Georgetown University School of
Foreign Service in Qatar; her email address is sulagna.mookerjee@georgetown.edu.


                                              1
                    Table S.1: Robustness Checks: Selected Samples

                                         (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)
                                        Hindu        Non-Hindu     Hindu      Non-Hindu

      Own Healthcare Decision          0.026∗∗          -0.002     0.023∗∗        0.002
                                       (0.009)         (0.022)     (0.009)       (0.020)
      Major Purchase Decision          0.037∗∗          -0.017     0.032∗∗        -0.009
                                       (0.009)         (0.020)     (0.009)       (0.020)
      Minor Purchase Decision          0.035∗∗          0.003      0.031∗∗        0.010
                                       (0.009)         (0.018)     (0.009)       (0.017)
      Expenditure Decision             0.017∗           -0.015      0.013         -0.015
                                       (0.008)         (0.019)     (0.008)       (0.019)
      Family Visit Decision            0.051∗∗          -0.004     0.046∗∗        0.005
                                       (0.008)         (0.020)     (0.008)       (0.019)
      Visits to Health Clinic          0.021∗∗        -0.061∗∗     0.021∗∗      -0.044∗∗
                                       (0.008)         (0.019)     (0.008)       (0.019)
      Visits to Market                 0.036∗∗        -0.058∗∗     0.035∗∗      -0.041∗∗
                                       (0.008)         (0.018)     (0.008)       (0.018)
      N                                65,030          16,302      63,310        16,523
**,* indicate signiﬁcance at 1 and 5 percent respectively. Standard errors clustered at the PSU
level in brackets. The coeﬃcients reported are for the interaction term of the woman belonging to
a reform state and married post reform. All regressions control for age and age squared, education,
urban or rural residence, caste, year-of-marriage ﬁxed eﬀects and state ﬁxed eﬀects. Columns (1)
and (2) exclude Kerala from the sample, and columns (3) and (4) exclude women married after
2005.




                                                 2
                   Table S.2: Robustness Checks: Additional Controls

                                    (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)
                                   Hindu       Non-Hindu        Hindu      Non-Hindu        Hindu      Non-Hindu

 Own Healthcare Decision           0.023∗           0.002      0.022∗          -0.004      0.025∗∗         -0.003
                                   (0.009)        (0.021)      (0.009)        (0.021)      (0.009)        (0.020)
 Major Purchase Decision           0.029∗∗         -0.004      0.032∗∗         -0.023      0.034∗∗         -0.008
                                   (0.009)        (0.020)      (0.009)        (0.020)      (0.009)        (0.020)
 Minor Purchase Decision           0.027∗∗          0.016      0.027∗∗          0.005      0.033∗∗         0.010
                                   (0.008)        (0.017)      (0.009)        (0.018)      (0.009)        (0.017)
 Expenditure Decision               0.012          -0.009       0.012          -0.018      0.016∗          -0.011
                                   (0.008)        (0.019)      (0.008)        (0.019)      (0.008)        (0.019)
 Family Visit Decision             0.044∗∗          0.005      0.045∗∗         -0.005      0.048∗∗         0.002
                                   (0.008)        (0.019)      (0.009)        (0.019)      (0.008)        (0.019)
 Visits to Health Clinic           0.017∗        -0.042∗∗      0.020∗        -0.052∗∗      0.020∗        -0.046∗∗
                                   (0.008)        (0.018)      (0.008)        (0.018)      (0.008)        (0.018)
 Visits to Market                  0.034∗∗       -0.042∗∗      0.035∗∗       -0.050∗∗      0.037∗∗       -0.046∗∗
                                   (0.008)        (0.017)      (0.008)        (0.018)      (0.008)        (0.017)
 N                                 66,456         16,701       63,926         16,048       66,456         17,431
**,* indicate signiﬁcance at 1 and 5 percent respectively. Standard errors clustered at the PSU level in brackets. The
coeﬃcients reported are for the interaction term of the woman belonging to a reform state and married post reform. All
regressions control for age and age squared, education, urban or rural residence, caste, wealth quintiles, year-of-marriage
ﬁxed eﬀects and state ﬁxed eﬀects. Columns (1) and (2) control for family type, columns (3) and (4) control for tv
ownership and wealth quintiles, and columns (5) and (6) control for native language.




                                                 3
                     Table S.3: Triple Diﬀerence Results

                                          Aft*St*H       Aft*St        St*H

        Own Healthcare Decision              0.027         -0.000     0.003
                                            (0.018)       (0.016)    (0.021)
        Major Purchase Decision             0.040∗∗        -0.005     0.004
                                            (0.018)       (0.016)    (0.019)
        Minor Purchase Decision             0.041∗∗        -0.003     0.024
                                            (0.015)       (0.014)    (0.017)
        Expenditure Decision                0.041∗∗        -0.022     0.003
                                            (0.016)       (0.015)    (0.018)
        Family Visit Decision               0.060∗∗        -0.006     0.016
                                            (0.015)       (0.014)    (0.018)
        Visit Health Clinic Alone           0.071∗∗      -0.047∗∗     0.032
                                            (0.017)       (0.015)    (0.019)
        Visit Market Alone                  0.087∗∗      -0.046∗∗     0.001
                                            (0.015)       (0.014)    (0.019)
        N                                   84,212        84,212     84,212
**,* indicate signiﬁcance at 1 and 5 percent respectively. Standard errors clustered at
the PSU level in brackets. All regressions control for age and age squared, education
level, urban or rural residence, caste, year-of-marriage ﬁxed eﬀects and state ﬁxed
eﬀects.




                                          4
                Table S.4: Placebo Test (τ = 10)

                                        Hindu      Non-Hindu

      Own Healthcare Decision            -0.015        -0.025
                                        (0.012)       (0.030)
      Major Purchase Decision             0.017        -0.043
                                        (0.012)       (0.030)
      Minor Purchase Decision             0.017        -0.023
                                        (0.011)       (0.026)
      Expenditure Decision               -0.002        -0.021
                                        (0.011)       (0.027)
      Family Visit Decision              0.009         0.016
                                        (0.011)       (0.027)
      Visit Health Clinic Alone           0.018       -0.056∗
                                        (0.011)       (0.030)
      Visit Market Alone                 0.020        -0.052∗
                                        (0.011)       (0.030)
      N                                 36,074         9,012
**,* indicate signiﬁcance at 1 and 5 percent respectively. Standard er-
rors clustered at the PSU level in brackets. The coeﬃcients reported
are for the interaction term of the woman belonging to a reform state
and married within 10 years before the reform. All regressions con-
trol for age and age squared, education level, urban or rural residence,
caste, year-of-marriage ﬁxed eﬀects and state ﬁxed eﬀects. The sample
is restricted to women married before the last reform year, and not
actually exposed to the reform.




                                   5
            Table S.5: Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerence Results Split by Years

                                             0-2 yrs     2-5 yrs    5-10 yrs     >10 yrs

   Own Healthcare Decision            H        0.011      0.011      0.027∗       0.052∗∗
                                             (0.015)     (0.013)     (0.011)      (0.013)
                                     NH       -0.008      0.040       -0.021       -0.019
                                             (0.032)     (0.027)     (0.024)      (0.027)

   Major Purchase Decision            H        0.013     0.032∗∗     0.021∗       0.066∗∗
                                             (0.015)     (0.013)     (0.011)      (0.013)
                                     NH       -0.001      0.001       -0.011       -0.030
                                             (0.034)     (0.028)     (0.023)      (0.028)

   Minor Purchase Decision            H        0.003      0.016      0.030∗∗      0.077∗∗
                                             (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.011)      (0.012)
                                     NH       -0.002      0.041       -0.002       0.003
                                             (0.032)     (0.025)     (0.021)      (0.026)

   Family Visit Decision              H      0.043∗∗     0.030∗∗     0.047∗∗      0.081∗∗
                                             (0.014)     (0.012)     (0.010)      (0.012)
                                     NH       0.030       0.014       -0.010       -0.035
                                             (0.028)     (0.026)     (0.022)      (0.025)

   Visit Health Clinic Alone          H       -0.023     0.026∗      0.027∗∗       0.024∗
                                             (0.014)     (0.012)     (0.010)      (0.012)
                                     NH       -0.022      -0.039      -0.044      -0.047∗
                                             (0.033)     (0.027)     (0.024)      (0.024)

   Visit Market Alone                 H       -0.039     0.033∗      0.047∗∗     0.061∗∗
                                             (0.013)     (0.027)     (0.010)      (0.011)
                                     NH       -0.011      -0.013     -0.048∗     -0.068∗∗
                                             (0.032)     (0.026)     (0.023)      (0.024)


**,* indicate signiﬁcance at 1 and 5 percent respectively. Standard errors clustered at the
PSU level in brackets. The coeﬃcients reported are for the interaction term of the woman
belonging to a reform state, and married within a certain interval post reform. All regressions
control for age and age squared, education level, urban or rural residence, caste, year-of-
marriage ﬁxed eﬀects and state ﬁxed eﬀects. The average number of observations is 69,023
for Hindus and 18,214 for non-Hindus.




                                              6
Table S.6: Eﬀect of living in a Joint Family on Autonomy: Reform States Only

                                                    Hindu      Non-Hindu

                 Own Healthcare Decision           -0.064∗∗      -0.045∗∗
                                                   ( 0.009)      ( 0.021)
                 Major Purchase Decision           -0.121∗∗      -0.113∗∗
                                                   ( 0.010)      ( 0.025)
                 Minor Purchase Decision           -0.123∗∗      -0.123∗∗
                                                   ( 0.009)       (0.021)
                 Expenditure decisions             -0.099∗∗      -0.097∗∗
                                                    (0.009)       (0.021)
                 Family Visit Decision             -0.110∗∗      -0.105∗∗
                                                    (0.009)      ( 0.021)
                 Visit Health Clinic Alone         -0.043∗∗      -0.048∗∗
                                                   ( 0.010)      ( 0.020)
                 Visit Market Alone                -0.052∗∗      -0.080∗∗
                                                   ( 0.009)       (0.019)
                 N                                  16,004         3,375
 **,* indicate signiﬁcance at 1 and 5 percent respectively. Standard errors clustered at the
 PSU level in brackets. The coeﬃcients reported are for the interaction term of the woman
 belonging to a reform state and married post reform. All regressions control for age and age
 squared, education, urban or rural residence, caste, year-of-marriage ﬁxed eﬀects and state
 ﬁxed eﬀects. The sample is restricted to women who were married into the household.



           Table S.7: Probability of Sons Moving Out (REDS sample)

                                                  Hindu     Non-Hindu

                     St*Inheriting Sibling        0.042∗∗      -0.059
                                                  (0.015)     (0.077)
                     St*Treated Sister            0.035∗∗      0.017
                                                  (0.013)     (0.061)
                     St*Untreated Sister           -0.021       0.71
                                                  (0.014)     (0.062)
                     N                             7,983        703
    **,* indicate signiﬁcance at 1 and 5 percent respectively. Robust standard errors in
    brackets. St: dummy for reform state, Treated Sister: dummy for having a sister not
    married before the reform, Untreated Sister: dummy for having a sister married before
    the reform, Inheriting Sibling: dummy for having either a brother or a treated sister.
    All regressions control for years of education, age, years of education, caste, total
    number of male and female siblings, and include state and sister’s year-of-marriage
    ﬁxed eﬀects. The sample is restricted to boys over 18 years of age. Data Source:
    REDS 1999.



                                              7
