                                                    WPS8140


Policy Research Working Paper                     8140




             Evidence for a Presource Curse?
              Oil Discoveries, Elevated Expectations,
                  and Growth Disappointments

                                 James Cust
                                David Mihalyi




Africa Region
Office of the Chief Economist
July 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8140


  Abstract
 Oil discoveries can constitute a major positive and exog-                           percentage points gap in the case of super giant discoveries.
 enous shock to economic activity, but the resource curse                            The estimated effect is inversely related to the quality of
 hypothesis would suggest they might also be detrimental to                          political institutions, and driven by countries with lower
 growth over the long run. This paper utilizes a new method-                         institutional quality at the time of the discovery, consis-
 ology for estimating growth underperformance to examine                             tent with the similar long-run results documented in the
 the extent to which discoveries depress the growth path of                          resource curse literature. For countries with below-thresh-
 a country following a discovery and prior to production                             old institutional quality, the growth disappointment effect
 starting. The study finds causal evidence of a significant                          is larger, measured as 1.35 percentage points in annual
 negative effect on short-run growth and growth relative                             terms. There is no measured growth disappointment effect
 to counterfactual forecast growth in countries with weak                            for countries with strong institutions. Using the synthetic
 institutions, creating growth disappointments prior to pri-                         control method, we confirm our findings for a selection
 vate and public resource windfalls. This effect is termed                           of countries above and below the institutional quality
 the presource curse. For a giant oil or gas discovery in                            threshold. The findings suggest that studies of the resource
 1988–2010, the study estimates an average growth disap-                             curse that focus only on the effects of resource exploita-
 pointment effect of 0.83 percentage points, measured as the                         tion or examine only long-run growth effects may overlook
 average annual gap between forecast and actual growth over                          important short-run growth disappointments following
 the five years following a discovery. Further, the estimated                        discoveries, and the way countries respond to news shocks.
 effect varies by the size of the discovery, increasing to a 1.77


  This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, Africa Region and the Natural Resource Governance Institute.
  It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development
  policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.
  org. The authors may be contacted at jcust@worldbank.org and dmihalyi@resourcegovernance.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
         Evidence for a Presource Curse? Oil Discoveries, Elevated
                     Expectations, and Growth Disappointments∗

                                                     James Cust†
                                                    David Mihalyi‡




    Keywords: resource curse, economic growth, forecasting, forecast errors, news shocks, institutions.
                                     JEL classiﬁcation: O40, O43, Q33, Q35




  ∗ We  would like to thank Cesar Calderon, Punam Chuhan-Pole, Rick van der Ploeg and Michael Ross as well as participants at
the CSAE Conference 2017, University of Oxford for valuable comments. The views expressed in this paper are entirely those of
the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World
Bank, the Natural Resource Governance Institute or any aﬃliated organizations.
   † World Bank. Oﬃce of the Chief Economist Africa Region. Email: jcust@worldbank.org
   ‡ Natural Resource Governance Institute. Email: dmihalyi@resourcegovernance.org
1    Introduction

Oil discoveries can constitute a major positive exogenous shock to national wealth and hence to economic
activity. However, the resource curse hypothesis suggests that such discoveries may ultimately prove detri-
mental to long run growth if they put countries on a path to resource dependence. There exists no short-run
corollary to the resource curse hypothesis, however recent years have seen a spate of countries facing severe
economic challenges in the years following major natural resource discoveries, including Ghana, Mozambique
and Brazil. In this paper we seek to examine whether these anecdotal cases generalise to a widespread em-
pirical phenomenon. We investigate the short run growth response to major oil and gas discoveries around
the globe.

         We utilise novel data and a newly developed methodology for estimating growth under-performance,
to examine the extent to which discoveries depress the growth path of a country following a discovery - and
prior to resource wealth being converted into private and public revenues. By combining information on the
timing and location of giant oil and gas discoveries with IMF growth forecasts we can estimate the extent
to which discoveries lead to growth disappointment eﬀects whereby the actual growth path under-performs
relative to the counter-factual expected growth. Using synthetic control method we verify these eﬀects for a
selection of countries. We ﬁnd causal evidence of a signiﬁcant negative eﬀect on short-run growth relative to
counter-factual forecast growth; creating growth disappointments even before production begins. We term
this the presource curse.

         Under the resource curse hypothesis, the curse is normally deﬁned and measured in terms of lower
growth in resource abundant economies compared to non-resource rich economies. These may or may not
constitute a meaningful control group. An ideal test would be to compare resource-rich countries’ growth
compared with the counter-factual growth trajectory had they successfully harnessed their resource wealth.
In other words, an ideal measure of the resource curse would evaluate what growth could have been compared
to what it actually was. Unfortunately, we do not observe this counter-factual. Our paper takes advantage
of the closest we get to this growth counter-factual over the short-run - expert growth projections from the
IMF’s World Economic Outlook. While limited to ﬁve year forecasts only, these nonetheless provide a setting
for us to test the growth performance against some benchmark counter-factual of what the growth eﬀects of
a discovery are expected to be.

         We ﬁnd that while growth forecasts across the global sample are consistently higher on average for
the period following a major oil or gas discovery, actual growth paths are, on average, lower or unchanged,
relative to periods without such discovery. This divergence between the expected eﬀect of a discovery on
output and actual economic performance can be thought of as a growth disappointment - in the cases where
projections exceed performance. For an oil or gas discovery exceeding 500 million barrels of oil equivalent,
we estimate an average growth disappointment eﬀect of 0.83 percentage points, measured as the average
annual gap between forecast and actual growth over the 6 years following a discovery. Our estimated eﬀect
varies by the size of discovery, increasing to 1.77 in the case of super-giant discoveries.

         Evidence suggests that the growth disappointment eﬀects are mediated by the quality of political



                                                        2
institutions. Our estimated eﬀect is inversely related to various measures of political institutions, consistent
with the similar long run results documented in the resource curse literature. For countries with below-
threshold institutional quality prior to discovery, measured in terms of constraints on executive, the growth
disappointment eﬀect is larger - 1.35 percentage points. We ﬁnd no evidence for such a result in countries
with strong institutions.

         We identify discoveries as the source of these growth disappointments and document a phenomenon
we term the presource curse,1 a corollary to the long run resource curse. We follow Blanchard and Leigh
(2013) in utilising the diﬀerence between forecast growth and actual growth performance to evaluate the
outcomes of government policy in response to a shock.

         Oil discoveries can constitute a major exogenous news shock to the economy. While a discovery
typically will not result in oil production for over half a decade, it can be considered a step-change in known
national wealth, implying increased economic output in the future and a permanent increase in consumption
potential for the country. A discovery can therefore generate expectations of increased economic activity and
consumption in the future (Arezki et al., 2016), however any subsequent impact on output is also aﬀected by
policy choices made by government, including borrowing in the short run to ﬁnance increases in investment
and consumption (Eastwood and Venables (1982), Pieschacon (2012) & Wills (2014)). Furthermore, it
has been proposed that oil discoveries can trigger a country’s accumulation of unsustainable levels of debt
(Mansoorian, 1991), while government decisions can be distorted by citizen expectations leading to excessive
consumption spending (Collier, 2017).

         Under rational expectations, a giant oil discovery should lead to a jump in both forecasted and
actual growth as the country moves to a new steady state output equilibrium consistent with the shock
to national wealth and the associated increase in investment and economic activity. Meanwhile, economic
forecasts generated subsequent to a discovery should adjust to reﬂect the higher growth path anticipated as
the economy adjusts to this shock.

         However, if a discovery is associated with a presource curse eﬀect, whereby the actual growth path is
lower than the expected growth path, we would expect to observe a systematically negative growth diﬀerential
(the amount forecast growth exceeds actual growth). This negative growth diﬀerential reﬂects the growth
under-performance relative to some forecasted counter-factual. Therefore, if countries are systematically
underachieving on growth compared to what is expected, we would predict the positive news shock to be
positively correlated with a growth diﬀerential; while being negatively or uncorrelated with actual growth.
This is what we ﬁnd.

         Our contribution complements the existing literature on the resource curse. Here many studies have
sought to document the relationship between resource abundance and disappointing growth rates, however
these are typically associated with, and blamed on, responses to resource extraction, resource exports and the
rents government derives from this production. See for example Van der Ploeg (2011) and Ross (2015) who
discusses the evidence for various economic and political mechanisms that may underlie this curse including
   1 The   term was originally used by energy reporter Leigh Elston describing        the   case   of   Mozambique:
http://interfaxenergy.com/gasdaily/article/20380/mozambique-and-the-presource-curse



                                                       3
Dutch disease, the impacts of commodity price volatility, rent-seeking, rapacious depletion and conﬂict.

         In our case, we ﬁnd evidence for growth disappointments setting-in prior to production starting and
before governments see windfall revenues. Our ﬁndings suggest the challenges posed by resource wealth are
present and can have detrimental consequences to the economy long before a single barrel of oil is extracted.
Further this eﬀect is associated with the way in which government responds to resource discoveries, mediated
by the quality of government policies and institutions.

         Our contribution is threefold: we present the ﬁrst empirical evidence - to the best of our knowledge
- of a ‘presource curse’ whereby growth disappointments are observed following resource discoveries rather
than subsequent to production and revenue windfalls. Second, we present new evidence on the primary
importance of institutions and governance in mediating any such presource curse eﬀects. Third, we build on
earlier work such as Blanchard and Leigh (2013) to demonstrate how growth forecast errors can be useful to
evaluate the divergence between economic performance and oﬃcial forecasts, and its implications for policy
making. Here our ﬁndings suggest that this divergence is associated with weaker governance as well as
elevated expectations. Elevated expectations themselves may further exacerbate growth disappointments,
for example if they drive overly favourable investor perceptions or sovereign credit scores.



1.1    Context and literature

The relationship between economic growth and natural resource wealth

         The relationship between economic growth and resource wealth has been subject to extensive study
and debate (for recent surveys see Van der Ploeg (2011) & Ross (2015)). Some argue that on average
resource wealth creates a curse, causing reduced or even negative growth, with notable examples including
Nigeria and Sierra Leone. In contrast, there are countries whose overall economic development was spurred
or unhindered by natural resources - ranging across countries such as the UK, USA, Norway, Malaysia,
Botswana and Chile.

         An emerging consensus agrees that any overall resource curse eﬀect is best understood as mediated
by the quality of institutions (Mehlum et al. (2006) & Robinson et al. (2006)). Here it is argued that
countries with strong political institutions at the time of discovery are better placed to reap the beneﬁts of
resource wealth, in contrast, countries with weak institutions at the time of discovery are more susceptible
to the various resource curse mechanisms and are likely to see a reduction in growth compared to various
counter-factuals.

         What these studies share in common is an examination of the relationship between resource wealth’s
contribution to the economy, typically measured via production value, export dependence or government
revenue windfalls, and economic performance. Additionally, these studies typically examine the long run
growth eﬀects of resource abundance- examining this relationship across decades.

         Our approach diﬀers in three key ways: ﬁrst, we examine the post-discovery eﬀects of anticipated



                                                      4
resource wealth on countries- testing for a potential eﬀect prior to production commencing; second, we focus
on estimating the short run growth impacts of resources. And third, we examine the role for government
policy and institutions in mediating the growth eﬀects of discovery.

          The economic eﬀects of a resource discovery

          A number of countries have recently faced severe macroeconomic problems only a few years after
major oil discoveries. Brazil’s economy plunged into a recession, while Ghana’s and Mozambique’s govern-
ment turned to the IMF for ﬁnancial assistance shortly following a series of seemingly transformative oil and
gas ﬁnds.

          Major gas discoveries were made in Mozambique in 2009 and 2010. At the time growth rates were
averaging 6.5%. In the years immediately following the discovery the IMF forecast growth would reach an
average of 7.8% for the 2012-2016 period. Actual growth by the end of the period had slumped to 3.3%.
Similarly, Ghana saw major oil and gas discoveries in 2007 and 2010. The IMF continued to forecast strong
economic performance above 6% when in fact it reached historical lows below 4% between 2014-2016. Brazil
too saw growth slump from a pre-discovery average of 4%, to a post-discovery recession within 7 years of the
ﬁrst of the major oﬀshore ’pre-salt layer’ oil discoveries. Each of these cases raises the question of whether
the discoveries themselves, rather than windfall revenues or production triggered actions that ultimately
endangered macroeconomic performance and generated growth disappointments. New research suggests
several African countries may have experienced resource curse type symptoms even without discoveries
                                                                    ao Tome & Pr´
(Frynas et al., 2016). Here the authors argue that in the cases of S˜                e and Madagascar
                                                                                ıncip`
elevated expectations that discoveries would be made prompted spending pressures and deterioration in
governance.2

          The theoretical foundations for the economic consequences of a resource discovery were developed
in the 1980s, including Eastwood and Venables (1982). The authors show how a signiﬁcant oil discovery
can induce a recession under certain conditions, in contrast to the New Classical macroeconomic view at
the time that an oil discovery should create no special macroeconomic problems. More recent papers have
also considered the short-run consequences of a resource discovery. Arezki et al. (2016) consider the impacts
on macroeconomic variables such as employment, savings, investment and the current account, Harding
et al. (2016) examine the impact on relative prices, Toews et al. (2016) ﬁnd a FDI bonanza following giant
discoveries, while Pieschacon (2012) and Wills (2014) consider the ideal government policy responses to these
shocks.

          A resource discovery can be thought of as a one-time shock to national wealth, constituting a news
shock about higher levels of output in the future. The delay between discovery and production determines
how far into the future increased revenues may be, however both private and public consumption may rise
prior to production, ﬁnanced via borrowing or by running a current account deﬁcit.

          Arezki et al. ﬁnd that in anticipation of oil production following a discovery, employment falls and
   2 These cases are not included in our analysis since we rely on data on actual giant discoveries for the timing of our news

        ao Tome & Pr´
shock. S˜                   e and Madagascar are yet to make major discoveries of oil or gas.
                       ıncip`




                                                              5
the current account deteriorates. Meanwhile in the immediate years following a resource discovery output
remains ﬂat, until production begins. In contrast, the IMF consistently projects positive output growth in
the period following a resource discovery, as the country converges to a new steady state with its increased
natural wealth endowment.

         This is supported by the theory: in a simple endowment open economy, news of a future increase
in output should produce an immediate rise in consumption and therefore output, and an immediate fall in
the savings rate and current account as the country borrows from abroad. Once the new resource begins
being extracted, the savings rate and current account should swing from negative to positive as the country
pays oﬀ its debt and also saves for the future.

         Wills identiﬁes potential sources for a short-run growth disappointment, relative to the theoretical
boon to output implied by the discovery. First, under nominal rigidities, a resource discovery can induce a
recession without appropriate policy responses by government. Countries who operate an exchange rate peg
are particularly vulnerable to this risk, constituting 75 percent of resource rich countries in Wills’ analysis.
Second, even under a ﬂexible price regime output may dip in the pre-production years as households work less
and consume more, in anticipation of increased government spending and therefore increase household income
in the future. Notably, Wills argues that government policy, and speciﬁcally monetary policy responses can
mitigate the risk of a recession by allowing the interest rate to track the natural rate of inﬂation. If the
monetary policy rule properly responds, the predicted inﬂation and recession can be overcome.

         Countries may also choose to consume the anticipated ﬂow of revenues while simultaneously post-
poning extraction, an anticipation of better times eﬀect hypothesized by Van der Ploeg (2011). Under these
circumstances economic output gains might be reduced by countries saving less in anticipation of higher
prices in the future, which in turn may be delayed or never realized.

         Furthermore, it has been suggested that countries that lack strong legal and institutional safeguards
can ﬁnd themselves succumbing to a ‘voracity eﬀect’, whereby powerful elites compete for ﬁscal spoils (Tornell
and Lane, 1999). Such forces can generate outcomes where the loss in output following a discovery may exceed
the size of the discovery itself (Collier, 2017).

         These studies variously argue that the economic eﬀects of discoveries may depend on institutional
quality and adequate government policy response; where failure can trigger growth disappointments. This
is what we ﬁnd reﬂected in the data.

         Forecasting and Economic Growth

         We follow Blanchard and Leigh (2013) in utilizing the divergence between forecast and actual growth
rates to evaluate short run policy performance in response to a shock. This approach builds on work by
Timmermann and Granger (2004) who argue that growth forecasts internalize relevant available information
at the time – therefore forecast errors indicate a divergence of performance from expectation, which in
turn reﬂects an incorrectly calibrated growth multiplier. Blanchard and Leigh apply this approach to the
ﬁscal consolidation episodes in Europe following the ﬁnancial crisis. Here they ﬁnd evidence of systematic
under-forecasting of growth rates by the IMF - providing evidence, they argue, for a realization by European


                                                       6
                                                                                         as and Summers
countries of a true growth multiplier that is larger than that used in the forecasts. Fat´
(2016) have since extended this analysis using the same methodology with extrapolated growth forecasts to
examine longer run eﬀects.

           We take this same technique and apply it to the impact of a resource discovery. Here we ﬁnd the
opposite- namely evidence that the short run growth eﬀect of a resource discovery is systematically smaller
than that modelled in forecasts, and in some cases may actually be negative. While experts agree that
resource discoveries should be good for growth, in certain policy settings the opposite appears to be true.



2      Data

Our analysis is based on a global cross country panel from 1990 to 2010 and builds on three core datasets.
The dataset of giant oil and natural gas ﬁeld, compiled by Horn (2012), reports on ﬁelds of over 500 million
barrel equivalent of ultimate recoverable reserves discovered between 1868 and 2010. The dataset provides
information on the location and size of the ﬁeld.3 In terms of measures of oil ﬁeld size, we construct a
dummy variable on reported discoveries as our main variable. We also create an additional dummy variable
for supergiant discoveries.4 Our third variable of interest on discovery size is the Estimated Ultimate Recovery
ﬁgure as measured in million of barrel equivalent (EU RM M BOE ). The dataset reports on 996 discoveries
since 1868 and 236 discoveries since 1988. The discoveries in our sample are widely distributed geographically,
covering 46 countries, and are of signiﬁcant magnitude for the country’s development: the average discovery
equals 1.4 percent GDP in NPV terms.

           Forecasts are from the IMF‘s database of global historical World Economic Outlook (WEO) reports
which covers growth, balance of payment and inﬂation forecasts in every WEO published from 1990 until
2016. Reports are published both in spring and fall, but for simplicity, we use the fall edition each year.5
For each year (t), we compile the geometric mean of growth forecasts (averaged growth rate) starting from
year t+1 until t+5, which is period which the forecasts are reported for. Growth is measured in real GDP
terms (at constant price).6 Actual growth over our sample period is also taken from the Fall 2016 IMF
WEO report. We use the ﬁgures reported to compile similar 5 year (t + 1–t + 5) average growth performance
variables.

           We supplement the dataset with additional data on WTI oil price history from the World Bank (to
construct discovery value variable) and GDP per capita (IMF) to construct our developing country dummy.
Institutional quality measures are taken from a variety of sources including the Augmented Freedom House
index of Political Rights and the various components of the Polity IV scores. Our sovereign credit scores are
taken from the database of Institutional Investor Ratings, compiled by Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2011).
    3 Werefer to oil and gas discoveries as oil hereafter.
    4 Wealso include the single, even larger mega-giant discovery reported during the period of analysis as part of the supergiant
category.
   5 We show that our results are robust to the choice of WEO between spring and fall editions.
   6 We also estimate results using the compounded growth in output of the period i.e. the total growth rate.




                                                                7
                 Figure 1: Giant oil discoveries in the full sample and between 1988-2010


         Summary statistics are presented below. We have 3,781 country-year observations, comprising 185
countries over the period 1990 to 2012. We observe 285 country-years post discovery, for all countries with
a giant oil discovery in the previous 2 years. The remaining 3,496 country-year observations include all
country-years for which there is no recorded giant discovery over the previous two years.

         Our overall sample records an average forecast growth rate of 4.5 while actual growth is measured
at an average of 4.0- implying an average over-forecasting of growth across the country-year sample of around
0.5 percentage points. The absolute forecast error- i.e. the measure of overall mis-forecasting- positive or
negative is 2.2 percentage points.

         In the case of resource rich countries, (as classiﬁed by the IMF in 2012), the average forecast growth
rate was of 5.2 while the actual growth was 5.8 implying an average under-forecasting of growth of about
0.50. This is shown in Table 2.

         The summary statistics describe a forecast error of notable size. For the full sample it shows is
an over-forecasting of growth compared to actual, while for resource rich countries we observe the exact
opposite: an under-forecasting of growth of similar magnitude. The absolute forecast error is larger for
resource rich countries on average.

         IMF WEO Forecasts

         The IMF World Economic Outlook provides forecasts on key macroeconomic aggregates on a 5-year
forward looking horizon twice a year for 191 economies. Country forecasts are carried out independently by
each IMF country team. They are based on the information and data provided by the national authorities


                                                      8
                                   Variable                Mean     Std. Dev.       N
                         Actual minus forecast growth
                         annual over ﬁve years             -0.472        3.616   3781
                         Absolute diﬀerence
                         annual over ﬁve years             2.15          2.945   3781
                         Averaged actual growth rate
                         annual over ﬁve years             3.985         3.913   3781
                         Averaged forecast growth rate
                         annual over ﬁve years             4.457         2.054   3781

                                  Table 1: Summary statistics, full sample
                                   Variable            Mean Std. Dev.               N
                         Actual minus forecast growth
                         annual over ﬁve years          0.504          6.53         583
                         Absolute diﬀerence
                         annual over ﬁve years          3.194         5.717         583
                         Averaged actual growth rate
                         annual over ﬁve years          5.776         6.818         583
                         Averaged forecast growth rate
                         annual over ﬁve years          5.272         2.547         583

                             Table 2: Summary statistics, resource rich countries


such as Statistics Oﬃce, Ministry of Finance, Central Bank as well as common assumptions and guidance
provided by a central IMF team for consistency. As the IMF website reports “because forecasts are made
by the individual country teams, the methodology can vary from country to country and series to series
depending on many factors”.7 Despite the diﬀerences an important assumption underlying all forecasts is
that the present policies of national authorities will be maintained.8



2.1       Identiﬁcation strategy

We test the extent to which growth disappointments arise following a resource discovery. In particular,
we investigate the period immediately following discoveries and prior to production taking place, and how
performance is associated with government policies and institutions. Our ideal test would be to randomly
assign major resource discoveries to diﬀerent countries and then measure their performance against some
calibrated trajectory of growth. We could then observe deviations by countries with weak institutions or poor
policy making in the years following a resource discovery and examine how this performance compares to
their counter-factual trajectory. To mimic this set-up we exploit the giant oilﬁelds data as having plausibly
exogenous timing once we account for country and year ﬁxed eﬀects. This dataset has been utilized by
various studies in the literature such as Harding et al. (2016), Lei and Michaels (2014) & Arezki et al.
(2016).

           The empirical test for a resource curse is typically formulated as the diﬀerence in long run growth
  7 www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/faq.htmq1g
  8 www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/data/assump.htm




                                                       9
rates between resource-rich and non-resource-rich countries. Here non-resource-rich countries serve as a
counter-factual to the growth path of resource-rich countries. However, this overlooks two challenges. The
ﬁrst is that we do not observe the counter-factual growth rate for the resource-rich countries themselves.
Second, we do not consider the under-performance of the country in terms of harnessing its resource wealth.
Since such wealth should be a blessing, the curse is not merely a divergence from a non-resource-rich average,
but the divergence from the true growth potential from resource-wealth (Ross, 2012). Our methodology of
comparing growth to counter-factual forecast growth addresses both these challenges, albeit in the short-run
only.

          By utilizing IMF WEO growth forecasts we are able to construct a growth trajectory counter-
factual based on expert analysis and assuming a stable policy path.9 This allows us to examine how much
weak institutions and policy actions might lead to systematic deviations from the growth path; here any
systematic deviation from forecast growth that is associated with a resource discovery can be thought of as
evidence of a divergence between the modelled growth and actual growth.

         We follow others in the literature (Harding et al., 2016) to argue that the within-country timing of
individual discoveries is plausibly exogenous due to the uncertainty surrounding explorations and the limited
ability countries and companies have in triggering giant discoveries. While the country’s characteristics may
be associated with whether exploration activity takes place or not (see for example the role of institutions
versus geology (Cust and Harding, 2014)), and whether a giant discovery is feasible or not, the timing of
such a discovery is hard to predict and from a country’s point of view can be considered an unanticipated
news shock.

          We seek to test two hypotheses. First, whether growth rates are systematically lower in countries
following a resource discovery, even before production begins, compared to their predicted counter-factual.
And two, whether such under-performance is systematically associated with weak institutions and policy
making.

          We estimate the eﬀect of giant oil discoveries on the subsequent diﬀerential between forecast eco-
nomic performance and actual economic performance in the period immediately following the discovery. We
then distinguish between countries with varying quality of prior institutions and policy making. Finally, we
test against long run growth performance to estimate where short-run growth disappointments are balanced
by accelerated growth over the medium or long run.

          We discuss a variety of potential channels, including the role for IMF growth forecasts inﬂuencing
sovereign debt rating and the cost of borrowing. We present several examples and country cases that illustrate
cases of growth disappointments following major resource discoveries.

          For robustness, we test whether our estimates of an overall growth disappointment can be explained
by increased imprecision of forecasting i.e. an increase in the absolute forecasting error. We ﬁnd no evidence
for the average imprecision of forecasting increasing following a resource discovery in the global sample and
judge this unlikely to be driving our results of a growth disappointment eﬀect.
  9 www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/data/assump.htm




                                                       10
         Further, our evidence that IMF forecasts overshoot performance more in weakly governed countries
than compared to the estimated eﬀect from discoveries in general supports our interpretation that our results
are driven by countries growth under-performance rather than analyst exuberance alone. Where we examine
the estimated eﬀect of discoveries in strong institution contexts we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant eﬀect on any of our main
outcomes of interest, namely forecast growth, actual growth or the growth forecast error, further supporting
this interpretation.



2.2    Empirical speciﬁcation

We are interested in both how discoveries impact growth rates relative to their counter-factual, and how these
eﬀects might diﬀer across countries with diﬀerent quality of political institutions. We compare the growth
forecast errors in the period immediately following a resource discovery to those prior to the discovery and
further away in time. To identify the eﬀect we measure the within-country variation in growth forecast
errors, controlling for time invariant country characteristics via country ﬁxed eﬀects, as well as common
time-varying eﬀects via year ﬁxed eﬀects. For our main speciﬁcation we regress our oil discovery on the
subsequent growth performance: deﬁned in terms of forecast growth, actual growth and the resulting growth
diﬀerential.

         Under the null hypothesis, the estimated coeﬃcient on the diﬀerence between forecast growth and
actual growth should equal zero. In other words, the forecast growth eﬀect of a giant oil discovery should not
diﬀer from the growth path the country subsequently experiences. Where this estimated coeﬃcient is less
than zero, average forecasts exceed the average observed growth experience, implying oil discoveries have
proved worse for growth, over the period of 6 years, than we expected.

         We analyze a cross country panel between 1990 and 2010. In every year (t) and country (n)
we compare cumulative average t+1-t+5 year growth forecasts as reported in year (t) with actual growth
trajectory for the same t+1-t+5 period. We label the diﬀerence of growth forecast and actual growth “diﬀ”.
For example, in 1990 the IMF WEO reported an average expected growth rate of 5.1% for country Z for the
1991 to 1995 period. The actual average growth rate turned out to be 4.7% in the same country and period.
Hence the diﬀerence (shortfall) in growth rates for country Z in 1990 is - 0.4%. Forecast(Z,1990) = 5.1%,
Actual (Z, 1990) = 4.7%. Diﬀ (Z, 1990) = - 0.4%.



                               (t+1)−(t+5)                     (t+1)−(t+5)                  (t+1)−(t+5)
         GrowthDif f erentiali,t             = F orecastGrowthi,t            − ActualGrowthi,t               (1)


         We utilize the forecast growth rate, the actual and the diﬀerential across various speciﬁcations.

         Our analysis looks at whether the lagged variable of oil discoveries aﬀect growth and growth fore-
casts, and by extension the forecasting gap or error.

         Our preferred treatment variable is two year lags of oil discoveries, based on both evidence from


                                                        11
                                          Figure 2: Timeline and speciﬁcation


other papers and conﬁrmed by our own analysis. This would mean we look at whether 1990 forecasts versus
actual growth patterns are aﬀected by oil discoveries in both 1988 and 1989. Discoveries in 1990 are unlikely
to be announced in time to be reﬂected in forecasts published in April or September of that given year.
In our robustness check section, we also review a variety of diﬀerent treatment variables and lags between
discovery and the date when forecasts are being prepared. However, using additional lags might contaminate
our identiﬁcation strategy with early signs of the presource curse becoming incorporated into the forecast as
more time passes between discovery and forecast. Where we expect a negative growth response to discovery-
both forecast and actual- this eﬀect, if present, should bias our estimates towards zero.10

          We use a country-year panel regression with country-level ﬁxed eﬀects, year ﬁxed eﬀects and cluster-
robust standard errors clustered by country. We run one regression on eﬀects of lagged discoveries on
forecasts, one on actual growth performance and one on growth performance against forecast.


                                              Yi,5 = βXit + αi + yeart + i t                                                (2)


          where Yt is the ﬁve-year averaged values of growth, forecast growth and the growth diﬀerential. Xt
is a dummy taking a value of 1 if there was a major oil discovery in either of the two preceding years. αi
gives country time-invariant characteristics which we control for using country ﬁxed eﬀects. Common time
varying eﬀects yeart are captured in our year ﬁxed eﬀects term.


                               Xit = Discoverydummyi,t−1 + Discoverydummyi,t−2                                              (3)


          Our alternative diﬀerence in diﬀerence speciﬁcation takes the form:



                                             Yit = βpostit + αi + yeart + i t                                               (4)


          where postit takes the value of 1 in all countries with oil discoveries for all years after the discovery.
  10 Werun our main speciﬁcation with a variety of diﬀerent lags for our discovery shock. Our results do not diﬀer qualitatively
from our main ﬁndings.




                                                              12
3     Results

Our main results support the hypothesis that resource discoveries have a causal impact on the growth
performance of countries relative to expectations. We ﬁnd that following giant oil discoveries, the growth
rate forecasts as reported in the IMF WEO increase signiﬁcantly, while changes in actual growth remains,
on average, zero. Hence, we ﬁnd that growth forecasts have a statistically signiﬁcant upward bias relative to
the actual growth path.



3.1    Testing for a growth disappointment eﬀect following a discovery

Our ﬁrst test examines the direct relationship between a discovery and growth rates- as they deviate from
forecast growth. Here we are primarily interested in the eﬀect on three variables; the measured rate of
growth, the forecast rate of growth over the same period, and the diﬀerence between these two - the growth
forecast error which provides our estimate of the growth disappointment eﬀect.

         Table 3 presents results for our primary speciﬁcation where our dependent variable represents the
changes in our three outcomes of interest. Columns 3,4 and 5 provide additional tests when we include a
measure of institutional quality - deﬁned by the Polity IV measure of constraints on the executive (XConst),
and measured prior to our ﬁrst discovery, in 1980.

         Our estimates suggest a growth forecast error of -0.83 on average, while the estimated impact on
actual growth is -0.95 and signiﬁcant when we control for initial institutional quality. Our measure of forecast
growth alone cannot be distinguished from zero for the global sample. The interpretation on the growth
diﬀerential coeﬃcient states that the WEO forecast growth for the ﬁve year period is on average higher than
actual growth by roughly 0.833 percentage points, and this is driven by both negative growth and growth
being lower than anticipated. In other words, a negative estimated coeﬃcient on ‘Diﬀ gr’ reﬂects a growth
disappointment eﬀect.

         The result is stronger in the case of a ‘super-giant’ discovery, where forecast growth rates rise by
an average of 1.14 percentage points, adding up to an estimated diﬀerential of -1.77 percentage points. This
indicates a larger growth disappointment eﬀect.



3.2    The role of diﬀerences in institutional quality

We examine how our main results vary according to diﬀerences institutional quality, holding other things
equal. Our main results in Table 3 includes a continuous measure of institutions interacted with our discovery
dummy. Table 4 presents a wider range of possible governance scores, including our preferred measure,
XConst, which captures constraints on the executive. Additionally we present results using Freedom House
scores, measures of democracy, autocracy and the overall Polity IV scores.

         We want to distinguish our eﬀects across diﬀerent levels of institutional quality. However, institu-


                                                      13
                                    Figure 3: Actual and forecast growth


tional quality is measured on an ordinal rather than cardinal scale- as such interpretation of the eﬀect on a
continuous variable in problematic. We therefore select a threshold to split the sample between strong and
weak institutional quality. Our preferred threshold for institutional quality is set at 4 out of a score from 1
to 7 on the XConst Constraints on the Executive measure from Policy IV, measured for countries in 1980
or the nearest available year. 1980 is chosen as preceding the earliest discovery year we include- 1988. Our
calibration of the threshold value is discussed in section 5. The timing allows us to be sure we are measuring
institutional quality prior to any discovery in our sample, thus reducing potential simultaneity between oil
discoveries and our measure of institutional quality; for example, if oil wealth had an eﬀect on subsequent
political institutions.

          Table 5 and Table 6 provide separate estimates for the sample above and below an institutional
quality threshold, respectively. We present estimates decomposed by our three growth related variables: the
growth diﬀerential, the actual growth rate and the forecast growth rate.

          The results presented in Table 5 show the increased impact of discoveries in countries with observed
weaker institutions. For a given oil discovery with estimate an increase in growth diﬀerential of almost 1.4
percentage points, while forecast growth rates measured alone are not distinguishable from zero. The eﬀect
on actual growth performance is estimated to be negative, at -0.8 percentage points per year.

          Table 6 presents the same estimates but now for our sample of countries above the institutional
quality threshold. We do not observe any signiﬁcant diﬀerential between forecast and actual growth, and
the increase in actual growth and forecast growth are both indistinguishable from zero.

          These results suggest our global full sample results are being driven by those countries with weaker
institutions seeing a bigger growth disappointment eﬀect, rather than mis-forecasting of the general eﬀect of


                                                      14
                                   (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                  Diﬀ gr        Actual gr     Forecast gr      Diﬀ gr      Actual gr     Forecast gr

  Lag disc dum,two years         -0.833∗∗∗        -0.095          0.458       -1.556∗∗      -0.952∗       1.018∗
                                  (0.308)        (0.325)         (0.299)       (0.645)      (0.572)       (0.603)
  Inst*lag disco                                                                0.138        0.162         -0.159
                                                                               (0.140)      (0.123)       (0.099)
  Fixed eﬀects                  CFE YFE        CFE YFE        CFE YFE        CFE YFE       CFE YFE       CFE YFE
  Sample                           Full          Full           Full             Full         Full          Full
  Obs- Country Year)              3781           5413           4773            2807         3972           3536
  R-sq                            0.06           0.05           0.03             0.06         0.06          0.04
  F-test                          13.78          8.95           7.34            13.11         8.82          6.63
  Time trend, Standard errors clustered at country level
  ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                 (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                Diﬀ gr       Actual gr      Forecast gr      Diﬀ gr      Actual gr     Forecast gr

   Lag supergiant dum          -1.766∗          -0.336       1.138∗∗∗          1.677     -4.615∗∗∗       1.800
                               (1.062)         (0.890)        (0.351)        (4.801)       (0.816)      (1.272)
   Inst*lag Super disco                                                       -2.690      1.332∗∗∗       -0.590
                                                                             (3.584)       (0.136)      (0.714)
   Fixed eﬀects              CFE YFE         CFE YFE        CFE YFE         CFE YFE      CFE YFE       CFE YFE
   Sample                       Full           Full           Full              Full         Full         Full
   Obs- Country Year)          3781            5413           4773             2807         3972          3536
   R-sq                        0.06            0.05           0.03              0.05        0.06          0.03
   F-test                      14.18           8.80           7.62             16.10        12.81         7.05
   Time trend, Standard errors clustered at country level
   ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                              Table 3: Main results, all sample, ﬁve year cumulative


discoveries.



3.3    Synthetic controls

In this section we present synthetic control estimates for a variety of diﬀerent countries. The use of synthetic
controls allows us to demonstrate the variation in the eﬀect of discoveries on diﬀerent countries with diﬀerent
prior characteristics. Since our identiﬁcation strategy uses the exogenous timing of a major discovery, we
can use this to show eﬀects at the country speciﬁc level.

          We follow the literature in generating our synthetic controls Abadie et al. (2010). We use ﬁve
predictor variables to construct each synthetic control based on conditions in the country prior to discovery:
ethnic fragmentation, population in year prior to discovery, GDP per capita one, three, and ﬁve years before
the discovery event.

          Figures 5 and 6 gives illustrative examples of the short run GDP per capita eﬀects of a giant oil


                                                            15
                           Figure 4: Change in growth forecast error, by institutions



                                     (1)                    (2)         (3)              (4)            (5)
                                  XConst                    FH        Democ           Autoc            Polity
Lag disc dum,two years            -1.556∗∗                -2.317     -1.468∗∗∗         -0.769        -0.979∗∗∗
                                   (0.645)               (1.809)      (0.451)         (0.531)         (0.312)
Inst*lag disco                      0.138
                                   (0.140)
Inst*lag disco                                            2.162
                                                         (2.331)
Inst*lag disco                                                        0.133∗
                                                                      (0.077)
Inst*lag disco                                                                         -0.066
                                                                                      (0.097)
Inst*lag disco                                                                                         0.053
                                                                                                     (0.044)
Fixed eﬀects                  Country, Year       Country, Year    Country, Year   Country, Year   Country Year
Sample                         All sample          All sample       All sample      All sample      All sample
Obs- Country Year)                2807                1890             2807            2807            2807
R-sq                              0.06                0.03             0.06            0.06             0.06
Time trend, Standard errors clustered at country level
∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                                   Table 4: Main results, diﬀ, weak institutions



                                                             16
                           (1)                     (2)                      (3)
                          Diﬀ gr                Actual gr               Forecast gr

    lag disco          -1.354∗∗∗               -0.831∗                     0.631
                        (0.419)                (0.427)                    (0.445)
    Fixed efects     Country, Year          Country, Year              Country, Year
    Sample            Weak inst              Weak inst                  Weak inst
    Obs                  1950                   2765                       2451
    R-sq                  0.05                   0.08                      0.04
    Standard errors in parentheses
    ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                   Table 5: Main results, weak institutions
                               (1)              (2)             (3)
                             Diﬀ gr         Actual gr       Forecast gr

sinst lag disco                -0.365                 0.296                   0.158
                              (0.373)                (0.453)                 (0.141)
Fixed eﬀects               Country Year           Country Year            Country Year
Sample                      Strong inst            Strong inst             Strong inst
Obs- Country Year)              2807                  3972                    3536
R-sq                            0.05                   0.06                   0.03
Standard errors in parentheses
∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                  Table 6: Main results, strong institutions




      Figure 5: Plots above institutions threshold: xconst1980=4
                      From left: Malaysia, Israel, Trinidad & Tobago




      Figure 6: Plots below institutions threshold: xconst1980=4
                        From left: Algeria, Colombia, Mozambique




                                           17
or gas discovery. Here the examples show the diﬀerential eﬀects above and below our chose threshold of
institutional quality, constraints on the executive measured in 1980. Here we see countries such as Malaysia,
Israel and Trinidad & Tobago exceeding their counter-factual synthetic GDP per capita path. In contrast
for countries such as Algeria, Colombia and Mozambique, we see the discovery coinciding with countries
undershooting their counter-factual growth.



4    Threats to identiﬁcation

In this section we examine a range of potential channels and estimate heterogeneous eﬀects of a resource
discovery on growth. We seek to determine what may drive our headline result and thus determine the policy
implications that may derive from this ﬁnding.

         There are a range of competing interpretations for our result, including that they may be driven not
by growth under-performance, but instead by forecasting error, persistent over-forecasting, or exuberance
following discoveries. We address each of these in turn.

         Forecasting error A number of articles have scrutinized the accuracy of cross-country macroeco-
nomic forecasts. Given its long history, transparency and widespread country coverage, the majority of this
research has examined IMF WEO forecasts, which has a coverage that dwarfs other similar datasets (e.g.
OECD, Consensus Forecasts).

                                                                                         ıve forecast such as
         The accuracy of forecasts is generally evaluated against the performance of a na¨
random walk or recursive mean. The ratio of the root-mean squared forecast errors (RMSFE ratio) of actual
      ıve forecast provides a measure of accuracy. Global reviews on the accuracy of the WEO forecasts
and na¨
                                           ıve forecasts (Timmermann and Granger (2004) & Genberg and
nd that it generally perform better than na¨
Martinez (2014)). However, country and period selection matters; for a subset of developing countries over
certain periods the IMF WEO did not outperform a random walk forecast (Beach et al. (1999) & Arora and
Smyth (1990)).

         Our results suggest that there is a large and consistent divergence in growth forecasts and measured
growth following major resource discoveries. It could be the case that the size and complexity of such an
external shock may create forecasting error simply due to the wide range of possible growth responses
and diﬃculties in modelling and predicting how diﬀerent economies may respond. For example a resource
discovery may trigger capital ﬂows which may have diﬀerential eﬀects based on the monetary regime or the
depth of the ﬁnancial system.

         We can disentangle any potential forecasting error eﬀect from our growth disappointment eﬀect via
a test on the absolute growth diﬀerential as compared to our main variable of interest - the simple growth
diﬀerential. For details on construction of the variables please refer to Appendix A.

        Under conditions of increased but symmetric forecasting error we would expect the estimated
coeﬃcient on the discovery eﬀect on absolute growth diﬀerentials to be positive. In other words, we would


                                                     18
expect the absolute spread between growth forecasts and actual growth to rise following a discovery since
it may simply be harder to forecast growth after such a large external shock. In contrast, we would not
expect a result signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero for our measure of the simple growth diﬀerential- here any
over-estimate should be cancelled by under-estimates of the true rate of growth across our global sample.

                                     (1)                (2)                  (3)                     (4)                (5)
                                   Abs diﬀ            Abs diﬀ              Abs diﬀ                 Abs diﬀ            Abs diﬀ

     lag disco                     0.200               0.399                0.221                   0.132              0.464∗
                                  (0.197)             (0.277)              (0.201)                 (0.234)             (0.267)
     Fixed eﬀects              Country, Year       Country Year         Country, Year           Country Year        Country, Year
     Sample                     All sample        Weak institutions   Strong institutions   Low and Middle income   High income
     Obs- Country Year)            3781                1950                  857                    2647                1134
     R-sq                          0.02                 0.03                 0.05                   0.03                 0.13
     Standard errors clustered at country level
     ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                       Table 7: Absolute forecast error, diﬀerent samples, ﬁve year cumulative.

           Table 7 presents our results. We ﬁnd that for the global sample there is no evidence for an increase in
the imprecision of the forecasts (absolute error) after discovery. The imprecision error increases signiﬁcantly
in countries with strong institutions, on which we found no evidence of over-forecasting relative to actual
growth (simple growth diﬀerential - shown in Table 6). In countries with weak institutions, there is no
consistent increase in imprecision, but forecasts are more optimistic after discovery relative to actual growth
(Table 5).

           Persistent over-forecasting As shown in the descriptive statistics (Table 1), WEO forecasts are
on average larger than actual growth rates on the global sample. The Independent Evaluation Oﬃce’s review
of WEO forecasts estimated there is a statistically signiﬁcant persistent over-forecasting of 0.3 percentage
point across all countries and year (Genberg and Martinez, 2014). Previous research has also demonstrated
that that persistent over-forecasting is not a unique to the IMF. Its widespread occurrence has been docu-
mented across forecasts prepared by national governments (Frankel (2011) and Frankel and Schreger (2012)),
central banks (Alessi et al. (2014) and Lansing and Pyle (2015)), multilateral institutions (Genberg and Mar-
tinez, 2014) and those of the private sector such as the Consensus Forecast (Loungani, 2001). Studies have
also found similar levels of eﬃciency forecasts and a near-perfect collinearity between these sources (Loungani
(2001) and Timmermann and Granger (2004)).

           Frankel (2011) postulates that over-optimism in oﬃcial government forecasts explains why govern-
ments may have adopted overly pro-cyclical ﬁscal policy and run excessive budget deﬁcits in boom times.
Cimadomo (2012) ﬁnds that pro-cyclicality can also be fueled by biased GDP data available in real time,
which is then subject to subsequent revisions. In response to these papers, Avellan and Vuletin (2015) argue
that pro-cyclicality cannot be explained by biases in forecasts and data revisions alone, it is being enabled
and aggravated by weak institutions.

           Our estimation technique is not contaminated by any such global over-forecasting eﬀect since we
measure variation of forecasting errors within countries across time. Any ‘average’ IMF bias would be
captured in our constant term. If persistent over-forecasting is worse in certain contexts, this is handled via


                                                                      19
our use of country ﬁxed eﬀects. Here, we are able to be sure our variation comes from the within-country
variation from before and after a resource discovery, rather than an average diﬀerence between types of
country. Finally, if we are concerned about an evolution in forecasting bias across time, our use of year ﬁxed
eﬀects should capture any such common time eﬀects over our sample period.

          For our results to be driven by such bias the over-forecasting bias would have to time-vary at the
country level and be associated with the timing of major resource discoveries. We turn our attention to such
a possibility.

          Analyst exuberance following a discovery A related but separate concern would arise if mis-
forecasting occurs, but is systemically biased in an upward direction following a discovery - an eﬀect we term
“analyst exuberance”. Here we might consider that instead of growth diﬀerentials arising from below-par
growth performance, instead analysts may be systematically and “incorrectly” over-estimating the growth
path resulting from a giant oil discovery. There are similar types of issues discussed around the optimism
bias of megaprojects (Kahnemann, 2011). The passage from discovery to production is analogous to the
period from announcement and planning to eventual execution of megaprojects, where many studies have
established the underestimation of cost and complexity that subsequently emerges.

          Oil discoveries of this magnitude generate headlines, their news spreads to policy makers and
analysts. On the other hand, details of the true commercial potential of these oil ﬁnds are generally not well
known at the outset, and sometimes kept conﬁdential or exaggerated by unscrupulous investors seeking to
generate buzz. Some discoveries are not developed at all or may take several years before any investment
decision is made. While the typical oil ﬁeld takes 6-8 years to develop and produce (according to Smith
(2015)), they can also take much longer, depending on geology, market conditions and relations between the
investor and the government. All of this can contribute to a challenge for any forecaster to evaluate the true
potential and likely economic contribution of a given discovery.

          If growth forecasters systematically mis-perceive the size of the discovery, the speed at which it may
be developed or the resulting growth dividend the government and country can generate, they may in turn
systematically over-forecast the true growth potential of the discovery. This would bias our global estimated
results, and suggest growth-under-performance is occurring when in fact it is not relative to the true size of
the discovery.

          In order to test for an “analyst exuberance” eﬀect we consider a range of heterogeneity estimates
that help us unpack the source of our growth disappointment eﬀect.

          The ﬁrst test is to consider diﬀerent types of countries receiving the oil discovery shock. Under
conditions of “analyst exuberance” we might consider over-forecasting to be by resource discoveries. Here
the eﬀect would be common to discoveries across diﬀerent settings. In other words, if the eﬀect is deriving
from a forecaster eﬀect rather than real economic under-performance the estimated forecast error should not
diﬀer by countries’ institutional quality or other country features.

          In contrast, if the eﬀect stems from economic performance which is mediated by government policy
and institutional quality, we may expect our results to vary by institutional quality. Further, we may


                                                       20
hypothesize that the growth disappointment eﬀect would be stronger in countries with poorer institutions,
consistent with the resource curse literature. In both cases this is what we ﬁnd, presented above in section
3.2.

         Table 6 presents our estimates for a sub-sample of only countries with strong institutions prior
to discovery. Consistent with our priors there is no evidence of a growth disappointment eﬀect in these
countries. This suggests countries are able to realize the positive growth potential predicted by a discovery
shock, and reﬂected in growth forecasts.

         Our second test is to examine the role of a country’s ﬁrst discovery. Here we might consider
this another form of heterogeneity whereby the eﬀect on the growth forecast of a ﬁrst discovery should be
no diﬀerent to a second, or ﬁfth discovery, in terms of their forecast accuracy, unless it is conditioned on
the country’s response to the discovery. In contrast, for a country experiencing its ﬁrst major oil and gas
discovery there may be wide ranging political and economic consequences, including a higher likelihood of
policy missteps, and an absence of defensive institutions to protect against voracity eﬀects or citizen pressures
for consumption or preferential redistribution.

         In this case we ﬁnd divergent eﬀects depending on the sequential number of discovery. Section 5.1
examines this in more detail. Here, we see for a country’s ﬁrst major discovery a larger growth disappointment
eﬀect, including a negative and signiﬁcant eﬀect on GDP growth rates relative to the period prior to discovery.
Further, our results suggest that the estimated growth disappointment eﬀect is driven by country conditions
rather than the forecaster.

         Our ﬁndings are consistent with the literature examining where and why systematic forecasting
errors occur. Studies have found that any growth bias eﬀect across the global sample disappears once all
recession years are excluded from the calculations. This implies that any such bias stems from an inability
to foresee crises and forecast periods with negative growth (Genberg and Martinez, 2014). While countries
receiving IMF ﬁnancial support and under an IMF program have higher forecast errors and overly optimistic
growth projections (Beach et al. (1999) & Faust (2013)), any such eﬀect in our data would be handled via
country ﬁxed eﬀects and otherwise bias our forecasts to zero for those with IMF programs. Similarly, it
has been found that forecasts of inﬂation are systematically optimistic for countries voting in-line with the
US in the General Assembly (Dreher et al., 2007). Finally, as previously referenced, Blanchard and Leigh
(2013) ﬁnd that there were larger growth forecast errors for countries that were planning to undertake major
ﬁscal consolidation during the crises in Europe. Here they interpret this forecast error as evidence for an
over-performance by European countries relative to the expected size of ﬁscal multipliers.

         Salience of forecast errors: estimating the impact on sovereign credit scoring We ﬁnd
evidence for a divergence between growth forecasts and actual growth performance. One question is what
consequences may arise from this divergence, beyond the measured growth disappointment.

         One feature of interest is whether other agents are inﬂuenced by growth forecasts above and beyond
historical growth performance. One test for the salience of the forecasts for public policy is to see how other
variables might respond to IMF WEO growth forecasts. Sovereign credit scores given by investors provide a



                                                       21
means to test the degree to which private agents internalize growth forecasts.

               Table 8 presents estimates for the eﬀect of WEO forecasts and actual growth performance on credit
scores. We ﬁnd that lagged increases in growth forecasts improve subsequent credit scores, while lagged
increases in actual growth performance also improve credit scores but with a smaller magnitude. When we
control for both forecasts (future) and actual growth performance (past), we ﬁnd both to be signiﬁcant,
but forecasts carry a larger magnitude. When we include a lagged dummy for resource discoveries we ﬁnd
no change in the direction or signiﬁcance of the result; indicating that our eﬀect is driven by forecasts and
growth performance in general, rather than via discoveries speciﬁcally.

               Our estimates suggest that investor perceptions of sovereign risk are positively inﬂuenced by WEO
growth forecasts, even when controlling for the actual growth performance of the country. In other words,
when forecasts improve we would expect to see a subsequent improvement in a country’s sovereign investor
perception as measured by the Institutional Investor Rating dataset. This holds even when we control for
actual growth performance historically. This implies forecasts may factor into investor decisions and other
factors such as the cost of borrowing for the country.

                                              (1)       (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)         (9)
                                           CScore      CScore     CScore         CScore     CScore      CScore    CScore      CScore    CScore
  lag forecast                             2.377∗∗∗                                         1.346∗∗∗              2.257∗∗∗              1.252∗∗∗
                                            (0.484)                                          (0.337)               (0.494)               (0.338)
  L.lag forecast                                      2.154∗∗∗                                          1.009∗∗
                                                       (0.466)                                          (0.324)
  lag actual                                                     0.931∗∗∗                   0.722∗∗∗                         0.795∗∗∗   0.611∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.124)                    (0.120)                          (0.101)    (0.110)
  L.lag actual                                                                   0.997∗∗∗              0.861∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.123)               (0.130)
  Lag disc dum
   (disc in past 2 years (excl. t=0))                                                                               -2.457     -3.674     -1.894
                                                                                                                   (2.513)    (2.085)    (2.491)
  Lag disco*Lag forecast                                                                                             0.787                -0.262
                                                                                                                   (0.612)               (0.660)
  Lag discovery*Lag actual                                                                                                     0.953      1.113
                                                                                                                              (0.506)    (0.674)
  Controls                                 CFE YFE    CFE YFE    CFE YFE     CFE YFE        CFE YFE    CFE YFE    CFE YFE    CFE YFE    CFE YFE
  Standard errors                           Robust     Robust     Robust      Robust         Robust     Robust     Robust     Robust     Robust
  Obs- country year                          1095       1034       1601        1540           1080       1019       1095       1419        1072
  R-sq                                       0.54       0.52        0.50       0.54           0.61       0.62       0.54        0.55       0.61
  F Test                                     23.71      19.70      31.88       19.67          37.74      24.45      21.14      34.74       40.42
  Standard errors in parentheses
  ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                                Table 8: Eﬀects of growth measures on CR

               If our identiﬁcation and interpretation holds, it suggests IMF forecasts may be giving an unduly
optimistic assessment of the true growth potential of a major oil and gas discovery in countries with weak
institutions. In other words, in the presence of a presource curse, growth forecasts may need to be carefully
calibrated to take into account the political institutions and governance environment, or else risk distorting
expectations and potentially behavior.

               Systemically over-forecasting growth following a resource discovery compared to what a country
might reasonably achieve given its institutional context is not just evidence for a presource curse. It can have
knock-on eﬀects which may drive or exacerbate any growth disappointments. For example, a mis-perception
of the feasible growth path following a resource discovery may also be held by policy-makers, citizens and


                                                                            22
ﬁnancial markets, all of whom may be inﬂuenced by growth forecasts.



5     Robustness testing and heterogeneity

In this section we provide a variety of tests and alternative speciﬁcations to examine the robustness of our
main results.



5.1     Discovery sequencing: First, second and multiple prior discoveries

Next we examine, whether there is any diﬀerence between the economic eﬀects of a ﬁrst discovery within a
country versus subsequent discoveries. Here, we are interested in whether the impact of a resource discovery
is stronger for new producing countries or whether it persists, regardless how mature the petroleum sector
may already be.11

             First, and ﬁrst or second discoveries lead to much larger and much bigger growth diﬀerential
than subsequent ones. As a result, ﬁrst, and ﬁrst or second discoveries result in a very large (over 1.5
and 2.5 percentage points respectively) forecasting error, which drops magnitude for subsequent (multiple)
discoveries.
                                 (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)
                              First Diﬀ       First Act   First Fore   Second diﬀ      Second Act   Second fore   Multi diﬀ   Multi Act    Multi fore

          lag Fdisco            -1.695∗         0.894       0.654
                                (0.957)        (0.621)     (0.638)
          lag Secdisco                                                  -2.579∗          -0.453        0.458
                                                                        (1.310)         (0.929)       (0.781)
          lag Multidisco                                                                                           -0.597∗      -0.201        0.427
                                                                                                                   (0.325)     (0.353)       (0.324)
          Obs                    3781             5413      4773         3781            5413          4773         3781         5413         4773
          R-sq                   0.06             0.05      0.03         0.06            0.05          0.03          0.06        0.05          0.03
          Standard errors in parentheses
          ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                  (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)            (9)
                               First Diﬀ      First Act   First Fore   Second diﬀ      Second Act   Second fore   Multi diﬀ   Multi Actual     Multi fore

      inst lag Fdisco           -2.586∗∗        0.730        1.004
                                 (1.157)       (0.640)      (0.860)
      inst lag Secdisco                                                  -2.557∗∗        -1.464∗       0.449
                                                                          (1.267)        (0.827)      (0.766)
      inst lag Multidisco                                                                                          -1.001∗∗      -0.887∗         0.558
                                                                                                                    (0.449)      (0.493)        (0.499)
      Obs                         2807            3972       3536         2807            3972          3536         2807         3972           3536
      R-sq                        0.05            0.06       0.03         0.05            0.06          0.03         0.05          0.06           0.04
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




Table 9: First, ﬁrst or second and multiple discoveries, top panel all sample, lower panel weak institutions

  11 The ordering of discoveries is determined across the full giant oil discovery dataset, so discoveries are only recorded as ﬁrst

in the analysed period (1988 onwards), where there was no preceding discovery recorded in the full sample (going back to 1868).




                                                                                  23
                     Figure 7: Time series plot of pre/post treatment, annual growth rates


5.2    The short run eﬀect on the measured rate of growth

Our main results ﬁnd evidence for a growth disappointment eﬀect. However, for our global sample there does
not appear to be a clear negative eﬀect on actual growth rates from the lagged discovery, compared to years
prior to and later in the sample period. This may help explain why post-discovery growth disappointments
have gone unnoticed in the literature until now.

         We next examine the link between discoveries and measured actual growth rates in diﬀerent settings.
Table 10 presents the results on actual growth rates for diﬀerent event study samples. Here we take a period
symmetric around the year of discovery t.

         Our results indicate some evidence for a short-run negative response in growth rates compared
to the period immediately preceding discovery. For the ﬁve year post-discovery growth is on average 0.14
percentage points lower than the same period pre-discovery. This eﬀect is smaller for the 10 year comparison-
only 0.06 percentage points lower on average.

         However, when we extend our diﬀerence-in-means test to the 15 year period and to the full sample
of years prior and post discovery, this eﬀect is no longer measured as signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.



5.3    Testing for persistence in growth disappointments (long run growth)

Our study ﬁnds diverging short-term growth eﬀects as a result of discoveries across countries depending on
their institutional quality. A question of interest is whether these results persist or even accentuate in the
longer term, or whether these eﬀects are only temporary, with long-run convergence to a similar steady state
between countries.

         Table 10 shows that for the ﬁve and ten year pre vs. post discovery periods, average GDP growth


                                                      24
                                 (1)                   (2)                        (3)               (4)               (5)                 (6)
                              Actual gr             Actual gr                  Actual gr         Actual gr         Actual gr             est6

  post                        -5.166∗∗∗         -7.508∗∗                       -0.911            -1.760∗          -2.941∗∗              0.559
                               (1.876)           (2.891)                      (1.267)            (0.949)           (1.378)             (1.055)
  Fixed eﬀects               CFE YFE           CFE YFE                       CFE YFE            CFE YFE         CFE YFE               CFE YFE
  Period                     Five years        Five years                    Five years         Ten years        Ten years            Ten years
  Sample                     All sample      Weak institutions           Strong institutions    All sample    Weak institutions   Strong institutions
  SE                           Robust            Robust                       Robust             Robust            Robust              Robust
  Obs- Country Year)           432.00            242.00                        179.00             779.00           440.00               313.00
  R-sq                           0.11              0.19                         0.35               0.08              0.12                0.18
  inst pol, Standard errors clustered at country level
  ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                           Table 10: Actual annual growth rates, Polity, diﬀerent event samples


is lower following a discovery. However, when we examine longer comparison groups we ﬁnd no evidence for
an average divergence from zero, showing in Table 11. Similarly, when we divide the sample by institutional
quality we ﬁnd no evidence for an average long run eﬀect.

            Our ﬁndings on the growth eﬀects of resource discoveries suggest that the conventional estimation
approaches used in the literature may overlook a short-run presource curse eﬀect. For example, Smith
(2015) notes: “One possible way to deﬁne the event year is the year of discovery, but this does not make
sense for a growth regression, since GDP is not directly aﬀected by the discovery of resources, but rather their
extraction”. Instead Smith focuses on estimating the resource curse eﬀect from the year of exploitation, which
can occur 8 or more years beyond the year of discovery. We ﬁnd, to the contrary of Smith’s hypothesis,
a systematic short-run growth under-performance following discoveries across our sample. Indeed, where
comparisons are made for growth in the period prior and post the year of production starting, such estimates
risk contamination by the presence of short-run presource curse eﬀect.

            It is worth noting, when extended to the long-run which captures the eﬀects of oil production as well
as discovery, we ﬁnd no evidence for a long run (unconditional) resource curse eﬀect. As found by Warner
(2015), oil production can mechanically raise the aggregate level of growth in an economy, even where the
rest of the economy fails to beneﬁt fully from the boom (for example when measured in terms of growth in
non-resource GDP). Our ﬁndings would be consistent with this observation.

                                                                          (1)            (2)            (3)
                                                                        AGrowth        AGrowth        AGrowth

                                             post                         -0.029         0.004          0.009
                                                                         (0.921)        (0.966)        (0.870)
                                             Controls                  CFE YFE         CFE, YFE      CFE YFE
                                             Standard errors             Robust         Robust         Robust
                                             Event sample             Fifteen years   Twenty years   Full sample
                                             Obs- country year             1097          1382           1946
                                             Actual growth rate
                                             * p¡0.10, ** p¡0.05, *** p¡0.01


                             Table 11: Actual annual growth, long run, diﬀerent event samples




                                                                                25
                                  (1)                   (2)                  (3)               (4)              (5)                   (6)
                               Actual gr             Actual gr            Actual gr         Actual gr        Actual gr             Actual gr

  post                           0.591               0.723                   1.604∗            1.096           0.924                  1.416
                                (0.680)             (0.937)                 (0.829)           (0.809)         (1.236)                (0.826)
  Fixed eﬀects                CFE YFE             CFE YFE                 CFE YFE           CFE YFE         CFE YFE                CFE YFE
  Period                     Fifteen years       Fifteen years           Fifteen years       All years       All years              All years
  Sample                      All sample        Weak institutions     Strong institutions   All sample    Weak institutions    Strong institutions
  SE                            Robust              Robust                  Robust           Robust           Robust                Robust
  Obs- Country Year)            1097.00             668.00                  280.00           1946.00          1187.00                472.00
  R-sq                            0.06                0.08                    0.17              0.06            0.07                   0.17
  inst, Standard errors clustered at country level
  ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                                  Table 12: Actual 5yr growth rates, diﬀerent event samples.


5.4      Controlling for prior drilling and production

We may be concerned that our result is being driven by the eﬀects of prior oil sector activities. For example
if discovery today is correlated with prior exploration drilling, we may worry that our estimated treatment
eﬀect is actually capturing some measure of the eﬀect from earlier drilling or oil production, rather than a
presource curse eﬀect.

            We therefore control for prior drilling, in terms of country well count at the time of discovery. We
also control for whether the country is already an oil producer at the time of discovery.

            Our forecast error results remain unchanged with the inclusion of these controls, suggesting such
factors are not driving our main results.

                                                            (1)                   (2)                     (3)                  (4)
                                                           Diﬀ gr                Diﬀ gr                  Diﬀ gr               Diﬀ gr

      Lag disc dum,two years                              -0.833∗∗∗             -0.827∗∗∗            -0.824∗∗∗             -0.819∗∗∗
                                                           (0.308)               (0.311)              (0.308)               (0.310)
      Exploration drilling prior sum                                              -0.000                                     -0.000
                                                                                 (0.000)                                    (0.000)
      Production dummy                                                                               -0.157                  -0.156
                                                                                                    (0.470)                 (0.470)
      Fixed eﬀects                                    Country, Year         Country, Year        Country, Year           Country, Year
      Sample                                           All sample            All sample           All sample              All sample
      Obs- Country Year)                                  3781                  3781                  3485                    3485
      R-sq                                                0.06                  0.06                  0.06                    0.06
      Time trend, Standard errors clustered at country level, proddum control
      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



             Table 13: Controlling for prior exploration well count and whether country is producing




                                                                          26
                              (1)                      (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)
                           Actual gr                Actual gr      Actual gr      Actual gr         Actual gr      Actual gr

 lag disco                  -0.095                    -0.446         -0.480         -0.662           -0.831∗         -0.670
                           (0.325)                   (0.678)        (0.380)        (0.502)           (0.427)        (0.423)
 Fixed efects           Country Year               Country Year   Country Year   Country Year      Country Year   Country Year
 Sample                  Full sample                XConst 1       XConst 2       XConst 3          XConst 4       XConst 5
 Obs                         5413                      313            1132           2063             2765            3112
 R-sq                        0.05                      0.16           0.06           0.09              0.08           0.07
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                                        Table 14: Main results, actual growth, weak institutions

                             (1)                       (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)
                            Diﬀ gr                    Diﬀ gr         Diﬀ gr         Diﬀ gr            Diﬀ gr         Diﬀ gr

 lag disco                -0.833∗∗∗                   1.142∗         -0.527        -1.157∗∗∗         -1.354∗∗∗      -1.337∗∗∗
                           (0.308)                   (0.556)        (0.473)         (0.398)           (0.419)        (0.402)
 Fixed efects           Country Year               Country Year   Country Year   Country Year      Country Year   Country Year
 Sample                  Full sample                XConst 1       XConst 2       XConst 3          XConst 4       XConst 5
 Obs                        3781                       220            795            1438              1950           2206
 R-sq                        0.06                      0.16           0.03            0.05              0.05           0.06
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗   p < 0.10,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01


                                         Table 15: Main results, forecast diﬀ, weak institutions


5.5      Testing for a threshold in institutional quality

Our main estimates show that when we control for, and interact our discovery variable with institutional
quality, the magnitude and signiﬁcance of our results increases. Indeed, we ﬁnd that for countries with
lower institutional quality, the growth disappointment eﬀects appear stronger. In contrast, countries with
strong institutions prior to discovery appear to suﬀer no growth disappointment eﬀect following a resource
discovery.

            Below we test for whether our growth disappointment eﬀect exhibits a threshold- whereby countries
below the threshold show qualitatively diﬀerent results compared to countries above the threshold. Table 14
and Table 15 provide estimates by actual growth and growth forecast error respectively. Each column gives
a diﬀerent cut-oﬀ of institutional quality, limiting the sample. In both cases the magnitude of our growth
disappointment eﬀect is maximized for countries below the threshold XConst=4. This is the threshold we
use in our main split-sample estimates.




                                                                     27
5.6      Testing for diﬀerent size of forecasting windows

The IMF produces 5-year forecasts in each WEO edition. We use this ﬁve yearly forecast as our default
testing horizon, since it captures the maximum information regarding a country’s growth trajectory in any
given year. In order to check the robustness of our results we can narrow this forecast window by excluding
outer years from our variables and re-run our main speciﬁcation.

           Table 16 below presents our results using forecast windows of 1, 2, 3 and 4 years in addition to our
baseline estimates using the 5 year window. For windows shorter than 4-years we fail to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
eﬀect. This suggests that shorter windows we are unable to measure with precision our negative eﬀect on the
forecast error. The magnitude and signiﬁcance is maximized at the longest window available in the WEO
forecasts.

                                                  (1)              (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)
                                                 Diﬀ 1y           Diﬀ 2y      Diﬀ 3y          Diﬀ 4y      Diﬀ 5y

    Lag disc dum
     (disc in past 2 years (excl. t=0))           -0.599          -0.527        -0.350      -0.597∗∗      -0.833∗∗∗
                                                 (0.509)         (0.381)       (0.305)       (0.295)       (0.308)
    Dep var                                   1 yr window     2 yr window   3 yr window   4 yr window   5 yr window
    Fixed eﬀects                               CFE YFE         CFE YFE       CFE YFE       CFE YFE       CFE YFE
    Sample                                         Full             Full         Full          Full          Full
    Obs- Country Year)                             4522            4335          4148         3964          3781
    R-sq                                           0.06            0.07          0.07          0.06          0.06
    F-test                                        15.20            12.41        11.89         12.82         13.78
    Time trend, Standard errors clustered at country level
    ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                        Table 16: Forecast error results, all sample, diﬀerent time windows




6      Conclusions

We ﬁnd that in the years following a giant oil or gas discovery, growth forecasts increase signiﬁcantly while
actual growth performance does not. Following a major discovery in countries with weaker prior institutional
quality, actual growth performance is negative relative to the same years prior to the discovery. These results
add up to a systematic growth diﬀerential reﬂecting growth under-performance relative to a counter-factual
anticipated growth path. Our results increase in magnitude in the case of supergiant discoveries. Furthermore
when we limit our analysis to only oil discoveries (excluding gas) the magnitude also increases.

           We interpret our growth disappointment estimates as causal evidence that discoveries may trigger
growth under-performance relative to expectations in countries with weaker governance. We ﬁnd these eﬀects
set in following major discoveries but prior to production starting; a phenomenon we term the presource
curse.



                                                             28
          Meanwhile, we ﬁnd no evidence that discoveries lead to increased forecasting error on average in our
global sample, and instead ﬁnd evidence that our results are driven by growth under-performance in countries
with weaker institutional quality. Furthermore, our approach controls for any persistent over-forecasting that
may be present across time or space that is unrelated to the timing of resource discoveries.

          Our contribution is threefold: we present the ﬁrst empirical evidence of a ‘presource curse’ whereby
growth disappointments are observed following resource discoveries. Second, we present new evidence on the
primary importance of institutions and governance in mediating any such presource curse eﬀects. Third, we
build on earlier work such as Blanchard and Leigh (2013) to demonstrate how growth forecast errors can be
useful to evaluate the divergence between economic performance and oﬃcial forecasts, and its implications
for policy making. Here, our ﬁndings suggest that this divergence is associated with weaker governance and
political institutions.

          We leave it to future research to examine the underlying mechanisms that may generate the growth
eﬀects we estimate.




                                                      29
A    Deﬁnition of variables

    GDPi,t                   Real GDP for country I in period t
         t+5
    F GDPi,t                 Real GDP forecast for country I as per WEO published in year t
                             for period t+5
                t+1−t+5
    ActualGrowthi,t          =(GDPi,t+5 /GDPi,t )/1/5 − 1
                             The 5 year average growth rate for for country i as per WEO
                             published in year t
                   t+1−t+5
    F orecastGrowthi,t       = (FGDPi,t+5 /GDPi,t )/1/5 − 1
                             The 5 year average forecast growth rate for country i as per WEO
                             published in year t
               t+1−t+5                             t+1−t+5                 t+1−t+5
    GrowthDif fi,t           = ForecastGrowth      i,t       − ActualGrowthi,t
                             The 5 year average growth diﬀerential for country i as per WEO
                             published in year t
                  t+1−t+5                      t+1−t+5                +1−t+5
    AbsGrowthDif fi,t        = |F orecastGrowthi,t     − ActualGrowtht
                                                                     i,t     |
                             Absolute value of 5 year average growth diﬀerential for country i
                             as per WEO published in year t
    LagDiscoi,t              A dummy variable which equals one if one or more giant oil dis-
                             covery was made in country i in the two year prior to the WEO
                             being published in year t
    LagSuperDiscoi,t         A dummy variable which equals one if one or more supergiant oil
                             discovery was made in country i in the two year prior to the WEO
                             being published in year t
    LagSignDiscoi,t          A dummy variable which equals one if the estimated value of dis-
                             coveries made are larger than 1 percent GDP in country i in the
                             two year prior to the WEO being published in year t
    LagF irstDiscoi,t        A dummy variable which equals one if country i made its ﬁrst giant
                             oil discovery in the two year prior to the WEO being published in
                             year t
    Insti                    A dummy variable which divides country into two groups based
                             on whether they scored above or below mean on the Augmented
                             Freedom House index of Political Rights in 1985, the last year we
                             have data for before our sample starts




                                              30
References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). Synthetic control methods for comparative case stud-
 ies: Estimating the eﬀect of california’s tobacco control program. Journal of the American statistical
 Association 105 (490), 493–505.
Alessi, L., E. Ghysels, L. Onorante, R. Peach, and S. Potter (2014). Central bank macroeconomic forecast-
  ing during the global ﬁnancial crisis: The european central bank and federal reserve bank of new york
  experiences. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 32 (4), 483–500.

Arezki, R., V. A. Ramey, and L. Sheng (2016). News shocks in open economies: Evidence from giant oil
  discoveries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , qjw030.
Arora, H. K. and D. J. Smyth (1990). Forecasting the developing world: An accuracy analysis of the imf’s
  forecasts. International Journal of Forecasting 6 (3), 393–400.

Avellan, L. and G. Vuletin (2015). Fiscal procyclicality and output forecast errors. Journal of International
  Money and Finance 55, 193 – 204. Macroeconomic and ﬁnancial challenges facing Latin America and the
  Caribbean after the crisis.
Beach, W. W., A. B. Schavey, and I. M. Isidro (1999). How reliable are IMF economic forecasts?

Blanchard, O. J. and D. Leigh (2013). Growth forecast errors and ﬁscal multipliers. The American Economic
  Review 103 (3), 117–120.
Cimadomo, J. (2012). Fiscal policy in real time. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 114 (2), 440–465.
Collier, P. (2017). The institutional and psychological foundations of natural resource policies. The Journal
  of Development Studies 53 (2), 217–228.

Cust, J. and T. Harding (2014). Institutions and the location of oil exploration. OxCarre Research Paper 127.
Dreher, A., S. Marchesi, and J. R. Vreeland (2007). The politics of IMF forecasts.
Eastwood, R. K. and A. J. Venables (1982). The macroeconomic implications of a resource discovery in an
  open economy. The Economic Journal 92 (366), 285–299.

   as, A. and L. H. Summers (2016). The permanent eﬀects of ﬁscal consolidations. Technical report,
Fat´
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Faust, J. (2013). A report of the predictive accuracy of the IMF’s WEO forecast. Version as of February 5.
Frankel, J. A. (2011, July). Over-optimism in forecasts by oﬃcial budget agencies and its implications.
  Working Paper 17239, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Frankel, J. A. and J. Schreger (2012, August). Over-optimistic oﬃcial forecasts in the eurozone and ﬁscal
  rules. Working Paper 18283, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Frynas, J. G., G. Wood, and T. Hinks (2016). The resource curse without natural resources: expectations
  of resource booms and their impact. African Aﬀairs .
Genberg, H. and A. Martinez (2014). On the accuracy and eﬃciency of IMF forecasts: A survey and some
 extensions. IEO Background Paper No. BP/14/04 (Washington: Independent Evaluation Oﬃce of the
 IMF) .
Harding, T., R. R. Stefanski, and G. Toews (2016). Boom goes the price: Giant resource discoveries and
  real exchange rate appreciation.



                                                     31
Lansing, K. J. and B. Pyle (2015). Persistent overoptimism about economic growth. FRBSF Economic
  Letter .
Lei, Y.-H. and G. Michaels (2014). Do giant oilﬁeld discoveries fuel internal armed conﬂicts? Journal of
  Development Economics 110, 139–157.

Loungani, P. (2001). How accurate are private sector forecasts? cross-country evidence from consensus
  forecasts of output growth. International Journal of Forecasting 17 (3), 419 – 432. Reassesing Modern
  Business Cycles.
Mansoorian, A. (1991). Resource discoveries and excessive external borrowing.       The Economic Jour-
 nal 101 (409), 1497–1509.

Mehlum, H., K. Moene, and R. Torvik (2006). Institutions and the resource curse. The economic jour-
 nal 116 (508), 1–20.
Pieschacon, A. (2012). The value of ﬁscal discipline for oil-exporting countries. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 59 (3), 250–268.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoﬀ (2011). From ﬁnancial crash to debt crisis. The American Economic
  Review 101 (5), 1676–1706.
Robinson, J. A., R. Torvik, and T. Verdier (2006). Political foundations of the resource curse. Journal of
  development Economics 79 (2), 447–468.
Ross, M. (2012). The oil curse: How petroleum wealth shapes the development of nations. Princeton Uni-
  versity Press.
Ross, M. L. (2015). What have we learned about the resource curse? Annual Review of Political Science 18,
  239–259.
Smith, B. (2015). The resource curse exorcised: Evidence from a panel of countries. Journal of Development
  Economics 116, 57–73.
Timmermann, A. and C. W. Granger (2004). Eﬃcient market hypothesis and forecasting. International
  Journal of forecasting 20 (1), 15–27.
Toews, G., P.-L. Vezina, et al. (2016). Resource discoveries and fdi bonanzas. Technical report, Oxford
  Centre for the Analysis of Resource Rich Economies, University of Oxford.

Tornell, A. and P. R. Lane (1999). The voracity eﬀect. american economic review , 22–46.
Van der Ploeg, F. (2011). Natural resources: Curse or blessing? Journal of Economic Literature 49 (2),
  366–420.
Warner, A. M. (2015). Natural Resource Booms in the Modern Era. International Monetary Fund.

Wills, S. (2014). Optimal monetary responses to oil discoveries.




                                                    32
