                                                  WPS8172


Policy Research Working Paper                    8172




   Does Arsenic-Contaminated Drinking
  Water Limit Early Childhood Development
               in Bangladesh?
                              Sabrina S. Haque
                                George Joseph
                               Nazia Moqueet




Water Global Practice Group
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8172


  Abstract
 Arsenic contamination in shallow groundwater aquifers                              childhood development outcomes in a sample of around
 remains a major barrier to providing access to safe drinking                       7,500 children ages 3–5 years. Early childhood develop-
 water in Bangladesh. Chronic exposure to arsenic has been                          ment is measured in four skills domains: literacy-numeracy,
 shown to cause serious health impacts, including various                           physical, social-emotional, and learning using the Early
 cancers, skin lesions, neurological damage, heart disease,                         Childhood Development Index. Arsenic contamination is
 and hypertension. Numerous epidemiological studies have                            measured in source drinking water at the cluster-level. After
 shown cognitive impacts on memory, linguistic-abstraction,                         controlling for a range of demographic, social, and economic
 attention, learning, and physical ability. The neurotoxic                          characteristics of households, the results show that arsenic
 effects of arsenic could be particularly harmful for children                      contamination is significantly and negatively associated
 during their critical growth periods and have impacts on                           with the overall Early Childhood Development Index, on
 early childhood development. This study uses cross-sectional                       outcomes within the physical, social-emotional, and learn-
 data from the nationally representative 2012–13 Bangla-                            ing skills domains. Further, there is a clear dose-response
 desh Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey to investigate the                          relationship, where those children with exposure to higher
 effects of arsenic contamination in drinking water on early                        concentrations of arsenic have worse developmental outcomes.



  This paper is a product of the Water Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
  access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working
  Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at gjoseph@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
   Does Arsenic-Contaminated Drinking Water Limit
    Early Childhood Development in Bangladesh?

                                       Sabrina S. Haque
                                          George Joseph
                                        Nazia Moqueet




Key words: arsenic, early childhood development, water quality, health
JEL Code: C13; I14; Q57
    1.        Introduction
    Population exposure to inorganic arsenic through drinking water supply continues to be a public
health issue across the world, from numerous regions of the Americas to Asia. Naturally occurring
inorganic arsenic in groundwater has particularly overwhelmed Bangladesh, in what has been deemed
the “largest mass poisoning of a population in history” (Smith et al., 2000). An estimated 35 million
to 77 million Bangladeshis were chronically exposed to some level of arsenic through drinking water
from 2000 to 2010 alone (Flanagan, et al., 2012). The exact mechanisms of the natural occurrence of
arsenic in groundwater supply have been hypothesized and debated and can vary depending on
hydrogeological and physiogeological contexts of regions in Bangladesh (Burgess, et al., 2010;
Ravenscroft., et al., 2005). However, the presence of arsenic in drinking water supply and its effects
on human health have been well documented since its discovery in well water in the early 1990s in
Bangladesh. Though arsenic presents itself as colorless, odorless, and tasteless in drinking water, the
heavy metal causes severe health impacts ranging from skin lesions to various deadly cancers and
diseases (Ravenscroft, et al., 2009).
    Similar to other heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, and manganese, arsenic can also penetrate
the blood-brain barrier and have neurotoxic effects that may lead to irreversible neurological and
cognitive damage. Numerous epidemiological studies have demonstrated adverse effects of arsenic on
cognitive performance in both children and adults. For example, Wasserman et al. demonstrated in
two separate studies that children exposed to low to moderate levels of arsenic had overall lower
intellectual functioning among 10-year old and 6-year old Bangladeshi children (Wasserman, et al.,
2004) (Wasserman, et al., 2007). A few studies additionally report the specific domains of cognitive
function that are most impacted by arsenic in school-aged children including negative effects on
memory, ability to focus and solve problems, sensory and motor function, and verbal and linguistic
capability (Rosado, et al., 2007) (Asadullah & Chaudhury, 2008; Parvez, et al., 2011; Tsai, et al., 2003).
Apart from the literal neurotoxic effect of arsenic poisoning, there are reasonable speculations on the
indirect effect of arsenic poisoning on economic opportunities primarily acting through health status
and cognitive abilities of victims. As such, those suffering from symptoms of arsenicosis have poorer
health status and may subsequently have relatively poorer school or work attendance and performance.
Victims may even be ostracized from public settings (Asadullah & Chaudhury, 2008). Murray and
Sharmin, for example, observed that Bangladeshi children (aged 6-10 years) who drank arsenic-

                                                                                                        2
contaminated water attended fewer days of school per year compared to those who drank arsenic-free
water. The study further found that young adults (aged 19-21 years) who relied on arsenic-
contaminated water had six months less schooling, on average, compared to their counterparts who
drank arsenic-free water (Murray & Sharmin, 2015). On productivity, one study estimates that
lowering the concentrations of retained arsenic among Bangladeshi prime-aged males to those levels
found in unaffected countries would increase earnings by 9 percent (Pitt, et al., 2012).
    Although there is significant evidence on the damaging effects of arsenic on cognitive function
and educational attainment, the bulk of the literature notes these effects among adolescent-aged
children and young adults, with relatively little focus on very young children. Yet, exposure to arsenic
could be most harmful during the initial critical windows of growth when the developing brain is most
sensitive (Rice and Barone, 2000; Kile, et al., 2016; von Ehrenstein, et al., 2007). Therefore, reduced
cognitive and educational attainment in later childhood and adulthood could be an accumulative result
of arsenic exposure during in utero and early childhood. Before a child even sets foot in school, he or
she may already have vastly different cognitive abilities than his or her classmates, which may have
significant implications for future individual health, education, and livelihood.
    In this paper, we seek to measure the magnitude of the effect of varying levels of arsenic
concentration in drinking water on early childhood development skillsets in children aged 3-5 using
nationally representative household survey data. We ask: does arsenic exposure through drinking water
lead to relatively poorer performance in skills related to healthy early childhood development? Such
an effect would be consistent with evidence on the impact of arsenic poisoning on intellectual function
and educational attainment and further motivate the prioritization of arsenic mitigation in Bangladesh
for not only water and health policy, but also for early childhood development and education policy.
We additionally attempt to determine the particular types of skills that arsenic poisoning can inhibit.
We specifically examine the effects of arsenic on physical, social-emotional, literacy-numeracy, and
learning skills domains and observe differences in effects experienced by the poor and non-poor.
    We present an econometric analysis using cross-sectional data from the 2012-2013 Bangladesh
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS). To examine early childhood development, we analyze
scores from the Early Childhood Development Index (ECDI), a novel 10-item module developed by
UNICEF to monitor performance indicators for basic skills related to good early childhood
development. In measuring childhood exposure to arsenic, we use MICS results from arsenic testing
at a child’s household water source used for drinking. We quantify arsenic exposure in three ways: 1)
based on the WHO guideline for safe levels of arsenic for human consumption of less than 10 parts

                                                                                                      3
per billion (ppb) of arsenic; 2) based on the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) standard of less than
50 ppb of arsenic; and 3) based on a combination of the WHO and GoB standards by categorizing
three risk levels as low risk (0-10 ppb), medium risk (11-50 ppb), and high risk (51+ ppb). After
controlling for a range of demographic, social, and economic characteristics of households, the results
from the logit regression models show that arsenic contamination is significantly and negatively
associated with the overall ECDI measurement, and specifically on outcomes within the physical,
social-emotional, and learning skills domains. Further, there was a clear dose-response relationship,
where those children with exposure to higher concentrations of arsenic had relatively worse
developmental outcomes. Moreover, children from non-poor households significantly had better
results on the EDCI than children from poor households when exposure status of arsenic was
comparable. However, non-poor children who are exposed to arsenic had worse development
outcomes than poor children who are not exposed.
    The paper contributes to the literature on arsenic and cognitive development in three ways. One
is that it specifically examines the developmental effects of arsenic poisoning in younger child
populations. It also demonstrates a clear dose-response relationship and compares the effects based
on both WHO and Bangladesh water quality standards. Finally, it utilizes a large nationally-
representative sample size of around 7,500 children aged 3-5 and observes differences in poor and
non-poor populations. The paper continues in four sections. Section 2 provides a background on
arsenic contamination in drinking water in Bangladesh and summarizes evidence on arsenic’s
subsequent effects on health and cognition to corroborate why there could be a negative effect of
arsenic on early childhood development skill domains. Next, section 3 describes the data used for the
analysis and the methods for building the logistic regression models, and section 4 presents the results.
Finally, section 5 discusses the findings and policy implications of the presented analysis.


    2.       Background: Arsenic contamination in Bangladesh
         and its effects on health and cognition
    Arsenic poisoning from drinking water in Bangladesh was ironically an unintended consequence
of campaigns that aimed to increase population access to safe and clean water. During the 1970s,
international organizations and NGOs encouraged Bangladeshi households to stop drinking from
surface water sources such as ponds, rivers, and lakes, which are highly susceptible to fecal and

                                                                                                       4
industrial pollution that can lead to an array of water-borne and diarrheal diseases (Field, et al., 2011).
Unlike surface water sources, groundwater sources are more protected from microbial contamination
because they are not exposed in the open and are naturally filtered through bedrock and sediments.
Millions of groundwater tubewells were thus installed throughout Bangladesh from the 1970s onwards
(Smith, et al., 2000).
    However, in the early 1990s, there were emerging signs that Bangladeshis primarily from rural
areas were developing signs of arsenicosis, a common effect of prolonged arsenic poisoning marked
by skin discolorations and lesions, cancers, blood vessel diseases, and other disorders (Smith, et al.,
2000). After there was enough evidence to document the scale of the problem, a massive testing
campaign was launched in 1998 to test tubewells for the presence of arsenic in areas with high
incidence of reported arsenicosis. By 2005, the testing campaign resulted in millions of tubewells that
were painted red to indicate that a tubewell exceeded the Bangladeshi standard arsenic concentration
level of 50 ppb (Bennear, et al., 2013). The most recent estimates indicate that about 25 percent of all
tubewells across Bangladesh exceed the WHO recommended safe levels of arsenic at 20 ppb
(Flanagan, et al., 2012).
    Even with advancements in mitigation strategies, millions of Bangladeshis are still at risk for
arsenic poisoning today from contaminated drinking water, soil, and crops (Flanagan, et al., 2012).
The effect of arsenic poisoning on human health has long been established. Exposure to arsenic is
associated with several dose-dependent illnesses, such as cancer of the lung and bladder,
cardiovascular and pulmonary disease, and skin lesions (Smith et al., 1998; Sohel et al., 2009; Flanagan
et al., 2012). Ingestion of arsenic has also been shown to contribute to poor pregnancy-related
outcomes, including spontaneous abortion, low-birth weight, and other pregnancy complications
(Kile, et al., 2014; Kile, et al., 2016). At an individual-level, the degree of toxicity of arsenic can depend
on a person’s general health, genetics, and diet (Anawar, et al., 2002; Karim, 2000). Population-wide
studies in Bangladesh have found that hyperpigmentation and keratosis are the most diagnosed health
effects of chronic arsenic poisoning followed by skin cancer and other internal cancers (Karim, 2000;
Yu, et al., 2003). However, it is conjectured that arsenic contributes to other dysfunctions that are
more difficult to diagnose or attribute solely to arsenic poisoning (Pitt, et al., 2012).
    Neurological damage is perhaps one of the more hidden consequences of arsenic poisoning; yet
there is growing research to indicate that there are significant population effects on cognitive
dysfunction. One of the first epidemiological studies to note correlations between arsenic exposure
and neurological damage in children is by authors Calderon et al. (2001). Using the Weschler

                                                                                                            5
Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC), Calderon et al. demonstrate impairments in long-term memory
and linguistic abstraction in Mexican children aged six to nine years old. Wasserman et al. (2004) and
(2007) show similar neurologic consequences in Bangladeshi children. In a cross-sectional study of
10-year old children in Arhaizar, Bangladesh, it was found that those children exposed to arsenic levels
greater than 50 ppb in drinking water tested worse on the WISC in Performance raw scores compared
to those children exposed to less than 5.5 ppb arsenic in drinking water. Children in the highest quartile
of arsenic exposure scored on average 10 points lower in Performance raw scores compared to the
lowest quartile. The Performance score measured accuracy in picture completing, coding, block
design, and maze tests, while arsenic exposure was measured by testing household water sources
(Wasserman, et al., 2004). Later in 2007, a second study by Wasserman et al. implemented comparable
intellectual functioning tests to a younger subset of children at age six. Although not as strong of an
association as seen among 10-year old children, the authors saw a significant decline in raw scores
dependent on a child’s exposure to arsenic in well water (Wasserman, et al., 2007). These results
complement an earlier study in Taiwan, China, which found strong negative correlations between well-
water arsenic and similar Performance-type tests for older children (Tsai et al, 2003).
    Additionally, Rosado et al. (2007) found a negative impact on memory and the ability to focus and
solve problems among children aged 6-8, while Asadullah and Chaudhury (2008) showed that
adolescent male Bangladeshi children who were exposed to arsenic at home had lower mathematics
scores in school compared to those who had no contact with arsenic (Asadullah & Chaudhury, 2008).
Most studies observing links between arsenic and cognitive function in children only examine
children’s current exposure status to arsenic. However, von Ehrenstein et al. consider in-utero arsenic
exposure as well as present arsenic concentration exposure in children aged 5-15 years old in West
Bengal. Again, using the WISC, the authors found a negative correlation between raw scores and
current arsenic exposure status; however, they did not find a significant association between raw scores
and arsenic exposure during pregnancy as hypothesized (von Ehrenstein et al., 2007).
    Aside from intellectual functioning, there is strong evidence asserting other arsenic-related
neurological impairments including motor disabilities. In a cross-sectional study of children aged 8-11
years old in rural Bangladesh, Parvez et al. observed impairments particularly in fine manual control
and body coordination skills (Parvez et al., 2011), while Tseng et al. (2006) found impairments in
motor and sensory nerve peripheral conduction. However, unlike this paper, these studies do not
examine young children to observe effects in early childhood development.



                                                                                                        6
    3.      Methodology
    3.1    Data

We use cross-sectional data from the nationally representative 2012-13 Bangladesh Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey (MICS) to investigate the effect of arsenic contamination in drinking water on early
childhood development outcomes in a sample of 7,502 children aged 3-5 years. The Bangladesh 2012-
13 MICS is a nationally representative survey with health, nutrition, socio-economic, education, and
housing characteristics indicators on women and children across urban and rural areas of the 7
divisions and 64 districts of Bangladesh. In answering our research question, we particularly examine
indicators on arsenic contamination in household drinking water and early childhood development.
The 2012-2013 MICS provides the latest nationally-representative data on household arsenic
contamination and is the first to provide nationally-representative data on early childhood
development skills domains.

    To estimate arsenic exposure, we use the results from water quality testing conducted in the
MICS. For the arsenic test, the MICS team randomly selected 5 households per cluster of 20
households and collected a water sample at the household’s reported source point for drinking water.
Arsenic was measured by the MICS team using the Arsenic Econo-Quick Test Kit (Industrial Test
Systems, USA) and lab tests (UNICEF, 2015). Our main independent variables of interest are arsenic
exposure from household drinking water wherein arsenic levels are constructed in three different ways.
The first arsenic indicator variable is constructed as a binary variable, where the variable takes a value
of 1 if the level of arsenic exceeds 10 ppb as per the WHO Drinking Water Quality Guidelines and
takes a value of 0 otherwise. The second arsenic indicator variable is also constructed as a binary
variable, where the variable takes a value of 1 if the level of arsenic exceeds 50 ppb as per the
Bangladesh standard (UNICEF, 2015) and takes a value of 0 otherwise. The last arsenic indicator is
an ordinal categorical variable using the following groups: low-risk (<10 ppb), medium-risk (11-50
ppb), and high-risk (>50 ppb). The categorical variable was constructed in order to examine a wide
range of arsenic exposure to evaluate a dose-response relationship. It also provides a convenient
variable to compare the WHO and Bangladesh national arsenic standards.

    Early childhood development is estimated using results from the Early Childhood Development
Index (ECDI), a novel monitoring tool created by UNICEF in 2007 to determine whether children


                                                                                                        7
aged 3-5 years are developmentally on track. The index is based on a 10-item module on milestones a
child is expected to reach by ages 3 and 4. Table 1 describes each item and how it fits into the four
domains under study – literacy-numeracy, learning, physical, and social development. In this analysis,
ECDI and each of the four domains are represented by binary variables, which take a value of 1 if the
criteria in Table 1 are met. If a child is on track in 3 out of 4 domains, he or she is considered to be
overall developmentally on track on the ECDI scale. In order to reflect this, a composite Early
Childhood Development Index (ECDI) is constructed for every child such that the ECDI will take a
value of 1 if a child meets at least three out of the four domains above.

3.2     Empirical strategy

Based on existing evidence, a negative correlation is expected between arsenic and early childhood
development as measured by the ECDI and its four domains. Moreover, the association is expected
to be stronger as the level of arsenic in drinking water increases. Logit regression analysis is used to
estimate the association between arsenic contamination in drinking water and the combined ECDI
and the four component domains, controlling for socio-economic and demographic factors that
influence a child’s cognitive development. The following equation is estimated.

      ECD = ∝ +      ℎ      +         ℎ        +           +             +                  +     (1)

      Where          are the outcome variables of interest, which are: ECDI, literacy, physical, social
and learning domains; and ℎ       ,        ℎ       , and             explanatory variables denote child,
household and community characteristics. Arsenic exposure (                  ) is specified in three ways:
(1) above 10 ppb; (2) above 50 ppb; and (3) x≤ 10 ppb, 10< x ≤ 50 ppb, and x >50 ppb. To increase
the sample size and improve robustness, the arsenic result from the tested household is applied to all
households within the survey cluster.1 This is based on the assumption that if a household water source
is contaminated, then all households that use the same type of water source in the vicinity are likely to
have similar levels of arsenic. Other explanatory variables in the three specifications include child’s
age, child’s sex, whether he/she has ever been breastfed, maternal education, household location,
household size, wealth quintile, type of sanitation facility, type of drinking water source, and water
treatment. Breastfeeding (if a child has ever been breastfed) is included in the analysis to account for
its impact on cognitive development and is expected to have a positive relationship with ECDI

1Cluster is the primary sampling unit (PSU), which is composed of about 250 households from which 20
households are randomly sampled for the survey which (MICS, 2015).

                                                                                                        8
performance based on past evidence (Quin et al., 2011). Likewise, maternal education is linked with
early childhood development, specifically in relation to behavior and school performance (Carneiro
2007; Andrabi et al., 2009). Maternal education is represented by a variable comprising of three
categories – no education, primary or lower education, and secondary or higher. On household wealth,
several studies have shown that socioeconomic conditions are positively associated with cognitive
development (pertaining to high IQ and language receptivity) and fewer behavioral problems
(Duncan, 1994; Schady et al., 2014). In this analysis, household wealth quintiles are constructed using
a principal component analysis, which accounts for ownership of durable goods, land, and animals.
There is similar evidence indicating that access to both water and sanitation is crucial for proper
cognitive development primarily through its effects on nutritional status and educational attainment
(Bartram, 2006; Spears and Lamba, 2013; Adukia, 2016). The effect of water and sanitation is captured
here through information on whether a household has access to an improved sanitation facility and
improved water.1        To account for water safety–related behaviors, this analysis also includes
information on whether households use appropriate treatment methods such as boiling, adding
bleach/chlorine, using a filter,2 and solar disinfection to remove pathogens (MICS, 2015). Finally, a
Huber-White matrix is used to correct standard errors for non-independent child observations at the
household level (Zenger 1993; Liang and Zeger, 1993). District-effects were not added because arsenic
exposure is strongly influenced by geography, meaning that only some districts are affected by arsenic.
Instead, the analysis was done in a sub-sample of districts with reported arsenic issues. Similar results
were found and can be given upon request. The three specifications of arsenic exposure are repeated
to examine their relationship between overall ECDI performances and each of the four domains,
separately.

3.3       Descriptive statistics

Table 2 reports the summary statistics, giving the weighted mean values of the variables used in the
logit model. About 65 percent of children aged 3-5 years are developmentally on track based on the
Early Childhood Development Index (ECDI), suggesting that almost two-thirds of the child
population meets at least three of the four domains. Of the four domains in the ECDI, literacy and
numeracy standards are the least met, with only 21 percent of children being able to recognize words,




2   Filters have been shown to remove some arsenic from water (MICS, 2015).

                                                                                                       9
letters of the alphabet, or numbers. Learning standards are met by 89 percent of children, while
physical and social standards are met by 93 percent and 90 percent of children respectively.
    When examining household arsenic exposure, about 27 percent of all children are exposed to
arsenic based on the WHO standard of >10 ppb compared to 13 percent when using the Bangladesh
standard of >50 ppb. About 73 percent, 14 percent, and 13 percent of children fall into the no-to-low
risk, medium risk, and high risk exposure groups, respectively. Arsenic is most prevalent in water from
tubewells. In contrast, less than 1 percent of households that use piped water and other sources are
contaminated.3 It should be noted that over 90 percent of the households in the sample use tubewells.
    Figure 1 shows that arsenic risk levels are evenly distributed across wealth quintiles. This indicates
that arsenic contamination is not influenced by wealth and affects households across all wealth
quintiles. However, early childhood development performance does vary by wealth quintiles. When
disaggregated by household wealth, more children are developmentally on track in Quintile 5 (76
percent) compared to Quintile 1 (62 percent). This trend is primarily driven by the literacy domain,
where children from wealthier households perform better. In the other three domains, there is no
clear difference between the number of children who are on track and those who are not across the
different wealth quintiles.



    4.        Results
4.1 Overall ECDI
Table 3 presents the marginal effects from the logit model used to examine the relationship between
ECDI and three specifications of arsenic exposure. After controlling for individual, household and
community characteristics, the results from the logistic regression models report that arsenic exposure
is significantly and negatively associated with the overall ECDI. Specifically, the presence of arsenic
in drinking water above the WHO standard of greater than 10 ppb (specification 1) reduces the
likelihood of being developmentally on-track by about 7 percentage points while the presence of
arsenic above the Bangladesh standard of 50 ppb (specification 2) reduces the likelihood by about 11
percentage points. Based on specification (3) where the explanatory variable of interest is the intensity
risk levels of arsenic in drinking water, the analysis further reveals that there is a clear dose-response

3
 The piped water category includes piped into dwelling, piped into compound, yard or plot, piped to neighbor, and
public tap/standpipe. Other sources include protected well, protected spring, unprotected well, unprotected
spring, cart with small/tank drum, and surface water (river, stream, dam, lake).

                                                                                                              10
relationship, where those children with exposure to higher concentrations of arsenic tend to have
worse developmental outcomes. Medium-risk of arsenic concentration (between 11-50 ppb) reduces
the chances of attaining overall child development by about 4 percentage points compared to the low
risk group (0-10 ppb) while high concentration of arsenic (above 50 ppb) reduces this by about 12
percentage points compared to the low risk group.
     The association between maternal education and ECDI is the highest with a 14 percentage point
increase in ECDI performance if a child’s mother has completed secondary education or higher
compared to a mother with no education. The findings also indicate that female children are more
likely to be developmentally on track compared to male children. Household characteristics and
behavior such as improved sanitation and water treatment both increase the likelihood of being
developmentally on track. Household wealth matters only if a household is in the topmost quintile,
where the probability of being on track increases by 5 percentage points compared to the bottom
quintile.
     While the incidence of arsenic is nearly uniform across wealth quintiles as seen in Figure 1, its
effects on early childhood development outcomes are considerably different when disaggregated by
wealth quintiles. As an illustration, Figures 5 and 6 show the marginal impact of arsenic on overall
ECDI for the B40 and T60 using the WHO and Bangladesh standards. Children living in households
that consume arsenic contaminated water tend to perform relatively worse in meeting the ECDI
regardless of whether they belong to the B40 or T60. In fact, children belonging to B40 households
without arsenic appear to perform better than children in T60 households with arsenic indicating that
the arsenic contamination more than offsets the advantages of belonging to a non-poor household.
Similar patterns are reflected in the learning outcomes as well.

4.2 Individual ECD domains
Arsenic exposure has a strong negative association in three out of four domains – learning, physical,
and social development. The effect of arsenic contamination on the child’s achievement in the literacy
domain was found to not be significant.
     The likelihood of a child being literate at a very young age of three to five years is strongly
associated with household wealth, maternal education, improved sanitation, water treatment,
household size, and child’s age (Table 4). Here, arsenic has no effect on literacy, regardless of what
standard is used to define contamination. Though the bulk of the literature would suggest a strong
effect on literacy, the reason for this result could be due to the fact that a very small proportion of
children were found to be on track for literacy development, regardless of arsenic status. Only 21
                                                                                                    11
percent of the total sample size met the literacy requirements (Table 2). Still, maternal education has
the largest impact with a 12 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a child being literate if he
or she has a mother who completed primary school or above, compared to a mother with no
education. Having improved sanitation and treating water at home increase the probability of child
literacy by 5 and 7 percentage points, respectively.
    Arsenic contamination has a significant negative influence on a child’s performance in the
learning domain (Table 5). In the first two specifications, a shift from no contamination to some
contamination leads to a 3 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of a child meeting the learning
criteria. Factors that positively influence child learning include breastfeeding, age, maternal education,
and household size. Improved sanitation has a small and significant impact with a 1 percent
association. Breastfeeding has a substantial effect with a 5 percentage point increase in the likelihood
of being on track in the learning domain.
    Table 6 reports a negative association between physical development and arsenic contamination.
The magnitude of the correlation increases from 2 percent in specification (1) to 3 percent in
specification (2), indicating a greater negative impact on physical development at higher levels of
contamination. Improved water has an unexpected negative association with physical development.
This might be attributed to poor water quality despite improved coverage.
    Finally, social development is also found to be negatively affected by arsenic contamination (Table
7). In specification (1), a shift from no arsenic to some contamination (WHO standard) leads to a 6
percentage point decrease in the likelihood of a child being on track for social development. The
magnitude is greater (8 percentage points), when a Bangladesh standard is used in specification (2).
This change is further illustrated in specification (3), where the association triples from a 3 percentage
point decrease with medium exposure to a 9 percentage point decrease at high exposure, with no
arsenic as the reference category. Other factors that play a role in social development include maternal
education, child’s age and sex. A female child is more likely to be socially developed compared to a
male child. In addition, a mother’s completion of primary education can lead to 3 percentage point
increase in the probability of a child’s social development, with no education as the base category.

    5.      Discussion
The results of this paper complement other findings from epidemiological studies on arsenic and
cognitive development. This paper adds some noteworthy advancement to the literature base. One is
that arsenic developmentally hinders children as young as age 3, highlighting the importance of


                                                                                                       12
intervening in the early years. Second, it shows that children regardless of socio-economic status are
at risk for effects of arsenic poisoning. Third, it reports a clear does-repose relationship, where
increasing levels of arsenic increase the likelihood for developmental impairment. Finally, it confirms
that children are sensitive to even small doses of arsenic that are less than the current Bangladeshi
national standard of 50 ppb.
    There are, however, limitations to this analysis that should be considered when interpreting the
results. Some limitations surround the validity of how arsenic exposure is defined in the analysis. As
reported in the methodology, arsenic was only tested randomly for 5 households per cluster in the
original MICS data set. However, in order to increase the sample size, the result of the five arsenic test
is applied to the rest of the households in that cluster. Although it is likely that households in close
vicinity and with the same water source would have similar risks of arsenic exposure, it is still an
assumption to believe all households in the same cluster would have the same arsenic concentration
in their respective water sources. To reduce the impact from this assumption, households with
dissimilar types of water sources from the tested household in the cluster were eliminated from the
sample (i.e. if the tested household had a tube well, then households that had piped water in the cluster
were not included in the sample). Yet, it is possible that even households with the same type of water
source have different concentrations of arsenic levels.
     Another limitation is the assumption that children’s exposure to arsenic equates the concentration
of arsenic in their household’s water source. Although children aged 3-5 are most likely regularly
drinking from their household’s water source (i.e. are no longer breastfeeding), they could be
consuming arsenic from other sources such as soil and food. The analysis also cannot account for past
exposure such as from in utero or if a child lived in a different area. Biological specimens such as
urine, toenails, or blood could have been a better proxy for actual exposure levels, but the data were
limited in this regard.
     The ECDI measurement also has some limitations.                The ECDI is a mother-reported
measurement of child development, which can introduce some bias. The ECDI may also not be able
to capture the severity of disability, as mothers are only able to give yes or no responses. Nevertheless,
the ECDI enables a better national-scale approximation of early childhood development than was
previously possible. To our knowledge, only one other study utilizes the ECDI to measure population
effects on child development (Miller, et al., 2015).
     Additionally, as in the case of most cross-sectional analysis, attribution of causality can only be
made with caution due to the non-temporal nature of the data set. However, since arsenic is a naturally

                                                                                                       13
occurring substance and household adaptation to exposure especially through behavior change seems
to be minimal, some claim of exogeneity and hence causality is plausible.
Responding to the arsenic crisis in Bangladesh
    Inorganic arsenic is released from sediment by biogeochemical processes and is found in higher
concentrations at shallower depths of groundwater tables (Rice, 2000). There are few options for low-
cost arsenic removal systems, and typically the most common mitigation strategy is simply switching
to wells that have been tested as arsenic-free, which are typically deeper tubewells that are costlier to
install (Chakrabotri, 2010). Arsenic testing campaigns have some proven success for reducing
population exposure to arsenic. Similar to other public health campaigns, education and awareness
alone have been shown to be ineffective in motivating households to switch to arsenic-free improved
water sources (Bennear, et al., 2013).
    Nevertheless, it is essential that arsenic testing is coupled with assured availability of tested safe
and improved water sources that households can access to avoid unintended negative consequences.
The significance of this condition is illustrated in a study by Field et al. (2011), which evaluated
unintended health consequences of massive arsenic testing and awareness campaigns. The study found
that households living in high arsenic-prone areas post-2000 when there was significant public
knowledge of arsenic had 27 percent higher rates of infant and child mortality compared to households
living in unaffected areas of Bangladesh. The authors imply that the large abandonment of arsenic-
contaminated wells after massive testing campaigns led to higher exposure to fecal-oral pathogens due
to households switching to surface or other unimproved water sources that are typically perceived as
arsenic-free (Field et al., 2011). The importance of safe and readily available arsenic-free sources is
also demonstrated by two studies by George et al. (2012) and Opar et al. (2007), which both evaluated
the effectiveness of arsenic testing and education interventions using randomized controlled trials.
George et al. (2012) found that overall the intervention was effective in reducing urinary arsenic
concentrations, where households would switch to arsenic-free improved water sources provided that
they were closely available. Opal et al. (2007) also found that the distance to the nearest safe well also
influenced a household’s decision to switch to arsenic-free sources.
    Areas that are highly prone to arsenic should be prioritized for arsenic mitigation. An extensive
literature base indicates that not all segments of a population experience uniform advances in health
status nor gains in life expectancy. One contributing factor for disparities in health status is disparities
in environmental exposures. In any country, there are identifiable communities that experience higher
levels of exposure to or greater impact from environmental contaminants. In the case of arsenic in

                                                                                                         14
Bangladesh, the risk of arsenic contamination is primarily dependent on geography, where households
living in some areas are more susceptible to arsenic contamination than others (UNICEF, 2015).
Interestingly, exposure to arsenic does not seem to be dependent on one’s socioeconomic status,
despite available mitigating mechanisms including well-switching, regular testing, filtration, rain water
harvesting, and installation of deeper tubewells (Rice, 2010). However, it would be expected that those
without access to mitigation mechanisms are most likely those individuals from households with lower
socio-economic status. The latest data from the 2012-2013 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS)
show that households across wealth quintiles have similar exposure levels to arsenic (UNICEF, 2015).
Therefore, it is warranted that high-risk geographical areas of arsenic are instead prioritized for
mitigation efforts.
    In addition to prioritizing high-risk geographical areas, arsenic mitigation efforts should also be
prioritized for expectant mothers and children. In recent years, the scientific community and policy
makers have placed a strong emphasis on maternal and childhood interventions during the “first 1,000
days,” or simply the time period between a woman’s pregnancy and her child’s second birthday.
Advocates for better nutrition have particularly embraced the “first 1,000 days” targeting strategy,
claiming that investment in nutrition during this period is pivotal, as scientific evidence shows that the
first years of a child’s life build the biological architecture for healthy brain development, growth, and
strong immunity (Miller et al., 2015). Investment in reducing environmental toxicities such as exposure
to arsenic in the early years of child development may also be an essential intervention for improving
long-term health, cognition, and productivity. Yet interventions for arsenic mitigation are not
commonly targeted to expectant mothers and young children. For example, supporting water quality
testing and installation of safe water sources in community health or conditional cash transfer
programs could be good opportunities for targeting expectant mothers and children. Most studies
observe cognitive impairment from arsenic exposure in school-aged and adolescent children; however,
this study particularly sees this relationship in children as young as three years old. The study group
was limited to children aged 3-5 due to the availability of data on cognitive development, but it is
plausible that arsenic is damaging brain architecture at even younger ages. It is imperative that
exposure to arsenic is eliminated at early ages when the brain is most vulnerable.

    Based on the results already discussed in the paper, one last recommendation is for the
Government of Bangladesh to revise its national water quality standards. Currently, the national
drinking water standard of arsenic concentration in Bangladesh is greater than 50 ppb. However, since


                                                                                                       15
2001, WHO and many other countries including the United States have adapted a more rigorous
standard of greater than 10 ppb. The government and development actors in Bangladesh should
adhere to more rigorous standards when testing and installing new water sources, as even small doses
have a significant effect on child development.




Table 1. 10-item module used to construct the ECDI (Source: MICS 2012-13 Report, Bangladesh)

 Domain               Component                                          Criteria for being on track
 Literacy-numeracy    Identify at least ten letters of the alphabet      2/3 components must be true
                      Read at least four simple and popular words
                      Name and recognize symbols of numbers 1 to 10
 Learning             Follow simple instructions                         1/2 components must be true
                      Carry out tasks independently
 Physical             Pick up a small object with two fingers            1/2 components must be true
                      Healthy enough to play
 Social               Gets along well with other children                2/3 components must be true
                      Does not kick, bite, or hit other children
                      Does not get distracted easily
 Overall EDCI         Literacy-numeracy                                  3/4 domains must be true
                      Learning
                      Physical
                      Social




                                                                                                    16
Table 2. Weighted sample mean values of variables in the logistic regression model

 Variable                                             Obs         Mean      Std. Dev.     Min         Max
 Early childhood development index                   7,502         0.65        0.48         0           1
 Literacy-numeracy                                   7,979         0.21        0.40         0            1
 Learning                                            7,968         0.89        0.32         0            1
 Physical development                                7,906         0.93        0.25         0            1
 Social development                                  7,693         0.70        0.46         0            1
 Child ever breastfed                                7,979         0.96        0.18         0            1
 Child is female (Y=1)                               7,979         0.48        0.50         0            1
 Child's age (months)                                7,979        47.50        7.01        35           59
 Child's age, months (log)                           7,979         3.85        0.15         4            4
 Child's age squared, months (log)                   7,979         7.70        0.30         7            8
 Mother's education                                  7,979         0.69        0.66         0            2
 Urban                                               7,979         0.19        0.39         0            1
 Household size                                      7,979         5.54        2.47         2           25
 Household size (log)                                7,979         1.64        0.37         1           3
 Wealth quintile                                     7,979         2.87        1.41         1            5
 Improved sanitation                                 7,979         0.48        0.50         0            1
 Improved water                                      7,979         0.98        0.14         0            1
 Water treatment                                     7,979         0.05        0.22         0            1
 Arsenic in source water (WHO, >10ppb)               7,979         0.27        0.44         0           1
 Arsenic in source water (BD, >50ppb)                7,979         0.13        0.33         0           1
 Arsenic in source water (11-50ppb)                  7,979         0.14        0.35         0           1
Note: The number of observations for the ECDI and four domains vary due to missing observations in the survey
dataset




                                                                                                           17
Figure 1. Proportion of households with varying risk levels of arsenic, by wealth quintile

                                      100%      4%                                                  5%
                                                             7%           8%           8%
                                                6%                                                  5%
                                      90%                    6%           7%           6%
  Households exposed to arsenic (%)




                                      80%       16%                                                 18%
                                                             15%          14%          15%
                                      70%
                                      60%                                                                     Very high (>=200ppb)

                                      50%                                                                     High (51-200 ppb)

                                      40%                                                                     Medium (11-50) ppb
                                                74%          72%          71%          70%          71%
                                      30%                                                                     Low (<=10ppb)

                                      20%
                                      10%
                                       0%
                                             Quintile 1   Quintile 2   Quintile 3   Quintile 4   Quintile 5




                                                                                                                                     18
Figure 2. ECDI rates by arsenic exposure (WHO Standard of >10ppb)



                                                  100%                                       94%
                                                                                 90%               90%
                                                  90%                                  86%
              Households exposed to arsenic (%)




                                                  80%
                                                                                                         72%
                                                         68%
                                                  70%                                                          65%
                                                               58%
                                                  60%

                                                  50%                                                                No Arsenic

                                                  40%                                                                Arsenic

                                                  30%
                                                                     22%
                                                                           19%
                                                  20%

                                                  10%

                                                   0%
                                                          ECDI       Literacy    Learning    Physical     Social


Figure 3. ECDI rates by arsenic exposure (Bangladesh Standard of >50ppb)

                                                  100%                                       94%
                                                                                 89%
                                                  90%                                  85%         87%
              Households exposed to arsenic (%)




                                                  80%
                                                                                                         71%
                                                  70%    67%
                                                                                                               62%
                                                  60%          53%
                                                  50%                                                                No Arsenic

                                                  40%                                                                Arsenic

                                                  30%
                                                                     21%
                                                                           18%
                                                  20%

                                                  10%

                                                   0%
                                                          ECDI       Literacy    Learning    Physical     Social




                                                                                                                                  19
Figure 4. ECDI rates by risk levels of arsenic



                                       100%                                                      94% 94%
                                                                                 90% 88%
                                       90%                                                                 87%
                                                                                           85%
   Households exposed to arsenic (%)




                                       80%
                                                                                                                 72%
                                              68%                                                                      67%
                                       70%          64%                                                                      62%
                                       60%
                                                           53%                                                                     None (<=10ppb)
                                       50%
                                                                                                                                   Medium (11-50ppb)
                                       40%                                                                                         High (51+ ppb)
                                       30%
                                                                 22%
                                                                       19% 19%
                                       20%

                                       10%

                                        0%
                                                    ECDI          Literacy        Learning         Physical        Social




                                                                                                                                                    20
Figure 5. Predictive margins of overall ECDI performance and arsenic exposure (WHO Standard:
>10ppb) by B40 and T60 wealth


                                                      Predictive Margins
   Pr(Early Childhood Development Index)
   .1  .2    .3   .4   .5   .6  .7   .8




                                           35   40          45           50          55      60
                                                              Age (months)

                                                     B40, No Arsenic          B40, Arsenic
                                                     T60, No Arsenic          T60, Arsenic



Figure 6. Predictive margins of overall ECDI performance and arsenic exposure (Bangladesh Standard:
>50ppb) by B40 and T60 wealth




                                                                                                  21
   Pr(Early Childhood Development Index)              Predictive Margins
   .1  .2    .3    .4  .5   .6  .7    .8




                                           35   40          45           50            55            60
                                                              Age (months)

                                                     B40, No Arsenic            B40, Arsenic
                                                     T60, No Arsenic            T60, Arsenic



Table 3. Correlates of overall ECDI performance including three-specifications of arsenic exposure
(N=7,502 children aged 3-5 years)

 VARIABLES                                                                  (1)          (2)          (3)
                                                                           WHO      Bangladesh   Risk Levels
 Child ever breastfed                                                     0.0485       0.0496       0.0512
                                                                         (0.0318)     (0.0314)     (0.0315)
 Child is female                                                        0.0429***   0.0429***    0.0428***
                                                                         (0.0109)     (0.0109)     (0.0109)
 Child's age (log)                                                       0.394***     0.393***    0.393***
                                                                         (0.0345)     (0.0345)     (0.0345)
 Mother's education (primary/some secondary)                            0.0698***    0.0699***   0.0693***
                                                                         (0.0125)     (0.0125)     (0.0125)
 Mother's education (secondary or higher)                                0.143***     0.145***    0.143***
                                                                         (0.0206)     (0.0205)     (0.0206)
 Urban                                                                    0.0146       0.0112       0.0112
                                                                         (0.0175)     (0.0175)     (0.0174)
 Household size (log)                                                  -0.0612***   -0.0593***   -0.0585***
                                                                         (0.0160)     (0.0160)     (0.0159)
 Quintile 2                                                              -0.00568     -0.00476    -0.00462
                                                                         (0.0163)     (0.0163)     (0.0163)
 Quintile 3                                                              -0.00695     -0.00473    -0.00479
                                                                         (0.0171)     (0.0171)     (0.0171)
 Quintile 4                                                               0.0152       0.0167       0.0172
                                                                         (0.0185)     (0.0185)     (0.0185)
 Quintile 5                                                             0.0532**     0.0508**     0.0524**
                                                                         (0.0232)     (0.0232)     (0.0232)

                                                                                                               22
 Improved sanitation                           0.0376***     0.0365***     0.0373***
                                                 (0.0121)     (0.0121)      (0.0121)
 Improved water                                  -0.0145      -0.00456      -0.00656
                                                 (0.0273)     (0.0265)      (0.0269)
 Water treatment                                 0.0614*      0.0640*       0.0637*
                                                 (0.0346)     (0.0344)      (0.0344)
 Arsenic (WHO)                                 -0.0711***
                                                 (0.0136)
 Arsenic (BD)                                                -0.108***
                                                              (0.0176)
 Arsenic - medium (11-50 ppb)                                              -0.0357**
                                                                            (0.0181)
 Arsenic - high (51+ ppb)                                                  -0.119***
                                                                            (0.0193)

 Observations                                    7,502         7,502         7,502
 Standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Table 4. Correlates of child literacy-numeracy including three-specifications of arsenic exposure
(N=7,979 children aged 3-5 years)

 VARIABLES                                           (1)           (2)            (3)
                                                    WHO       Bangladesh    Risk Levels
 Child ever breastfed                             -0.0256       -0.0251        -0.0253
                                                  (0.0231)      (0.0231)      (0.0231)
 Child is female                                  0.0157*       0.0157*       0.0157*
                                                 (0.00814)     (0.00814)     (0.00814)
 Child's age (log)                               0.678***      0.678***      0.678***
                                                  (0.0344)      (0.0344)      (0.0344)
 Mother's education (primary/some secondary)     0.117***      0.116***      0.116***
                                                 (0.00904)     (0.00903)     (0.00904)
 Mother's education (secondary or higher)        0.235***      0.234***      0.235***
                                                  (0.0196)      (0.0196)      (0.0196)
 Urban                                           0.0287**      0.0283**      0.0284**
                                                  (0.0120)      (0.0121)      (0.0121)
 Household size (log)                           -0.0472***    -0.0468***    -0.0470***
                                                  (0.0121)      (0.0121)      (0.0121)
 Quintile 2                                       0.0226*       0.0228*       0.0228*
                                                  (0.0122)      (0.0122)      (0.0122)
 Quintile 3                                     0.0401***     0.0403***     0.0403***
                                                  (0.0131)      (0.0131)      (0.0131)
 Quintile 4                                     0.0754***     0.0757***     0.0757***
                                                  (0.0141)      (0.0142)      (0.0142)
 Quintile 5                                      0.109***      0.110***      0.109***
                                                  (0.0178)      (0.0177)      (0.0177)


                                                                                              23
 Improved sanitation                              0.0450***     0.0452***      0.0451***
                                                  (0.00911)     (0.00911)      (0.00911)
 Improved water                                    -0.00446      -0.00388       -0.00379
                                                   (0.0257)      (0.0258)       (0.0256)
 Water treatment                                  0.0671***     0.0674***      0.0673***
                                                   (0.0204)      (0.0204)       (0.0204)
 Arsenic (WHO)                                     0.00347
                                                   (0.0103)
 Arsenic (BD)                                                    -0.00280
                                                                 (0.0142)
 Arsenic - medium (11-50 ppb)                                                  0.00720
                                                                               (0.0130)
 Arsenic - high (51+ ppb)                                                      -0.00147
                                                                               (0.0143)

 Observations                                       7,979         7,979          7,979
 Standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Table 5. Correlates of child learning including three-specifications of arsenic exposure (N=7,968 children
aged 3-5 years)

 VARIABLES                                             (1)            (2)           (3)
                                                     WHO        Bangladesh    Risk Levels
 Child ever breastfed                            0.0463***      0.0454***     0.0467***
                                                   (0.0158)       (0.0157)      (0.0158)
 Child is female                                   -0.00433       -0.00443      -0.00438
                                                  (0.00678)      (0.00678)     (0.00678)
 Child's age (log)                                 0.127***       0.126***     0.126***
                                                   (0.0192)       (0.0191)      (0.0192)
 Mother's education (primary/some secondary)      0.0203***     0.0208***     0.0203***
                                                  (0.00771)      (0.00778)     (0.00773)
 Mother's education (secondary or higher)         0.0396***      0.0415***     0.0396***
                                                   (0.0123)       (0.0123)      (0.0123)
 Urban                                             -0.00645       -0.00676      -0.00688
                                                   (0.0103)       (0.0104)      (0.0103)
 Household size (log)                            -0.0360***     -0.0362***    -0.0356***
                                                  (0.00957)      (0.00960)     (0.00960)
 Quintile 2                                      -0.0300***     -0.0302***    -0.0299***
                                                  (0.00971)      (0.00972)     (0.00973)
 Quintile 3                                       -0.0260**      -0.0260**     -0.0258**
                                                   (0.0102)       (0.0102)      (0.0102)
 Quintile 4                                         -0.0122        -0.0124       -0.0120
                                                   (0.0106)       (0.0105)      (0.0106)
 Quintile 5                                        -0.00177       -0.00350      -0.00194
                                                   (0.0130)       (0.0131)      (0.0130)
 Improved sanitation                               0.0140*        0.0133*       0.0140*


                                                                                                       24
                                                (0.00733)    (0.00731)     (0.00733)
 Improved water                                  -0.0136      -0.0111        -0.0126
                                                 (0.0178)     (0.0185)      (0.0179)
 Water treatment                                  0.0379       0.0382        0.0382
                                                 (0.0270)     (0.0271)      (0.0270)
 Arsenic (WHO)                                 -0.0343***
                                                (0.00791)
 Arsenic (BD)                                                -0.0330***
                                                              (0.00999)
 Arsenic - medium (11-50 ppb)                                              -0.0316***
                                                                             (0.0113)
 Arsenic - high (51+ ppb)                                                  -0.0424***
                                                                             (0.0123)

 Observations                                    7,968         7,968         7,968
 Standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Table 6. Correlates of child physical development including three-specifications of arsenic exposure
(N=7,906 children aged 3-5 years)

 VARIABLES                                         (1)            (2)          (3)
                                                  WHO       Bangladesh    Risk Levels
 Child ever breastfed                            0.0198        0.0212       0.0213
                                                (0.0139)      (0.0138)     (0.0138)
 Child is female                                -0.00666      -0.00675     -0.00675
                                               (0.00508)     (0.00507)    (0.00507)
 Child's age (log)                             0.0813***    0.0802***     0.0802***
                                                (0.0177)      (0.0175)     (0.0175)
 Mother's education (primary/some secondary)    0.00202       0.00184      0.00181
                                               (0.00593)     (0.00591)    (0.00591)
 Mother's education (secondary or higher)       0.00522       0.00545      0.00529
                                                (0.0105)      (0.0104)     (0.0105)
 Urban                                         -8.13e-05      -0.00159     -0.00160
                                               (0.00881)     (0.00883)    (0.00882)
 Household size (log)                           -0.00373      -0.00254     -0.00250
                                               (0.00729)     (0.00734)    (0.00735)
 Quintile 2                                     -0.0131*      -0.0129*     -0.0128*
                                               (0.00716)     (0.00717)    (0.00717)
 Quintile 3                                    -0.0156**     -0.0146**    -0.0145**
                                               (0.00747)     (0.00741)    (0.00741)
 Quintile 4                                     -0.00832      -0.00749     -0.00745
                                               (0.00800)     (0.00795)    (0.00796)
 Quintile 5                                     -0.00967       -0.0106      -0.0104
                                                (0.0108)      (0.0109)     (0.0110)
 Improved sanitation                            0.00888       0.00863      0.00868


                                                                                                 25
                                                (0.00552)   (0.00552)     (0.00551)
 Improved water                                 -0.0454**   -0.0417**     -0.0418**
                                                 (0.0189)    (0.0188)      (0.0188)
 Water treatment                                 0.00153     0.00228       0.00230
                                                 (0.0163)    (0.0165)      (0.0165)
 Arsenic (WHO)                                 -0.0187***
                                                (0.00619)
 Arsenic (BD)                                               -0.0334***
                                                             (0.00780)
 Arsenic - medium (11-50 ppb)                                               -0.00224
                                                                           (0.00732)
 Arsenic - high (51+ ppb)                                                 -0.0418***
                                                                            (0.0116)

 Observations                                    7,906        7,906         7,906
 Standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Table 7. Correlates of child social development including three-specifications of arsenic exposure
(N=7,693 children aged 3-5 years)

 VARIABLES                                           (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                    WHO      Bangladesh     Risk Levels
 Child ever breastfed                             -0.0114      -0.0106       -0.00921
                                                 (0.0296)     (0.0294)       (0.0295)
 Child is female                                0.0492***    0.0493***      0.0491***
                                                 (0.0107)     (0.0107)       (0.0107)
 Child's age (log)                               0.108***     0.108***      0.108***
                                                 (0.0355)     (0.0356)       (0.0355)
 Mother's education (primary/some secondary)    0.0267**      0.0270**       0.0263**
                                                 (0.0119)     (0.0119)       (0.0119)
 Mother's education (secondary or higher)         0.0281       0.0300         0.0278
                                                 (0.0221)     (0.0220)       (0.0220)
 Urban                                             0.0195       0.0170        0.0170
                                                 (0.0170)     (0.0170)       (0.0170)
 Household size (log)                            -0.00752     -0.00597       -0.00536
                                                 (0.0161)     (0.0161)       (0.0160)
 Quintile 2                                       0.0177       0.0186         0.0186
                                                 (0.0159)     (0.0159)       (0.0159)
 Quintile 3                                       0.00713     0.00877        0.00873
                                                 (0.0171)     (0.0170)       (0.0170)
 Quintile 4                                       0.00147     0.00269        0.00307
                                                 (0.0182)     (0.0182)       (0.0182)
 Quintile 5                                       0.0204       0.0181         0.0197
                                                 (0.0227)     (0.0227)       (0.0227)
 Improved sanitation                             0.00225      0.00155        0.00219


                                                                                               26
                                                        (0.0121)       (0.0121)       (0.0121)
 Improved water                                         0.0527*        0.0600**       0.0583**
                                                        (0.0270)       (0.0264)       (0.0267)
 Water treatment                                         0.0305         0.0327         0.0324
                                                        (0.0313)       (0.0312)       (0.0312)
 Arsenic (WHO)                                        -0.0581***
                                                        (0.0133)
 Arsenic (BD)                                                         -0.0841***
                                                                        (0.0171)
 Arsenic - medium (11-50 ppb)                                                         -0.0323*
                                                                                       (0.0178)
 Arsenic - high (51+ ppb)                                                            -0.0941***
                                                                                       (0.0189)

 Observations                                            7,693          7,693              7,693
 Standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




References
Adukia, A. (2016). Sanitation and Education. University of Chicago Policy Working Paper.
Anawar, H., Akai, J., Mostofa, K., Safiullah, S., & Tareq, T. (2002). Arsenic poisoning in groundewater:
Health risk and geochemical sources in Bangladesh. Environment International.
Asadullah, M. N., & Chaudhury, N. (2008). Poisoning the Mind: Arsenic Contamination and Cognitive
Achievement of Children. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.
Bennear, L., Tarozzi, A., Pfaff, A., Balasubramanya, S., Ahmed, K., & van Geen, A. (2013). Impact of a
randomized controlled trial in arsenic risk communication on household water-source choices in Bangladesh.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 225-240.
Bennear, L., Tarozzi, A., Pfaff, A., Balasubramanya, S., Ahmed, K., & van Geen, A. (2013). Impact of a
randomized controlled trial in arsenic risk communication on household water-source choices in Bangladesh.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 225-240.
Burgess, et al. (2010). Vulnerability of deep groundwater in the Bengal aquifer system to contamination by
arsenic. Nature Geoscience, 83-87.
Calderon, J., Navarro, M., Jimenez-Capdeville, M., Santos-Diaz, A., Golden, A., Rodriguez-Leyva, I., . . .
Diaz-Barriga, F. (2001). Exposure to Arsenic and Lead and Neuropsychological Development in Mexican
Children. Environmental Research Section, 69-76.
Chakrabotri. (2010). Status of groundwater arsenic contamination in Bangladesh: A 14-year study report.
Water Research, 5789–5802.
Crockett, M. J., & Haushofer, J. (2014). How poverty gets under the skull. Background paper prepared for the
World Development Report 2015, World Bank.


                                                                                                             27
Field, E., Glennerster, R., & Hussam, R. (2011). Throwing the Baby out with the Drinking Water:
Unintended Consequences of Arsenic Mitigation Efforts in Bangladesh. Working Paper Department of Economics
Harvard University.
Flanagan, S. V., Johnston, R. B., & Zheng, Y. (2012). Arsenic in tube well water in Bangladesh: health and
economic impacts and implications for arsenic mitigation. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 90,
839–846.
George, C. M., van Geen, A., Slavkovich, V., Singha, A., Levy, D., Islam, T., . . . Graziano, J. (2012). A
cluster-based randomized controlled trial promoting community participation in arsenic mitigation efforts in
Bangladesh. Environmental Health.
Justice, I. o. (1999). Toward environmental justice: Research, education, and health policy needs. Washington
DC: National Academies Press.
Karim, M. (2000). Arsenic in groundwater and health problems in Bangladesh. Water Research.
Kile, et al. (2014). A prospective cohort study of the association between drinking water arsenic exposure and
self-reported maternal health symptoms during pregnancy in Bangladesh. Environmental Health.
Kile, et al. (2016). Estimating Effects of Arsenic Exposure During Pregnancy on Perinatal Outcomes in a
Bangladeshi Cohort. Epidemiology, 173-181.
Miller at al. (2015). How consistent are associations between stunting and child development? Evidence from
a meta-analysis of associations between stunting and multidimensional child development in fifteen low- and
middle-income countries. Public Health Nutrition.
Murray, M., & Sharmin, R. (2015). Groundwater arsenic and education attainment in Bangladesh. Journal of
Health, Population, and Nutrition.
Opar, A., Pfaf, A., Seddique, A., Ahmed, K., Graziano, J., & van Geen, A. (2007). Responses of 6500
households to arsenic mitigation in Araihazar, Bangladesh. Health & Place, 164-172.
Parvez, F., Wasserman, G. A., Factor-Litvak, P., Liu, X., Slavkovich, V., Siddique, A. B., . . . Graziano, J. H.
(2011). Arsenic Exposure and Motor Function among Children in Bangladesh. Environmental Health Perspectives,
1665-1670.
Pitt, M., Rosenzweig, M., & Hassan, N. (2012). Identifying the Hidden Costs of a Public Health Success:
Arsenic Well Water Contamination and Productivity in Bangladesh”. PSTC Working Paper Series.
Ravenscroft, e. a. (2005). Arsenic in groundwater of the Bengal Basin, Bangladesh: Distribution, field
relations, and hydrogeological setting. Hydrogeology, 727–751.
Ravenscroft, P., Brammer, H., & Richards, K. (2009). Arsenic pollution: A global synthesis. Oxford: John-
Wiley and Sons.
Rosado, J. L., Ronquillo, D., Kordas, K., Rojas, O., Alatorre, J., Lopez, P., . . . Stoltzfus, R. J. (2007). Arsenic
Exposure and Cognitive Performance in Mexican Schoolchildren. Environmental Health Perspectives, 1371-1375.
Smith, A. H., Lingas, E. O., & Rahman, M. (2000). Contamination of drinking-water by arsenic in
Bangladesh: A public health emergency. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 78(9), 1093-1103.
Tsai, S.-Y., Chou, H.-Y., The, H.-W., Chen, C.-M., & Chen, C.-J. (2003). The Effects of Chronic Arsenic
Exposure from Drinking Water on the Neurobehavioral Development in Adolescence. NeuroToxicology.


                                                                                                                  28
Tseng, et al. (2006). Association between chronic exposure to arsenic and slow nerve conduction velocity
among adolescents in Taiwan. J Health Popul Nutr, 182-189.
UNICEF. (2015). Bangladesh MICS 2012-2013 Final Report.
Wasserman, G. A., Liu, X., Parvez, F., Ahsan, H., Factor-Litvak, P., Kline, J., . . . Graziano, J. H. (2007).
Water Arsenic Exposure and Intellectual Function in 6-Year-Old Children in Araihazar, Bangladesh.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 285-289.
Wasserman, G. A., Liu, X., Parvez, F., Ahsan, H., Factor-Litvak, P., van Geen, A., . . . Graziano, J. H. (2004).
Water Arsenic Exposure and Children’s Intellectual Function in Araihazar, Bangladesh. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 1329-1333.
WHO. (2011). Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, 4th edition. Geneva.
Yu, W. H., Harvey, C. M., & Harvey, C. F. (2003). Arsenic in groundwater in Bangladesh: A geostatistical and
epidemiological framework for evaluating health effects and potential remedies. Water Resources Research.
von Ehrenstein, O. S., Poddar, S., & Yuan, Y. (2007). Children’s Intellectual Function in Relation to Arsenic
Exposure. Epidemiology, 44-51.




                                                                                                                29
