                                                       WPS8221


Policy Research Working Paper                         8221




     Labor Policy and Digital Technology Use
    Indicative Evidence from Cross-Country Correlations

                               Truman G. Packard
                              Claudio E. Montenegro




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8221


  Abstract
 This paper exploits variation in country-level indicators                           economic stability, available infrastructure, and trade
 drawn from published data to analyze the relationship                               openness. To ensure the broadest country coverage, the
 between labor regulation and the use of digital technol-                            paper develops new indexes of employment protection,
 ogy. The analysis shows a statistically and economically                            using the World Bank’s Doing Business indicators, which
 significant association between digital technology use                              allow several aspects of labor market regulation—such
 by firms and a country’s statutory minimum wage and                                 as restrictions on hours and hiring, dismissal proce-
 employment protection regulations. The results are                                  dures, and severance costs—-to be analyzed separately.
 robust to the inclusion of controls for level of development,




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at tpackard@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
    Labor Policy and Digital Technology Use: Indicative Evidence from
                       Cross-Country Correlations1


                                                             By


            Truman G. Packard                                and                Claudio E. Montenegro
     World Bank, Social Protection & Jobs                               Department of Economics, University of
              Global Practice                                           Chile; The World Bank, and the German
                                                                              Development Institute (DIE)




JEL classification: J08, J31, J32, J65, O33, O57
Keywords: Labor regulation, digital technology, jobs


A Technical Background Paper for the Regional Study
“Technology Adoption and Inclusive Growth: Impacts of Digital Technologies on
Productivity, Jobs and Skills in Latin America”
Office of the Chief Economist, Latin America and Caribbean Region, World Bank Group



1
 This draft reflects the helpful comments of participants at the workshop “Digital Technology Adoption, Skills, Productivity
and Jobs in Latin America and the Caribbean” held at the World Bank’s headquarters, October 31- November 1, 2016.
Indhira Santos, Mark Dutz and Rita Almeida provided guidance in forming our research questions and our analytical
approach. We are particularly grateful to Rita Ramalho, Arvo Kuddo, Klaus Adolfo Koch-Saldarriaga and Daniel
Lederman for their careful reviews of our work and extensive, constructive comments on earlier drafts, and to Anna
Reva for her expert advice on the use of the Doing Business data. We’d also like to acknowledge the helpful research
assistance of Jonathan Mallek. We remain solely responsible for the views expressed, interpretations, conclusions and
any errors.
I. Introduction, motivation and summary of findings
Productivity has become particularly pertinent to policy makers in Latin America and the Caribbean,
eagerly looking for ways to sustain job-related gains against poverty and inequality since the
‘tailwinds’ of the commodity super-cycle abated. For countries in the region, advancing productivity
through innovation has, therefore, become a critical objective. Productivity growth is sustained by
the process of innovation and creative destruction. Innovating firms take risks. The adoption or
use-at-scale of digital technology is a case in point. Policy can help or hinder firms’ decisions to
innovate. In this paper, we scrutinize the role of labor policy.
Do a country’s labor policies support or constrain firms’ ability to adopt and use digital technology?
Are firms’ decisions to use digital technology affected by different regulatory instruments in the
same ways? Labor market regulations and accompanying social insurance programs in most of Latin
America and the Caribbean region were designed in industrializing countries for an industrial
economy, to correct market failures and help working people mitigate losses from adverse shocks.
However, unlike in Europe where many of these policy models were conceived, the reach and
relevance of labor market interventions remains limited to employment in the public sector, state-
owned enterprises and larger firms. As countries shift further away from manufacturing and into
services, and a greater number of firms move confidently into the digital economy -or adopt digital
technologies as part of their production processes- the business models and employment norms on
which prevailing labor institutions are based are becoming strained. Labor policies often fail to keep
pace with the demands of changing economies, or the needs of firms and workers. The concern
that motivates our analysis is that prevailing labor market policies may not be suited to facilitate
productivity gains through innovations, like firms’ adoption of digital technologies.
We conduct analysis on country-level aggregate data, to exploit variation in labor regulations and
social insurance provisions across national jurisdictions. Given our research questions, a cross-
country analytical approach is empirically critical. First, with some notable exceptions, labor
regulations typically do not vary substantially across municipalities and regions of the same country.2
And while labor regulation and social insurance arrangements can sometimes vary in the same
jurisdiction by firm size, industry and between the private and public sectors (including state owned
enterprises), in most countries the share of firms that are subject to legally differential treatment is
relatively small.
Second, analysis of country level data also allows us to exploit variation in how intensively countries
use different regulatory instruments, such as statutory minimum wages or different forms of
employment protection. Within a given jurisdiction, the labor code will typically mandate these
measures as a single, indivisible package. Regulators typically do not exercise discretion over which
or how intensively to apply each instrument. Nor are firms normally allowed the freedom to pick
and choose between instruments, although variation in enforcement capacity across sub-national
administrative units can yield useful insights (per Almeida and Carneiro, 2008; and Almeida, Corseuil
and Poole, 2017).

2
 Notable exceptions to this assertion include, differences in the level and adjustment protocols for statutory
minimum wages in countries such as Indonesia and the Philippines (Del Carpio and Pabon, 2014 and 2017);
and differences in employment protection regulation across the states of India (Ahsan and Pagés, 2008).

                                                       2
We adopt the analytical approach followed by Alesina, Battisti and Zeira (2015) to analyze the
relationship between labor regulation and firms’ technology adoption in member countries of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). However, we substantially
increase the number and diversity of countries in our analysis. To ensure the broadest country
coverage, we develop new indices of employment protection using the World Bank’s Doing
Business labor market regulation indicators, which allow differences in restrictions on hours and
hiring, dismissal procedures and severance costs to be considered separately in our analysis. We find
a statistically and economically significant association between digital technology use by businesses
and a country’s statutory minimum wage and its employment protection regulations. Our results are
robust to the inclusion of controls for countries’ levels of development, economic stability, available
infrastructure and trade openness.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section II provides a brief overview of the
relevant literature. Section III sets out our empirical strategy and describes our data, including the
new employment protection variables we constructed from the Doing Business data. Section IV
presents results from our cross country multivariate correlations. Section V concludes with a
discussion of the implications of our findings for policy making and avenues for further research.


II. Review of the literature
Labor market regulations and interventions such as social insurance are formulated according to
each country’s policy making institutions in an attempt to address market imperfections, such as
uneven power between those who seek and those who sell labor and human capital, information
failures on all sides, and limited or weak insurance markets to mitigate the costs to households from
loss of work income (Boeri and van Ours, 2008). The textbook predictions of how regulations, like a
statutory minimum wage and restrictions on dismissals, create a wedge between the cost of labor
and what people take home, are well known and actively debated. Furthermore, a large literature has
been produced applying the textbook models in countries where most people work beyond the
reach of regulation, in the informal economy (Perry et al. 2007; Packard, Koettl, and Montenegro,
2012).
Where the option to ‘informalize’ the production process is available to firms, segmentation of the
labor market can happen when a floor is imposed on the cost of labor from a legislated minimum
wage that forces a wedge between the earnings of workers not covered by these arrangements and
those that are. The textbook models predict that a minimum wage increases labor costs for firms
and prevents them from offering formal employment to workers whose marginal productivity does
not exceed the minimum. The effect will be stronger for workers with the lowest marginal
productivity, especially younger, less experienced workers. Priced out of formal employment, they
can join those genuinely unemployed, take informal employment, or seek formal work while
working informally. Workers who remain formally employed—those with higher marginal labor
productivity—benefit from higher earnings.
Employment protection (employment protection legislation, or EPL) is expected to reduce flows
into, but also out of unemployment. Theory shows that EPL reduces turnover and increases
average tenure. But it can also slow new employment. If restrictions on dismissing workers make
separations costly, it can make employers wary of taking on someone new, or of making innovations
                                                   3
to their business processes that involve changes to their workforce, even if doing so would raise
productivity and output (Boeri and van Ours, 2008, Koeniger, 2005, Bartelsman and Hinloopen
2005). Restrictions that raise the costs of hiring and dismissing workers, can prejudice the job
opportunities firms offer to young people and women (Montenegro and Pages, 2004), as well as
increase the incentives firms have to hire informally (Packard, Koettl and Montenegro, 2012).
While EPL can encourage employers to invest in training to make their workers more productive
and even encourage employee commitment, it can also slow productivity growth if it forces firms to
keep unproductive workers (Almeida and Aterido, 2008) or forgo innovating altogether. This
constraint can be offset if restrictive EPL causes firms to become more selective with the new hires
and if they are encouraged to invest more in worker training. Acharya, Baghai and Subramanian
(2013) argue that stricter labor regulation functions as a commitment device, by preventing firms
from dismissing workers after short-run failures and thus encouraging employees to engage in risky,
innovative activities that can eventually lead to higher production and profits. Furthermore, by
creating a ‘tax on dismissals,’ EPL can increase the incentives that firms have to train workers to use
new technology and make them more productive (Boeri and van Ours, 2008).
The impact of social insurance arrangements is also theoretically ambiguous on employment
outcomes. On the one hand, unemployment benefits can improve the quality of matches between
employers and workers. Workers who are covered by benefits and lose employment, are able to
search for a new job with greater care, facilitating a more efficient job-matching process. If the
quality of matching between firms and workers improves, structural unemployment can fall. On the
other hand, insurance benefits may give unemployed workers a reason to search with less effort and
intent than they otherwise would have and to turn down available work. If the level of
unemployment benefits is high or the maximum duration of benefits is long, the urgency of finding
new work is diminished. This moral hazard can lower the intensity of job search and lengthen spells
of unemployment (Mortensen 1977). Even though the existence of severance and unemployment
insurance can help mitigate losses from employment adjustments in the wake of new technology, the
non-wage labor costs of such arrangements can also dissuade firms from expanding formal
employment.
Most reviews of empirical evidence of the impact of labor market policies reflect these ambiguities
in economic theory. Trying to identify the impact of any of these measures is made more difficult by
obvious differences in what a country mandates and what it can enforce job-seekers and firms to
adhere to. Despite what the labor code says, these regulations are partially and poorly enforced in
many low- and middle-income countries. Actual restrictions on the choices of firms and individuals
are, in most cases, far less binding than what the laws intend.
With respect firms’ decisions at the margin whether to invest in productivity-augmenting (possibly)
labor savings technology, economic theory is also ambiguous. On one hand, high statutory wages,
dismissal costs, and limits on the use of term contracts and outsourced labor constrain firms’
choices and could raise the costs -and slow the pace- of adopting new technology and accompanying
business processes. On the other hand, stringent labor regulations that raise the unit costs of labor
relative to capital can make investments in capital more attractive at the margin, speeding the
adoption of labor-saving technology, particularly in sectors that are intensive in low-skilled labor
input, made costlier, per unit of value added when regulations bind. Finally, the prospect of

                                                   4
relatively higher earnings or greater job security could attract the ‘best and the brightest’, and longer
employment spells allow workers to develop expertise and encourage employers to invest in growing
their capacity.
In their analysis of labor market regulations and the extent of technology adoption across high-
income countries, Gust and Marquez (2004) find a negative correlation between investment in
information and communication technology (ICT) and employment protection legislation: where the
human resources decisions of firms are more constrained by regulation, investment in digital
technology is lower. The authors develop a dynamic model of vintage capital and SBTC. In each
period a firm decides whether to upgrade technology, which in turn requires upskilling the labor
force. Thus, dismissal costs delay or prevent firm decisions to adopt technology. Employers that are
unable to change their workforce to keep up with new technology or otherwise align their workers
with changing needs and new processes within the firm, can soon find themselves at a disadvantage.
Bartelsman, Gautier and De Wind (2016) argue that because of the experimentation and changes
required in a firm’s organizational structure to put a new technology in place, the outcome of
investment in that technology can be uncertain. If a firm’s investment in a new technology is
unsuccessful, the firm might be forced to exit the market. Incentives to innovate can thus depend on
exit costs, with higher exit costs deterring innovation if gains from technology adoption are risky.
Bartelsman, et al., find that technology-intensive sectors are smaller in countries with stricter labor
regulations, measured by the number of people they employ. They estimate that aggregate
productivity in the United States would be 10 percent lower due to lower investment in ICT if
severance payments in the US were similar to the average dismissal cost in Europe.
Alesina, Battisti and Zeira (2015) find that where labor regulation is more restrictive, firms’ take up
of technology is greatest in low-skill sectors. The authors develop a theoretical model in which labor
regulation raises the cost of low-skilled labor and reduces the skill premium. More restrictive labor
regulation will, the authors derive, lead firms to adopt more labor-saving technology in sectors that
mainly employ lower-skilled labor. Conversely, their model predicts firms in sectors that use skilled
labor more intensively, will adopt less technology. Thus, for a sample of member countries of the
OECD, their model predicts relatively higher levels of technology adoption in lower-skilled
manufacturing in countries like Spain and Italy where labor regulation is more restrictive on firms’
decision, than in the United Kingdom and United States where firms’ choices are less constrained by
labor regulation. This prediction is also made by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017). Empirically,
Alesina, et al. (2015) show that more restrictive labor regulation lowers ratio of capital in high-
skill/capital in low-skill sectors, lowers productivity (output per worker) in high-skill sectors; raises
productivity in low-skill sector; and raises patents/capita in low-skilled sector.
To the best of our knowledge, the current literature covers mainly the member countries of the
OECD and some other higher-middle income countries, many of which are still in the process of
becoming members. The current limitation of analytical work to these countries is a critical
shortcoming of the existing body of evidence. There is considerable added insight to be gained
from analyzing the much broader variation in labor market institutions and key contextual factors
(such as level of development, economic stability, available infrastructure and degree of openness to
trade) across high-, middle- and low-income countries, that firms are likely to take into account
when choosing whether to adopt technology.

                                                   5
III. Empirical strategy and data
Following Alesina, et al., (2015) we conduct analysis on country level data. The contribution of this
paper is to exploit the greater economic and regulatory variation across a much larger, and more
diverse sample of countries, including middle and low-income countries. In addition, we ‘unpack’
the composite measures of labor regulation used widely in the current literature into separate
components that we argue are likely to shape firms’ decisions differently. Although Alesina, et al,
(2015) analyze regulatory instruments such as statutory minimum wages, employment protection and
the power of unions separately, as in previous papers by others, they use the OECD’s composite
indicator of employment protection legislation (EPL).
Rather than a single, composite measure of employment protection, we construct four measures that
separately capture: (i) rigidity of working hours; (ii) restrictions on the use of temporary, fixed-term
contracts and outsourced labor; (iii) procedural difficulty of dismissing workers; and (iv) mandated
payments to workers upon dismissal (severance). We also add variables to capture other statutorily
mandated non-labor cost, specifically contributions required of employers and employees for social
insurance (old age pensions, disability, survivor, unemployment benefits and health coverage).
3.a. Data
The data are drawn from published data sets of country-level indicators, per Table 1 (full citations of
sources are listed in the references section).
Table 1. Data sources

 Measures of digital        International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
 technology use             Quality of Government (QoG) Basic Data, University of Gothemburg
                            World Economic Forum (WEF)
 Level of development       World Development Indicators (WDI): World Bank Group
 and other key economic
 parameters
 Labor market policy        EPLex: International Labor Organization
 indicators                 Inter-American Development Bank and Organization of Economic
                            Cooperation and Development
                            Doing Business Labor Market Regulation (LMR): World Bank Group,
                            observation years 2010-2014
                            Jobs Database: World Development Indicators
                            Social Security Programs Around the World: US Social Security
                            Administration


Given the wealth of options for measuring the use of digital technology provided by the ITU, QoG
and WEF data sets, we elected to construct two new, composite measures to separately capture the
extent of non-business (i.e. general household) and business usage. Rather than assign weights to
component variables, we apply principal components analysis, or PCA.
PCA is a way to identify patterns in data with high dimension, which is otherwise hard to simplify.
It is a mathematical procedure that uses an orthogonal transformation to convert a set of
observations of possibly correlated variables into a set of values of uncorrelated variables—called
principal components (Johnson and Wichern, 2008). The main advantage of PCA is that it can
compress the data by reducing the number of dimensions, without much loss of information. For it
                                                   6
to work properly, the main criterion is to subtract the mean from each data dimension. The
methodology captures the highest variation between correlated variables, and reduces it to a set of
orthogonal variables. In every case where we use the PCA methodology, we employ the first
principal component (i.e. the one that explains the greatest proportion of the joint variation). The
weighting of indicators maximizes the variance of the components across countries.
Our choice to construct new composite variables for the analysis in this paper might be criticized
echoing Ravallion’s (2016) arguments against ‘mashup’ indices. However, the core of this argument
is the prior (sometimes poorly explained) assumptions that researchers use to weight components of
their indices. PCA sidesteps this problem and avoids the loss of information or bias that could arise
from having to impose assumptions of how each indicator in the composite measure should be
weighted (Johnson, 2003). Furthermore, our application of PCA is purely to enable analysis. We do
not advocate using any of the composite measures created for this paper in policy debate, and would
agree with Ravallion (2016) that policy makers should monitor a wide range of variables.
Table 2 provides a detailed list of the variables we use in the analysis as well as the names and
definitions of their components as they originally appear in the source data sets. For ease of
interpreting results, in the analysis we use the logs of all our variables.




                                                   7
Table 2. Variable names, definitions and components
 lint_usage                                           Log digital whole economy index (PCA)
                                    I99H              Percentage of individuals using the Internet
                                    XHH4_IDI          Percentage of households with computer
                                    XHH6_IDI          Percentage of households with Internet
 ldig_bus_pca                                         Log digital business index (PCA)
                                    fix_broad_sus     Fixed broadband subscriptions (per 100 people)
                                    sec_int_servers   Secure Internet servers (per 1 million people)
 lgdppcppp                                            Log of GDP PC PPP
 lwdi_inflation                                       Log of inflation rate
 lopeness                                             Log of openness
 linf_index                                           Log of physical infrastructure index
 lmwtova_pw                                           Log MW to VA per worker
 lrest_oecd                                           Log OECD measure of regulation (epl)
 lrest_ilo                                            Log ILO measure of regulation (eplex)
 lepl_db                                              Log of EPL - DB index (PCA)
                  dif_hir_idx                         Log Difficulty of hiring index (PCA)
                                    v01               Are fixed-term contracts only allowed for fixed-term tasks?
                                                      What is the maximum duration of fixed-term contracts (in
                                    v02               months)?
                  rig_hours                           Log Rigidity of hours index (PCA)
                                    v05               50 hour weeks for 2 months?
                                    v06               (5j-) Are there restrictions on night work?
                                    v07               (5k-) Are there restrictions on 'weekly holiday' work?
                                    v08               (5f-) What is the maximum number of working days per week?
                  dif_firing_idx                      Log Difficulty of firing index (PCA)
                                                      Must the employer notify a third party before dismissing one
                                    v12               redundant employee?
                                                      Does the employer need the approval of a third party to dismiss
                                    v13               one redundant worker?
                                                      Must the employer notify a third party prior to dismissing 9 or
                                    v14               more redundant workers?
                                                      Does the employer need the approval of a third party prior to a
                                    v15               collective dismissal
                                                      Does the law mandate retraining or reassignment prior to
                                    v16               dismissal?
                                    v17               Are there priority rules applying to dismissal or lay-offs?
                                    v18               Are there priority rules applying to re-employment?
                  firing_cost_idx                     Log Firing cost index (PCA)
                                    v34               Paid annual leave (working days) - 10 years
                                                      Notice period for redundancy dismissal after 10 years of
                                    v37               continuous employment
                                                      Severance pay for redundancy dismissal after 10 years of
                                    v40               continuous employment
                                                      Log of Old age, disability, and survivors’ pension contribution,
 loads_emp                                            employer
                                                      Log of Old age, disability, and survivors’ pension contribution,
 loads_ins                                            insured worker
 lossp_emp                                            Log of All social insurance programs contribution, employer
 lossp_ins                                            Log of All social insurance programs contribution, insured worker

                                                        8
3.b. Descriptive statistics
Table 3 provides summary statistics of the variables used in our analysis. The table demonstrates the
added value -in terms of greater country coverage- of recent efforts by OECD-IADB and ILO to
broaden the set of de jure labor market policy indicators beyond the member countries of the
OECD. OECD-IADB’s (2016) measure EPL covers 71 countries. ILO’s EPLex covers 92
countries, albeit with a different methodology (see ILO 2016). We contribute to this extension in
coverage of de jure labor policy measures with our PCA variables of employment protection
legislation constructed from the World Bank’s Doing Business Labor Market Regulation (LMR)
indicators covering 180 countries. Readers should note, we are using the Doing Business LMR
indicators from 2010-2014, constructed with the pre-2015 methodology. The methodology by the
Doing Business unit from 2015 onwards measures labor market regulation in areas of hiring,
working hours, redundancy rules and cost, as well as job quality, depending on the subset of
questions used for construction of various indices.
Table 3. Variable summary statistics

 Variable               Obs              Mean            Std. Dev.            Min             Max
 lint_usage             175               3.718            1.166             0.551            5.100
 ldig_bus_pca           183              3.072             2.578            -2.729            8.389
 lgdppcppp              188              9.210             1.202            6.462            11.804
 lwdi_infla~n           162              1.214             0.826            -1.928            3.400
 lopeness               181               4.433            0.477             3.198            6.093
 linf_index             155               0.989            0.248             0.385            1.490
 lmwtova_pw             148              -1.168            0.693            -3.498            0.703
 lrest_oecd              71               0.759            0.278             0.020            1.253
 lrest_ilo               92              -0.885            0.269            -1.894           -0.323
 lepl_db                177              1.257             0.511            -0.260            2.105
 ldif_hir_idx           180              3.892             0.736            1.865            4.450
 lrig_hours             180              -0.441            0.683            -2.939            0.562
 ldif_firin~x           178              -0.495            1.185            -2.303            0.915
 lfiring_co~x           177              3.394             0.611            -2.335            4.035
 loads_emp              153              2.127             0.654            -0.117            3.503
 loads_ins              151               1.637            0.665            -1.079            2.996
 lossp_emp              154              2.504             0.656            -0.105           3.597
 lossp_ins              153               1.819            0.673            -0.105            3.126


A larger and more diverse sample of countries is critical to the value of our analysis, as there is very
little variation in labor market policies in each country over time, but substantial variation across the
sample. This said, coverage of the social insurance contribution measures compiled by the United
States Social Security Administration, ranges from 151 to 154 countries, which reduces the number
of countries that we are able to include in the full, multivariate analysis discussed in the next section.
To keep further shrinkage of our country sample to a minimum, as well as to control for outliers in


                                                    9
the data, in the full analysis we use the median value of observations of each variable over the period
2010 to 2014.
Of particular interest are the relationships between the composite variables we have constructed
using PCA to measure the use of digital technology (lint_usage for general, household usage, and
ldig_bus_pca for business usage), and employment protection legislation (the full composite of the
Doing Business indicators lepl_db, and four other PCA variables that each capture different
dimensions of employment protection, dif_hir_inx: difficulty of hiring; rig_hours: rigidity of hours;
dif_firing-idx: difficulty of firing index; firing_cost_idx: dismissal cost index). Readers should note that
our overall employment protection composite variable lepl_db, is the result of PCA applied to 16
labor market regulation indicators of the Doing Business database, and not to the four other PCA
composite variables. Each of the four that describes difficulty of hiring, rigidity of hours, etc.,
results from applying PCA to a relevant sub-set of labor market regulation indicators from Doing
Business database. In electing which variables to include in each PCA index, we followed the Doing
Business classifications, with one exception: we grouped v34 “Paid annual leave (working days) - 10
years” in our dismissal costs index, since in many countries firms are obliged to cash out unused
leave as part of the total severance entitlement due to a dismissed worker.
As is reasonable to expect from the application of a new technique to construct composite measures
of countries’ existing labor regulations, our PCA variables of employment protection policies from
Doing Business are significantly similar -but not identical- to the de jure labor regulation measures
of the earlier-established OECD and ILO methodologies.
Before turning to our results, an analysis of simple visual representations of the relationship between
key variables helps to establish the quality of the data, particularly the variables resulting from our
application of PCA (additional figures are provided in the annex). Figure 1 presents how our two
PCA composite measures of digital technology use are related to countries’ levels of development, as
proxied by the level of GDP per capita (in 2011 PPP US$), general household usage in the top panel
and business usage in the bottom panel. As is reasonable to expect for a very diverse sample of
countries, both measures of digital technology usage are strongly and positively associated with a
country’s level of economic development. The countries of the Latin America and Caribbean region
do not exhibit a very different relationship from the rest in our sample. Although the strong,
positive relationship comes as little surprise, it gives us confidence in the index variables we have
constructed with PCA.




                                                    10
             Figure 1. PCA Indices of Digital Technology Usage and Level of Development
                               a. PCA index of general (hh) digital technology use




                                                         b. PCA index of business digital technology use
                                   8




                                                                                                                                            CYM

                                                                                                                       KNA

                                                                                                                       ATG
Log digital business index (PCA)
                                   6




                                                                                                 DMA       BRB
                                                                                                                            BHS       ABW
                                                                                          BLZ
                                                                                                 VCT
                                                                                                                  PAN                PRI
                                                                                                 LCA     CRI         CHL          TTO
                                                                                                                  URY
                                   4




                                                                                                   GRD    BRA
                                                                                           JAM                        ARG
                                                                                                    COL        SUR
                                                                                                                MEX
                                                                                                 ECU
                                                                                                   DOM
                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                         SLV
                                                                                                                VEN
                                                                                          PRY
                                                                                        GTM
                                                                                      GUY
                                                                              NIC
                                   2




                                                                              HND   BOL




                                                            HTI
                                   0




                                                                                                                      CUB
                                   -2




                                        6                           8                                             10                              12
                                                                          Log of GDP PC PPP

                                                              (p 50) ldig_bus_pca                                 (p 50) ldig_bus_pca
                                                              Fitted values                                       Fitted values



                                            Source: Authors’ application of PCA using data from ITU, QoG and WEF


                                                                                    11
Turning to the de jure measures of labor market regulation, Figures 2, 3 and 4 present prior
published indicators of policy: the statutory minimum wage (as a share of average per-worker value
added); the OECD’s employment protection legislation (EPL) index, as expanded by that
organization in partnership with IADB to non-member countries of OECD in Latin America and
the Caribbean; and ILO’s EPLEX measure of employment protection. Mainly as a validation
exercise, the figures benchmark these variables by countries’ level of development.


      Figure 2. Statutory Minimum Wage (Ratio to Average Worker Value Added) and Level of
                                        Development
                                1




                                                              HND
                                0




                                             HTI

                                                              NIC
      Log MW to VA per worker




                                                                              BLZ
                                                                           GTM                                PRI
                                                                               PRY        CRI         ARG
                                                                     BOL            ECU
                                -1




                                                                                                    ATG
                                                                                                  PAN
                                                                                JAM DMA COL
                                                                                      GRD
                                                                                       DOM
                                                                                     PER            KNA
                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                     VCT                BHS
                                                                                                VEN
                                                                                                  URY
                                                                               SLV
                                                                         GUY
                                -2




                                                                                                MEX
                                -3
                                -4




                                     6               8                                            10                        12
                                                            Log of GDP PC PPP

                                         Log MW to VA per worker                                  Log MW to VA per worker
                                         Fitted values                                            Fitted values


                                               Source: Authors using WDI Jobs Database

The level of countries’ statutory minimum wages, normalized by average value added per worker,
has a downward slope when plotted against income per capita. This is to be expected given the
positive correlation between value added per worker and gross domestic product per capita.
Capturing workers’ output in the minimum wage variable also helps to contextualize countries
where the distortions to the market-price of labor from a high statutory minimum wage are
minimized by higher worker productivity. Although the slope of the curve fitted for countries in
Latin America and the Caribbean is slightly steeper than that for the full sample, this difference is
not statistically significant.


                                                                    12
   Figure 3. OECD Employment Protection Legislation (EPL) Index and Level of Development
                                 1.5
     Log OECD measure of regulation (v3)




                                                                                            VEN
                                 1




                                                                                           MEX
                                                                                                  ARG

                                               HND
                                                                               COL
                                                                          PER


                                                                                                  URY
                                                     BOL

                                                                         ECU                            CHL
                                                                 PRY                              PAN
                                                                                        BRB
                                 .5




                                                                                       BRA

                                                                   JAM
                                               NIC                                                       BHS

                                                                               DOM



                                                                 SLV                 CRI




                                                           GTM
                                 0




                                           8                 9                                     10                    11                   12
                                                                                     Log of GDP PC PPP

                                               Log OECD measure of regulation (v3)                             Log OECD measure of regulation (v3)
                                               Fitted values                                                   Fitted values


                                                                  Source: Authors using IADB-OECD (2016)


While the ILO’s EPlex indicator does not appear to be significantly related to level of development,
the OECD-IADB EPL measure presets intriguingly contrasting relationships. The restrictiveness of
employment protection legislation in OECD-member countries (excluding Mexico and Chile) is
inversely related to level of development. This relationship is most likely reflecting labor policy
reforms in several European countries since 2000 (most notably, in Germany, Spain and Italy) which
have generally loosened constraints on firms’ choices (Gill, Packard and Koettl, 2013).
However, among the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, the level of restrictiveness of
employment regulation is positively related to level of development. For these countries, the
observed relationship may reflect geographical differences of timing of transition of from mainly
agrarian economies to industrial and service economies, and employer-employee relationships
becoming more common. This step in the structural transformation of an economy is likely to
increase societies’ interest in regulating the labor market. The figure may also reflect the relative
wealth in the Southern part of the region which underwent this structural transformation and
urbanization earlier, and where larger waves of migrants from Europe settled, bringing with them
social norms and political and regulatory institutions mainly from Portugal, Spain and Italy.



                                                                                              13
                                            Figure 4. ILO’s Employment Legislation (EPlex) and Level of Development

                                 0
    Log ILO measure of regulation (eplex)
                                 -.5




                                                                                                          VEN

                                                                                                              PAN
                                                                                HND                              CHL
                                 -1




                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                         MEX    ATG
                                                                                           SLV


                                                                                                               ARG
                                                                                                 LCA
                                 -1.5




                                                                                                        BRA
                                 -2




                                            6                          8                                      10                           12
                                                                             Log of GDP PC PPP

                                                    Log ILO measure of regulation (eplex)                 Log ILO measure of regulation (eplex)
                                                    Fitted values                                         Fitted values


                                                                     Source: Authors using ILO (2016)


Finally, Figure 5 shows the close relationship between our new PCA index of employment
protection constructed with the Doing Business data, and that of IADB-OECD and ILO. Figure 6
presents our composite PCA index of employment protection and how the new measure relates
with level of development. Interestingly, and in contrast to IADB-OECD’s EPL, our Doing
Business PCA measure of employment protection shows a uniformly inverse relationship with
countries’ income per capita (Figure 6).




                                                                                      14
Figure 5. De jure measures of employment protection regulation form OECD-IADB, ILO and
                                PCA on Doing Business data




 Source: OECD-IADB, ILO 2016 and authors application of PCA to Doing Business Labor Market Regulation, and WDI




                                                      15
     Figure 6. PCA of Employment Protection from Doing Business and Level of Development


                                      2                  HND              PRY
                                                                                                        PAN
                                                                                                  MEX
                                                                                     PER



                                                                                                 SUR
                                      1.5
       Log DB measure of regulation




                                                                                   ECU
                                                                                                                 CHL

                                                                                                                  BHS
                                                                                   LCA
                                                                                  VCT           BRA
                                                                          BLZ
                                                                                                           ARG          TTO
                                      1




                                                                    GTM           DMA DOM CRI
                                                                  GUY
                                                                          SLV
                                                         NIC
                                                                                                          ATG
                                                                                                        URY

                                                                                     GRD                                      PRI
                                                                                                 BRB
                                      .5




                                                                                                              KNA
                                                                            JAM          COL
                                      0
                                      -.5




                                            8                         9                                    10                               11       12
                                                                                               Log of GDP PC PPP

                                                                                   (p 50) lepl_db                                   (p 50) lepl_db
                                                                                   Fitted values                                    Fitted values



                                                Source: Authors application of PCA to Doing Business Labor Market Regulation, and WDI


IV. Results
Two sets of multivariate conditional correlations are presented in Tables 4 and 5. In Table 4 we
present the estimates of how de jure labor market policy variables relate with the extent of general
(that is, household) use of digital technology (lint_usage). In Table 5, we show how these estimates
differ when the focus narrows on businesses’ use of digital technology (ldig_bus_pca). For both
general and business usage of digital technology, we show 17 specifications in each table. This
allows full presentation of how the digital technology usage variables relate to: first, a set of key,
contextual control variables; then to the published labor market regulation composite indices of the
OECD-IADB and ILO; and different combinations of our PCA measures of employment
protection from the Doing Business LMR indicators. The last specification at the right-hand side of
Table 5 is our preferred.
In both tables, the relevant contextual control variables in logs, are: (i) GDP per capita (lgdppcppp) to
capture a country’s level of economic development; (ii) the rate of inflation (lwdi_inflation) to account
for economic stability and its effect on agents’ confidence to invest in new technology; (iii) the log of
available physical infrastructure (linf_index) capturing the importance of connectivity, transport and
other physical infrastructure to the readiness of a country for broad-band roll-out and widespread



                                                                                                      16
availability of digital technology;3 and (iii) openness to trade (lopeness), given the likelihood of greater
adoption and usage of technology in more economically, globally-integrated countries, per the
arguments of endogenous growth theory made by Grossman and Helpman (1992) and Harrison
(1996).
For both sets of multivariate conditional correlations, level of development is positively and
significantly associated with digital technology usage of households and businesses. However, the
sign and significance of the estimated coefficients on the other three control variables is weakly and
erratically related to household digital technology use. This contrasts sharply with the strong,
significant and stable estimated coefficients on the same variables when considering digital
technology usage by businesses. There are subtle points here worth emphasizing: prior to inclusion
of the physical infrastructure index, the estimated coefficients on the rate of inflation were
consistently negative and strongly significant. With the inclusion of the physical infrastructure
index, although the estimated coefficients on the inflation variable are negative across all
specifications, only in specification 3 is the coefficient statistically significant, and then only at the 10
percent level. In almost all the specifications the control variables measuring trade openness and a
country’s available physical infrastructure are both highly significant and positively associated with
businesses’ use of digital technology.
Turning to the first labor market policy variable of specific interest to our research questions, the
level of the statutory minimum wage (lmwtova_pw), the sign and significance of the estimated
coefficient on this variable shift across specifications and is weak when related to household usage
of digital technology. However, the sign and significance of the coefficient on the statutory
minimum wage is consistent and robust to changes in specification in our analysis of businesses’
usage: a higher statutory minimum wage is significantly, positively associated with the extent of
digital technology use by businesses.
There are two simple economic explanations for the sign and significance of this relationship, and
one that may purely be statistical. First, a higher statutory minimum wage is more likely to bind,
particularly at the lower-end of the labor force distribution by skill and productivity levels.
Therefore, at higher levels, the statutory minimum wage could increase firms’ incentives to invest in
digital technology that substitutes for labor inputs and thus saves on labor costs. Second, faced with
a policy-mandated lower bound on wages, firms will have an incentive to make investments that
combine labor more efficiently with tools to raise marginal labor product above the mandated
minimum wage. The purely statistical explanation is that in lower-income countries -even after
controlling for income level- the statutory minimum wage may really only effectively cover
employment in the public sector and state-owned enterprises. In such countries, beyond these
segments of the working population, there is very little formal (i.e. regulated) employment and few
firms with the inclination or resources to invest in digital technology. That our estimated
relationships are statistically strong and of the economically expected sign for digital technology use
by businesses (and substantially less stable and significant for usage by households), provides
support for the economic interpretations of the results.


3
 We are grateful to Klaus Adolfo Koch-Saldarriaga for suggesting this control. As documented in World Bank (2016)
much of the literature on the ‘digital divide’ shows that a country’s physical infrastructure is a key enabling factor to
making internet and digital technologies accessible to households and firms.

                                                            17
Turning to our next set of labor policy variables, we experiment with each of the three composite de
jure measures of employment protection separately. Since each on its own is intended to be a
comprehensive index of labor market regulation, including more than one at the same time,
introduces multicollinearity. The estimated coefficients on the ILO’s measure are small and never
reach conventional thresholds of statistical significance. The estimated coefficient on the EPL
measure constructed by OECD-IADB, however, is large and statistically strongly associated with
digital technology use by businesses, but not by households: more restrictions on the employment
decisions of firms are associated with lower levels of digital technology usage. With respect to the
size of estimated coefficient, our PCA index of employment protection from the Doing Business
data performs similarly to the OECD-IADB measure, and shows the same levels of statistical
significance (at the 1 percent level). A more restrictive regulatory framework on firms’ human
resource decisions, as measured by Doing Business LMR composite variable, is strongly associated
with less use of digital technology by firms. While the sign of the estimated coefficient on our PCA
measure is also negative with respect to household usage, it is considerably smaller and the
significance (at the 5 percent level) is not as strong.
A valid concern is that the strength and statistical significance of our Doing Business LMR PCA
measure of employment protection might be driven by the much larger sample size of countries that
it covers relative to the number covered by OECD-IADB’s EPL and ILO’s index. We test the
robustness of our results to changes in the sample, by estimating the multivariate correlation using
each of the three measures (along with the contextual control variables) but for a sample of the same
countries. The OECD-IADB and our PCA measures cover 60 countries in common. The coverage
overlap between our measure and that of the ILO is 71 countries. Running our multivariate
correlations for our measure of digital technology use by businesses in a country, we find that our
Doing Business PCA measure of employment protection remains negative and significant (at 1
percent) to this change in sample (see Table 6).
However, as discussed in prior sections, the composite measures of employment protection are
useful, but blunt instruments for analysis. It is likely that different dimensions of employment
regulation will affect firms’ decisions in different ways. This is clear in Alesina, et al., (2015) and in
the differing signs on the coefficients we estimate for the statutory minimum wage and employment
protection. There is further nuance in the effects of regulatory instruments to be found. We
examine this possibility by replacing our PCA composite measure of employment protection with
the four separate measures constructed from the Doing Business LMR data. Of the four, the
strongest and most consistently significantly, negatively associated with firms’ digital technology use,
is our measure of procedural difficulty of dismissing workers (ldif_firing_idx). This contrasts with our
PCA measure of the financial costs of dismissal, which is positive but does not appear statistically
significant in any of the specifications.
As with the level of the statutory minimum wage, the possible economic explanation for this
statistical relationship is straightforward. All other things equal, more onerous procedures on firms’
choices of productive inputs impede businesses’ ability to adopt and adjust to new technologies. If
firms are more constrained in their human resource decisions, they will find it more difficult to
embed new technologies into their production models, to adopt the processes that the new
technologies entail, and to find the complementary labor and human capital they require to reach a
new optimal level of operation. And although none of our other three PCA measures of

                                                   18
employment regulation perform as consistently or as significantly as the measure of difficulty of
dismissal procedures, there are also straightforward economic explanations for why they could relate
differently to firms’ digital technology use decisions. Firms and workers might welcome the
certainty of an up-front, dismissal payment to technologically-displaced workers in order to speed
the adjustment process. Restrictions on hours and limits on the use of fixed-term and temporary
workers could constrain a firms’ ability to experiment and adapt to new technology and changes to
its production function.
Finally, the level of contributions for social insurance required from employees and employers,
present conflicting relationships with digital technology use by households and businesses. We
experiment with different specifications, at times separating the mandatory contribution for old-age,
disability and survivors’ pensions (‘oads’ which added together, typically make up the largest portion
of total social insurance contributions), from the total (‘ossp’), and then with alternating variables that
specify the statutory responsibility of employers (‘loads_emp’ and ‘loss_emp’) from that of insured
workers (‘loads_ins’ and ‘lossp_ins’). Curiously, mandatory social insurance contributions appear
statistically significant only in relation to households’ digital technology use. However, the size,
signs and level of significance of the estimated coefficients on our variables shift substantially across
specifications.
This said, the largest estimated coefficient is in the specification (Table 5, column 17) with the most
control and variables of interest, and specifically on the variable capturing employers’ full statutory
contribution for social insurance. Although it does not reach a level of statistical significance, a
higher mandatory contribution on employers for the social insurance coverage of employees appears
to be associated with lower levels of digital technology usage by businesses. Again, there is a
straightforward economic explanation for the sign on the estimated coefficient: when combined
with a binding minimum wage, employers are less likely to pass on the costs of mandatory
contributions to workers in the form of lower take home pay.
We summarize the results presented in this section, with the economic significance of our variables
of interest, with reference to our preferred specification (Table 5, column 17). Starting with the
minimum wage, a 1 percent increase in the statutory minimum wage (as a share of value added per
worker), is associated with a 0.35 percent increase in our measure of digital technology use by firms.
With respect to employment protection, a 1 percent increase in the difficulty of dismissal procedures
is associated with a decrease of 0.37 percent in the use of digital technology by firms.




                                                    19
Table 4. Non-business use of digital technology and labor market regulations: Multivariate correlations
VARIABLES                                                                                              Non business use of the internet: linf_index
                             1            2           3          4           5           6           7           8           9           10          11          12          13          14          15          16          17
lgdppcppp                0.875***    0.849***    0.874***    0.869***    0.901***    0.897***    0.861***    0.898***    0.866***    0.886***    0.762***    0.806***    0.805***    0.865***    0.728***    0.797***    0.803***
                          (15.63)     (9.223)     (10.71)     (13.49)     (14.13)     (14.01)     (13.13)     (13.94)     (12.90)     (9.303)     (9.112)     (12.67)     (11.78)     (9.334)     (8.176)     (12.32)     (11.55)
lwdi_inflation            0.105*      -0.0860      0.0645    0.125**      0.114*      0.107*      0.117*     0.131**     0.135**      -0.0392     0.0773     0.140**     0.130**      -0.0383     0.145*     0.173***    0.169***
                          (1.867)     (-1.390)    (0.832)     (2.076)     (1.916)     (1.794)     (1.956)     (2.100)     (2.168)     (-0.635)    (1.042)     (2.442)     (2.143)     (-0.624)    (1.847)     (2.997)     (2.813)
lopeness                  0.0444       0.0316      0.142      0.0674      0.0796      0.0683      0.0700      0.0294      0.0520       0.0372     0.220*      0.0771      0.0782     0.00876       0.186       0.102      0.0882
                          (0.460)     (0.409)     (1.173)     (0.662)     (0.775)     (0.667)     (0.694)     (0.280)     (0.492)     (0.490)     (1.860)     (0.773)     (0.751)     (0.115)     (1.484)     (1.011)     (0.835)
linf_index                 0.362       -0.393      0.126       0.437       0.362       0.349      0.457*       0.338       0.443       -0.450      0.223      0.484*      0.489*       -0.304      0.509      0.508*      0.501*
                          (1.374)     (-1.520)    (0.341)     (1.597)     (1.327)     (1.270)     (1.660)     (1.220)     (1.579)     (-1.538)    (0.537)     (1.761)     (1.725)     (-1.132)    (1.223)     (1.883)     (1.788)
lmwtova_pw                           -0.00364     -0.0180     0.120*      0.121*       0.114       0.114       0.117      0.129*      -0.0109     0.0624       0.112       0.111       0.0110     0.0605       0.111       0.112
                                     (-0.0477)    (-0.206)    (1.696)     (1.680)     (1.574)     (1.611)     (1.621)     (1.775)     (-0.139)    (0.736)     (1.611)     (1.537)     (0.144)     (0.687)     (1.588)     (1.543)
lrest_oecd                             0.0976                                                                                         -0.0441                                        0.00887
                                      (0.730)                                                                                         (-0.306)                                       (0.0616)
lrest_ilo                                          0.103                                                                                         -0.0744                                         -0.0226
                                                  (0.488)                                                                                        (-0.358)                                        (-0.102)
lepl_db                                                      -0.217**                                                                                        -0.251**                                        -0.230**
                                                              (-2.296)                                                                                        (-2.577)                                        (-2.266)
lrig_hours                                                               -0.0734                                          -0.0594                                         -0.0348                                         -0.0472
                                                                         (-1.022)                                         (-0.804)                                        (-0.381)                                        (-0.523)
ldif_hir_idx                                                                          0.0232                              -0.0136                                          0.0134                                        0.000858
                                                                                      (0.385)                             (-0.209)                                         (0.215)                                       (0.0133)
ldif_firing_idx                                                                                  -0.0815**               -0.0813**                                       -0.0861**                                       -0.0694*
                                                                                                  (-2.102)                (-2.002)                                        (-2.106)                                        (-1.690)
lfiring_cost_idx                                                                                               0.113       0.0979                                         -0.0288                                          0.0314
                                                                                                              (1.063)      (0.929)                                        (-0.277)                                        (0.306)
loads_ins                                                                                                                             0.0528       0.117     0.0986         0.112
                                                                                                                                      (0.976)     (1.117)    (1.327)       (1.436)
loads_emp                                                                                                                             0.104*     0.280***    0.179**      0.170**
                                                                                                                                      (1.817)     (2.723)    (2.242)       (2.010)
lossp_ins                                                                                                                                                                              0.121*      0.168      0.188**     0.192**
                                                                                                                                                                                      (1.734)     (1.476)     (2.423)     (2.364)
lossp_emp                                                                                                                                                                              0.0221      0.124       0.0609      0.0316
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.338)     (0.994)     (0.734)     (0.357)
Constant                 -5.087***   -3.684***   -5.071***   -4.755***   -5.322***   -5.284***   -5.033***   -5.437***   -5.291***   -4.304***   -5.379***   -4.797***   -5.129***   -4.144***   -5.094***   -4.869***   -5.254***
                          (-9.808)    (-4.666)    (-6.419)    (-7.932)    (-8.934)    (-8.160)    (-8.724)    (-8.450)    (-7.263)    (-5.528)    (-7.227)    (-8.519)    (-7.384)    (-5.301)    (-6.059)    (-8.331)    (-7.060)

Observations                 135        62          70         113         116         116         114         113         113          54          58          96          96          56          59          99          99
R-squared                   0.826     0.822       0.836       0.827       0.819       0.817       0.826       0.820       0.828       0.865       0.873       0.863       0.861       0.862       0.860       0.857       0.855
t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                 20
Table 5. Business use of digital technology and labor market regulations: Multivariate correlations
VARIABLES                                                                                        Business use of the internet: lint_usage: ldig_bus_pca
                              1           2           3           4           5           6           7           8           9          10          11          12          13          14          15          16          17
lgdppcppp                1.254***    2.270***    1.664***    1.338***    1.448***    1.432***    1.287***    1.431***    1.302***    2.296***    1.499***    1.248***    1.213***    2.297***    1.512***    1.242***    1.192***
                          (10.28)     (11.08)     (11.02)     (10.33)     (10.69)     (10.42)     (9.941)     (10.37)     (9.874)     (9.655)     (8.522)     (8.536)     (7.893)     (10.08)     (8.511)     (8.593)     (7.890)
lwdi_inflation             -0.140      -0.165     -0.242*      -0.123      -0.131      -0.152      -0.144      -0.115     -0.0879      -0.124      -0.208     -0.0725     -0.0482      -0.111      -0.227     -0.0954     -0.0895
                          (-1.079)    (-1.205)    (-1.686)    (-0.940)    (-0.967)    (-1.112)    (-1.117)    (-0.802)    (-0.666)    (-0.806)    (-1.334)    (-0.505)    (-0.326)    (-0.736)    (-1.446)    (-0.679)    (-0.636)
lopeness                 0.590***     0.352**    0.622***    0.786***    0.747***    0.703***    0.752***    0.640***    0.745***     0.385**    0.780***    0.958***    0.907***      0.376*    0.742***    0.930***    0.856***
                          (2.652)     (2.043)     (2.776)     (3.533)     (3.186)     (2.982)     (3.470)     (2.647)     (3.323)     (2.020)     (3.132)     (3.818)     (3.580)     (1.988)     (2.960)     (3.776)     (3.439)
linf_index               3.339***      0.940     2.145***    3.551***    3.358***    3.348***    3.657***    3.318***    3.627***      0.721     2.827***    3.843***    3.886***      0.858     2.710***    3.657***    3.742***
                          (5.852)     (1.646)     (3.125)     (6.437)     (5.788)     (5.671)     (6.710)     (5.571)     (6.566)     (0.993)     (3.242)     (6.115)     (6.151)     (1.309)     (3.262)     (6.021)     (6.122)
lmwtova_pw                           0.591***     -0.0834    0.361**     0.357**     0.337**     0.346**     0.352**     0.377**     0.593***     -0.0516    0.368**     0.367**     0.609***     -0.0701    0.366**     0.350**
                                      (3.479)     (-0.515)    (2.409)     (2.242)     (2.088)     (2.352)     (2.175)     (2.515)     (3.012)     (-0.290)    (2.191)     (2.165)     (3.248)     (-0.399)    (2.226)     (2.120)
lrest_oecd                           -0.979***                                                                                       -1.088***                                       -1.100***
                                      (-3.325)                                                                                        (-3.034)                                        (-3.116)
lrest_ilo                                         -0.303                                                                                          -0.323                                          -0.195
                                                 (-0.776)                                                                                        (-0.738)                                        (-0.441)
lepl_db                                                      -0.893***                                                                                       -0.886***                                       -0.832***
                                                              (-4.416)                                                                                        (-3.670)                                        (-3.396)
lrig_hours                                                               -0.270*                                           -0.254                                          -0.128                                         -0.0675
                                                                         (-1.670)                                         (-1.644)                                        (-0.589)                                        (-0.324)
ldif_hir_idx                                                                          0.0647                               -0.130                                          -0.121                                          -0.172
                                                                                      (0.469)                             (-0.948)                                        (-0.801)                                        (-1.139)
ldif_firing_idx                                                                                  -0.387***               -0.389***                                       -0.392***                                       -0.372***
                                                                                                  (-4.730)                (-4.579)                                        (-3.997)                                        (-3.899)
lfiring_cost_idx                                                                                               0.359       0.267                                           0.205                                           0.205
                                                                                                              (1.480)     (1.196)                                         (0.816)                                         (0.851)
loads_ins                                                                                                                             0.0174     -0.0548     -0.00495      0.0541
                                                                                                                                      (0.128)    (-0.249)    (-0.0265)    (0.284)
loads_emp                                                                                                                              0.161      0.0812     -0.00463      -0.107
                                                                                                                                      (1.123)    (0.376)     (-0.0233)    (-0.527)
lossp_ins                                                                                                                                                                              0.0129      0.107       0.202       0.244
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.0750)    (0.471)     (1.062)     (1.275)
lossp_emp                                                                                                                                                                               0.182      -0.181     -0.0538      -0.241
                                                                                                                                                                                       (1.128)    (-0.726)    (-0.267)    (-1.164)
Constant                 -14.37***   -18.75***   -17.24***   -14.57***   -16.50***   -16.29***   -15.41***   -16.99***   -16.02***   -19.27***   -17.31***   -14.86***   -15.90***   -19.49***   -16.67***   -14.79***   -15.04***
                          (-12.31)    (-10.64)    (-11.78)    (-11.65)    (-12.60)    (-11.21)    (-12.95)    (-11.66)    (-10.49)    (-9.857)    (-11.07)    (-11.08)    (-9.549)    (-10.10)    (-9.937)    (-10.90)    (-8.744)

Observations                 138        63          70         116         119         119         117         116         116          55          58          99          99          57          59         102         102
R-squared                   0.802     0.895       0.894       0.842       0.819       0.815       0.846       0.818       0.852       0.894       0.900       0.842       0.849       0.895       0.901       0.843       0.851
t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                 21
Table 6. Tests for changes in country sample size

VARIABLES                                    Business use of the internet: ldig_bus-pca

                                     18                                    19                 20
lgdppcppp                        2.238***                              1.645***           1.611***
                                   (6.997)                              (10.55)             (11.09)
lwdi_inflation                     -0.271                                -0.218             -0.214
                                  (-1.186)                              (-1.423)           (-1.493)
lopeness                           0.371*                              0.608***           0.605***
                                   (1.800)                              (2.678)             (2.932)
inf_index                           0.316                              0.754***           0.769***
                                   (1.141)                              (3.220)             (3.506)
lmwtova_pw                         0.450*                               -0.0920            -0.0211
                                   (1.910)                              (-0.565)           (-0.138)
lrest_oecd                       -1.174***
                                  (-2.891)
lrest_ilo                                                               -0.226
                                                                       (-0.564)
                                                                                               -
lepl_db                                                                                   0.568***
                                                                                           (-2.976)
                                                                                               -
Constant                         -18.41***                            -16.93***           15.61***
                                  (-7.155)                             (-11.44)            (-12.47)

Observations                       39                                    68                  68
R-squared                         0.891                                 0.896              0.908
t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                 22
V. Conclusions, caveats and possible future lines of research
In this paper, we examine the relationship between businesses’ use of digital technology and labor
market policies: statutory minimum wages, employment protection, and social insurance
contributions.
Although requiring caution in how results are presented and interpreted, a country-level analysis is
critically important to our investigation. Typically, there is little variation in a country’s labor code
over time. Nor are there very frequent or substantial changes in labor regulations. This raises the
value of variation across countries. Furthermore, in most countries firms and workers experience
labor policies as a single package, which is applied uniformly across regions and industries. With a
few exceptions -such as firms in special economic zones, or particular industrial promotion policies
– businesses cannot legally opt out. While variation in the ability of local administrative authorities
to enforce policies can be usefully exploited (as shown by Almeida and Carneiro, 2008 and Almeida,
Corseuil and Poole, 2017), the opportunities to do so are rare.
Not all instruments of labor market regulation are the same. Nor should their expected impact on
firms’ decisions to innovate by using digital technology be the same. Different regulatory
instruments can contribute differently to the prospective costs and benefits of firms’ decisions to use
digital technologies. For this reason, the variation across countries in whether and how intensively
the different instruments are deployed is also tremendously valuable. Only with a large sample of
countries can sufficient variation in the application of several regulatory instruments (viz. restrictions
on hours, financial costs of dismissals, regulation of the use of different contract types, required
procedures for dismissals) be observed.
By adopting an empirical strategy from Alesina, et al. (2015) but substantially increasing the number
and diversity of countries in our analysis, we show that de jure labor market policies are significantly
associated with businesses’ use of digital technology, but we provide greater granularity to their
significance.
Our results are consistent with those of Alesina, et al. (2015), but we believe they are stronger and
more reliable, for three reasons: (i) our larger and more diverse sample of countries provides greater
variation to exploit; (ii) by using more nuanced measures of employment protection, we capture
important differences in labor regulation; and (iii) our results are robust to the inclusion of variables
that control for the context in which firms make their decision to use digital technology, namely
countries’ level of income, economic stability, available physical infrastructure and global economic
integration. Despite most of these contextual controls being strong and statistically significant, we
find an important association between digital technology use by firms and labor market policies.
The strength and implications of this significant association are underscored by the lack of a strong
relationship between labor market policies and our measure of general household use of digital
technology.
There are several useful extensions of this analysis. The most obvious is to more fully exploit the
longitudinal dimension in the Doing Business LMR extending back to 2005, even if this requires

                                                   23
efforts to ensure comparability of the indicators over time. Also, a fuller picture of countries’ labor
market interventions could yield lessons on how to speed process innovations to achieve higher
productivity – specifically, inclusion in the analysis of policies and programs such as job search
assistance and skills training, designed to help working people navigate transitions in the labor
market.




                                                   24
References
Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo, 2017. Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets, NBER Working
      Paper No. 23285
        2016. “The race between machine and man: Implications of technology for growth, factor shares and
        employment,” NBER Working Paper No. 222521, May.
Acharya, V., R. Baghai, and K. Subramanian, 2013. “Labor Laws and Innovation,” Journal of Law and
       Economics, vol. (56), pp. 997—1037.
Ahsan, A. and C. Pagés, 2008. “Are All Labor Regulations Equal? Evidence from Indian Manufacturing”
       IZA Discussion Paper series, No. 3394, March
Aleksynska, M. and S. Cazes, 2014. “Comparing Indicators of Labour Market Regulations Across Databases:
        A post Scriptum to the Employing Workers Debate”. ILO, Geneva. Conditions of Work and
        Employment Series. N⁰50.
Alesina, A., M. Battisti and J. Zeira. 2015. “Technology and Labor Regulations: Theory and Evidence”.
         NBER Working Paper 20841
Almeida, R. and R. Alterido, 2008. “The Incentives to Invest in Job Training: Do Strict Labor Codes
       Influence this Decision?” Social Protection and Labor working paper No. 0832, Washington DC,
       World Bank
Almeida, R. and P. Carneiro, 2008 “Enforcement of labor regulation, informal labor, and firm performance
       enforcement of labor regulation in Brazil.” Journal of Comparative Economics
Almeida, R., C. Corseuil and J Poole, 2017. “The impact of digital technologies on skills: Do labor policies
       matter?” mimeo, Background Paper for the LCRCE Regional Study “Technology Adoption and
       Inclusive Growth: Impacts of Digital Technologies on Productivity, Jobs and Skills in Latin
       America” World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper, WPS 81187
Amin, M., 20008. “Technology and Labor Regulation: Evidence from the Retail Sector in India” Available at
       SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1101955 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1101955
Autor, D., W. Kerr and A. Kugler, 2007. “Does Employment Protection Reduce Productivity? Evidence
        from US States”, The Economic Journal, 117, June
Bartelsman, E.J. and J. Hinloopen, 2005. “Unleashing Animal Spirits: Investment in ICT and Economic
        Growth”, in L. Soete and B. ter Weel (eds.), The Economics of the Digital Society, Edward Elgar,
        pp. 272 – 304.
Bartelsman, P. Gautier, and J. De Wind, 2016. “Employment Protection, Technology Choice and Worker
        Allocation.” International Economic Review, Volume 57, Issue 3, August, Pagés 787–826
Boeri, Tito, and Jan van Ours. 2008. The Economics of Imperfect Labor Markets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
        University Press.
Botero, J., S. Djankov, R. La Porta, Rafael, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, 2004. The Regulation of labor.
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3), 1339–1382)
Brambilla, I., 2017. “Digital Technology Adoption and jobs: A Model of Firm Heterogeneity” Background
        technical paper for Regional Study, Digital Technology Adoption, Skills, Productivity and Jobs in
        Latin America and the Caribbean, Office of the LCR Chief Economist, World Bank

                                                      25
Cunningham, Wendy. 2007. Minimum Wages and Social Policy: Lessons from Developing Countries. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.
Del Carpio, X. and L. Pabon, 2014, “Minimum wage poicy: Lessons with a focus on the ASEAN region.”,
       East Asia and Pacific Regional Office, World Bank Group
       https://hubs.worldbank.org/docs/imagebank/pages/docprofile.aspx?nodeid=19457058
        2017. “Implication of minimum wage increaes on labor market dynamis: Lessons for emerging
        market economies.” Policy Research Working Paper, no. WP8030, Washington DC: World Bank
Dewan, D., D. Ganley and K. Kreamer, 2005. “Across the Digital Divide: A Cross-Country Multi-
       Technology Analysis of the Determinants of IT Penetration, Journal of the Association for
       Information Systems, Vol. 6 No. 12, pp. 409-432, December
Gill, I., T. Packard and J. Koettl, 2013. “Full Employment: A Distant Dream for Europe”, IZA Journal of
          European Labor Studies, 2:19
Grossman, G.M. and Helpman E., 1992. Innovation and Growth: Technological Competition in the Global
      Economy. Boston: MIT Press
Gust, C., and J. Marquez, 2004. “International Comparisons of Productivity Growth: The Role of
        Information Technology and Regulatory Practices”, Labour Economics, vol. 11(1), pp. 33—58,
        February
Harrison, A., 1996. “Openness and growth: a time-series, cross-country analysis for developing countries.”
        Journal of Development Economics, 48, 419-447.
International Labor Organization (ILO), 2015. “Employment Protection Legislation - Summary of Indicators
         in the Area of Terminating Regular Contracts (individual dismissals)”. International Labor Office,
         Inclusive Labor Markets, Labor Regulations and Working Conditions Branch (INWORK). Geneva.
        2016. “EPLex.- Objectives and Scope of the Database”. <www.ilo.org/dyn/eplex/termmain.home>.
Jackson, J. Edward 2003, A User’s Guide to Principal Components, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New
        Jersey.
Johnson, Richard, A., and Dean W. Wichern, 2008. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Pearson
       Prentice Hall Inc., Upper Saddle River
Koeniger, W., 2005. “Dismissal costs and innovation,” Economics Letters, vol. 88(1), pp. 79—84, July
Mortensen, D.T., 1977. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Decisions.” Industrial and Labor
       Relations Revie 30, pp. 505-517
Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 1994. “The OECD Jobs Study. - Facts,
       Analysis, Strategies”. OECD. Paris. Updated May 1996.
       <http://www.oecd.org/employment/emp/1941679.pdf>,
        2004. “Employment Outlook”. OECD. Paris. <http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/employment/oecd-
        employment-outlook-2004_empl_outlook-2004-en>.
        2013. “OECD Employment Outlook 2013 - Towards More and Better Jobs”. OECD. Paris.
        2013b, “Protecting jobs, enhancing flexibility: A new look at employment protection legislation”, in
        OECD Employment Outlook 2013,

                                                     26
        2014. “Calculating Summary Indicators of EPL Strictness Methodology”.
        <https://www.oecd.org/els/emp/EPL-Methodology.pdf>,
OECD-IADB, 2016. “Calculating Summary Indicators of Employment Protection Legislation (EPL) in Latin
     America and the Caribbean” <http://www.oecd.org/els/emp/EPL-Document-LAC-Methodology-
     ENG.pdf>
Packard, Truman, Johannes Koettl, and Claudio E. Montenegro. 2012. In from the Shadow: Integrating Europe’s
        Informal Labor. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Pagés, Carmen & Claudio E. Montenegro, 2004. "Who Benefits from Labor Market Regulations and
        Institutions?: Chile 1960-1998." 2004. In James J. Heckman and Carmen Pagés (eds.) "Law and
        Employment: Lessons from Latin American and the Caribbean." Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.
        401-434. Reprinted in Jorge Enrique Restrepo and Andrea Tokman R. (eds.), "Labor Markets and
        Institutions" (2005), Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile, pp. 77-114.
Perry, G. , W. Maloney, O. Arias, P. Fajnzylber, A. Mason and J. Saavedra-Chanduvi. 2007. Informality: Exit
        and Exclusion. World Bank Latin American and Caribbean Regional Study. Washington, DC: World
        Bank
Quality of Government (QoG) Institute, 2015, University of Gothenburg
Ravallion, M., 2016. The Economics of Poverty: History, Measurement and Policy, Oxford University Press
Saint-Paul, G., 2002. “Employment Protection, International Specialization, and Innovation,” European
        Economic Review, vol. 46(2), pp. 375—395.
Samaniego, R., 2006. “Employment Protection and High-Tech Aversion,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
       vol. 9(2), pp. 224—241.
World Bank, 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Washington DC: World Bank




                                                      27
Annex: Separate Measures of Labor Market Regulation using PCA on data from Doing Business

                                           A1. Correlation between Doing Business PCA and OECD and ILO employment protection indices




                                                                                                A2. Composite PCA measure of labor market regulation
                                                     Log Doing Business measure of regulation
                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                           2




                                                     HND                                                  PAN
                                                                     PRY
Log Doing Business measure of regulation




                                                                                                  MEX
                                                                                   PER


                                                                                                 SUR
                                           1.5




                                                                                 ECU
                                                                                                                 CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                  BHS
                                                                                 LCA
                                                                                VCT            BRA
                                                                                                                                                                  (p 50) lepl_db




                                                                       BLZ
                                                                                                           ARG          TTO
                                           1




                                                               GTM               DMA DOM CRI
                                                             GUY
                                                                     SLV
                                                     NIC
                                                                                                            ATG
                                                                                                          URY
                                                                                   GRD                                        PRI
                                                                                                BRB
                                           .5




                                                                                                                KNA
                                                                         JAM           COL
                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                           0
                                           -.5




                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                 8                 9                                       10                               11          12
                                                                                             Log of GDP PC PPP

                                                                                 (p 50) lepl_db                                     (p 50) lepl_db
                                                                                                                                                                                        0        .5        1           1.5       2   2.5
                                                                                 Fitted values                                      Fitted values
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Inverse Normal



                                                                                                                                               A3. Rigidity of hours PCA
                                                                        Log rigidity of hours index
                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                           1




                                                     NIC         GTM SLV                                  PAN

                                                                                       DOM

                                                     HND             PRY                          MEX
                                                                                             CRIBRA VEN
Log rigidity of hours index
                                           0




                                                                                 ECU                              BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                  (p 50) lrig_hours




                                                           BOL         JAM
                                                                     BLZ        DMA
                                                                                 LCA
                                                                                VCTPER
                                                                                    GRD
                                                                                      COL        SUR       ARG
                                                                                                          URY  CHL
                                                                                                             A TG       TTO
                                           -1




                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                           -2




                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                           -3




                                                             GUY                                BRB             KNA           PRI




                                                 8                 9                                       10                               11          12
                                                                                             Log of GDP PC PPP
                                                                                                                                                                            -3




                                                                               (p 50) lrig_hours                                    (p 50) lrig_hours
                                                                                                                                                                                            -2        -1           0         1         2
                                                                               Fitted values                                        Fitted values
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Inverse Normal




                                                                                                                                                             28
                                                                                                                                            A4. Difficulty of hiring PCA
                                                                  Log difficulty of hiring index




                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                   4.5




                                              NIC      GUY    BLZ
                                                             PRY
                                                         GTM SLVJAM        VCT
                                                                            LCAGRD
                                                                           DMA   COL
                                                                                DOM            SUR
                                                                                               BRB     ATGBHS
                                                                                                 MEX URYKNA                 TTO PRI
                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                     5
  Log difficulty of hiring index




                                                                                 PER                      ARG




                                                                                                                                                                       (p 50) ldif_hir_idx
                                   3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                   3




                                                                               ECU
                                               HND   BOL                                     BRA VEN
                                   2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                CHL
                                                                                        CRI            PAN
                                   2




                                         8                     9                                           10                                   11                12
                                                                                        Log of GDP PC PPP




                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                         (p 50) ldif_hir_idx                                          (p 50) ldif_hir_idx
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2        3                   4                 5           6
                                                                         Fitted values                                                Fitted values
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Inverse Normal


                                                                                                                                            A5. Difficulty of firing PCA
                                                               Log difficulty of firing index
                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                     2


                                                                                             MEX
                                             HND              PRY           PER                     PAN
                                                                                            SUR
Log difficulty of firing index




                                                      GUY      BLZ         ECU
                                                                          LCA                               BHS
                                                                                                           CHL
                                   0




                                                                         VCT                                          TTO
                                                                                                                                                                        (p 50) ldif_firing_idx




                                                                          DMA                                               PRI
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                   -1




                                                                                                      ATG
                                                                                            BRB       KNA
                                   -2




                                                                                                                                                                       -2




                                             NIC       GTM SLVJAM               DOM
                                                                                 COL CRIBRA
                                                                               GRD                   ARG
                                                                                                    URY
                                   -3




                                         8                   9                                       10                                    11                12
                                                                                       Log of GDP PC PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                     -4




                                                                 (p 50) ldif_firing_idx                                            (p 50) ldif_firing_idx
                                                                 Fitted values                                                     Fitted values                                                    -4           -2                        0           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Inverse Normal


                                                                                                                                                     A6. Firring costs PCA
                                                                          Log firing cost index
                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                   4




                                                               PRY                       BRA              KNA
                                             NIC                           LCAGRD
                                                                          VCT
                                                                          DMA               BRB      ARG                     PRI
                                                                   JAM
                                              HND                BLZ                        SUR           BHS
                                                                                                    URY
                                                                                                    PANATG
                                                      GUY                      PER    CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                4




                                                                                                                      TTO
                                                                                  COL         MEX
                                                                                 DOM                       CHL
                                   3




                                                                                                                                                                        (p 50) lfiring_cost_idx
Log firing cost index




                                                           GTM SLV
                                                                           ECU
                                   2




                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                   0




                                         8                   9                                        10                                    11               12
                                                                                                                                                                                     -2




                                                                                       Log of GDP PC PPP

                                                              (p 50) lfiring_cost_idx                                              (p 50) lfiring_cost_idx
                                                              Fitted values                                                        Fitted values                                                         2            3                        4           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Inverse Normal




                                                                                                                                                                  29
