                                                       WPS8083


Policy Research Working Paper                         8083




      Information Technology and Provision
          of National Identication Cards
              by the Bolivian Police
         Evidence from Two Randomized Natural Field
                        Experiments

                                 Alberto Chong
                            Gustavo Machicado Salas
                             Monica Yanez-Pagans




Education Global Practice Group
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8083


  Abstract
 This paper investigates the potential of information technol-                      to the digital renewal process were on average 12 percentage
 ogy to improve public service delivery and empower citizens.                       points more likely to complete it, compared with those who
 The investigation uses two randomized natural experiments                          were randomly assigned to the manual process. Further, suc-
 in the renewal of national identification cards by the Boliv-                      cessful applicants who were randomly assigned to the digital
 ian Police. The first experiment arises from the random                            process took on average 31 percent less time to complete the
 assignment of police officers and applicants to a manual                           process, compared with those who were randomly assigned
 or digital renewal process, which is identical in all other                        to the manual process. The investigation finds that infor-
 aspects. The second experiment arises from technical failures                      mation technology significantly lowers barriers to accessing
 in the digital renewal process, which allow police officers                        national identification cards, and promotes more equita-
 to change from the digital to the manual renewal process                           ble provision across the population. The findings suggest
 randomly across renewal days. The efficiency of public ser-                        that information technology might achieve these goals by
 vice delivery is measured in renewal success rates (which                          introducing efficiencies (such as reducing administrative
 average to a strikingly low rate of 72 percent in the sample)                      shortcomings and transaction costs) and limiting the exer-
 and the time it takes to renew an identification card. The                         cise of discretion by police officers in the renewal process.
 findings show that applicants who were randomly assigned



  This paper is a product of the Education Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at myanezpagans@
  worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Information Technology and Provision of National Identiﬁcation
     Cards by the Bolivian Police: Evidence from Two Randomized
                                     Natural Field Experiments*

                                                 Alberto Chong
                                            Gustavo Machicado Salas
                                             Monica Yanez-Pagans




   JEL Classiﬁcations: C93, O38, J24




   *
     Yanez-Pagans: The World Bank (E-mail: myanezpagans@worldbank.org). Machicado Salas: Institute for Advanced
Development Studies (E-mail: cmachicado@inesad.edu.bo). We are very grateful to V´    ıctor Hugo Escobar, Alfonso Var-
gas, Wilhelm Taboada, and Boris Villarroel for their collaboration in making this study possible. For helpful discussions
and comments, we thank Horacio Aguirre, Mary Arends-Kuenning, Kathy Baylis, Nestor Gandelman, Nicol´        as Garcette,
Saweda Liverpool, Ghazala Mansuri, Nolan Miller, Hernan Winkler, Alex Winter-Nelson, and Patricia Yanez-Pagans.
This project was funded and undertaken as part of the Latin American and Caribbean Research Network of the Inter-
American Development Bank. The paper has been screened to insure that no conﬁdential information is revealed.
1    Introduction

Shortcomings in identiﬁcation documents and, more generally, lack of identiﬁcation documents are pervasive
and widespread problems in most of the developing world. In general, the poor are at higher risk of holding
invalid identiﬁcation documents and, therefore, of being denied access to basic social services and marginal-
ized. In many developing countries, identiﬁcation cards are an essential document to hold a job in the formal
sector, own property, receive basic social services, beneﬁt from social transfers, carry out bank transactions,
vote in elections and, more generally, to fully participate in society (Duryea, Olgiati, and Stone, 2006). Still,
getting an identiﬁcation card in many of these countries is a complicated process, which is generally associ-
ated with excessive bureaucracy, red tape, and corruption. Moreover, bureaucracy is intimidating to many
people, especially so to the poor and those belonging to groups traditionally excluded from the mainstream.
To this end, understanding how to lower barriers in access to identiﬁcation cards is vital to promote more
equitable access to public services by citizens.

    Over the past decade, access to information technology in developing countries has grown rapidly. In-
creased access to these technology has unleashed the potential to use of them to advance development
objectives and promote greater equality (Sunden and Wicander, 2006). Applications of information tech-
nology to address development challenges have multiplied in recent years. Some examples include the use
of information technology to access price information for market participants in Peru, access to ﬁnancial
services through mobile banking in Kenya, and rapid damage assessment following natural disasters like the
earthquake in Haiti (World Bank, 2011). However, the use of information technology as a means to im-
prove the quality and reach of government services has lagged behind in comparison. Information technology
signiﬁcantly aﬀects the way in which citizens and governments interact, and whether it might be eﬀective
at enhancing economic opportunities for the poor, improving delivery of services to the under-served, and
enhancing government eﬃciency and transparency is an important and open empirical question.

    Although the development community is increasingly supporting public service reforms linked to infor-
mation technology, there is little evidence on its potential for dealing with some of the challenges to public
service reform in developing countries.1 Information technology might aﬀect governance and public service
delivery outcomes through diﬀerent channels, including eﬃciency, eﬀectiveness, transparency, and increased
access (World Bank, 2011). Yet, the beneﬁts arising from the use of information technology and its mecha-
nisms have been notoriously diﬃcult to measure (e.g. Bresnahan and Gordon (1997), and Griliches (1998)).
Most of the previous literature has looked at aggregated data or ﬁrm-level data and has looked at the eﬀects
of investments in information technology on labor productivity measures or total factor productivity (e.g.
Schreyer (2000), Colecchia and Schreyer (2001), and Stiroh (2001)). Some other studies have relied instead on
growth accounting techniques, estimating the basic neoclassical production function, including information
technology as one of the production factors (e.g. Draca, Sadun, and Reenen, 2006).
    1
      For instance, the World Bank has just released an entire report devoted to the idea of achieving development
results through information technology applications (World Bank, 2011). The ﬂagship publication of the Inter-American
Development Bank, this year, is also entirely devoted to the idea of incorporating information technology as a tool to
advance development objectives (Inter-American Development Bank, 2011).




                                                          2
    This paper investigates the potential of information technology to improve public service delivery and em-
power citizens in the context of two unusual randomized natural experiments occurring within one particular
bureaucratic process: the renewal of a national identiﬁcation card by the Bolivian Police (ID cards from now
on).2 The ﬁrst natural experiment arises from the random assignment of both police oﬃcers and applicants
to a manual or digital renewal process, which is identical in all aspects except that the digital process makes
use of information technology as part of the renewal process, which introduces eﬃciencies within the process.
The second experiment arises by the existence of technical failures within the digital renewal process, which
allow for police oﬃcers to randomly change from the digital to the manual process across renewal day. The
causal eﬀect of information technology on ID card provision is identiﬁed by using two diﬀerent identiﬁcation
strategies. In the ﬁrst one, we compare applicant-police oﬃcer pairs randomly assigned to each of these two
renewal processes after controlling for day-of-renewal ﬁxed eﬀects. In the second one, we take advantage of
the prevalence of technical failures, and compare instead applicant-police oﬃcers pairs randomly assigned to
the digital or manual process after controlling for police oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects. The quality of public service
delivery within this bureaucratic process is measured in terms of success rates at completing the renewal
process and the time it takes to complete the process conditional on being successful.

    The results of this paper present strong evidence that the adoption of information technology by the Police
led to substantial improvements in the quality of service provided to citizens. Applicants randomly assigned
to a digital renewal process are, on average, 12 percentage points more likely to complete the renewal process
as compared to those randomly assigned to the manual process. Further, applicants who are able to complete
the renewal process and who are randomly assigned to the digital process, take on average 31 percent less
time to complete the renewal process as compared to the average time taken by those applicants who are
able to complete the renewal process and who are randomly assigned to the manual process. Information
technology seems to be translating into an improvement in overall quality within this bureaucratic process by
increasing eﬃciencies within the renewal process, including a reduction in transaction costs and an increase
in accountability to citizens. More importantly, we ﬁnd strong evidence that the characteristics of applicants
are important predictors of the probability of successfully completing a renewal process, and the time it
takes to complete it conditional on being successful. Applicants from rural areas, indigenous groups, with
lower levels of education, and from lower socioeconomic strata all have lower success rates as compared to
those from relatively better-oﬀ backgrounds. To the extent that we just look at ID card renewals instead of
new applications, the ﬁndings are hard to reconcile with the existence of heterogeneous paperwork quality
among applicants. In addition and interestingly, we ﬁnd robust evidence that information technology within
this bureaucratic process is signiﬁcantly lowering barriers in access to ID cards among applicants from
relatively disadvantaged backgrounds and, thus, serve as eﬀective tools at promoting equitable public service
delivery within this bureaucratic process. Overall, the ﬁndings are consistent with the existence of selective
enforcement of rules and disparities in service quality by police oﬃcers based on applicants characteristics,
and the possibility that red tape might aﬀect applicants diﬀerently based on their intrinsic characteristics.

   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the setting of the study. Section
3 describes the two natural experiments in this setting. Section 4 presents the estimation framework. Section
   2
       National identiﬁcation cards are analogous to Social Security numbers in the United States.


                                                            3
5 describes the data. Section 6 presents the experimental results. Section 7 discusses the results of the study.
Section 8 concludes.



2       Setting of the study

In Article 27, the Organic Law of the Bolivian Police of 1985 stipulates that the Police is the entity in
charge of the provision of ID cards to citizens. At the local level, the Identiﬁcation Units are the bodies
responsible for administering this act. In La Paz, the city where this study takes place, ID cards are issued
at two Identiﬁcation Units. Each of these Units is located at two distant points in the city: one is in the
downtown area and one in the rich south zone. However, the jurisdiction of each oﬃce does not coincide
with the neighborhood of residence, and individuals can obtain their ID cards in either of these two oﬃces.
The downtown Identiﬁcation Unit is by far the largest in the city. At the time of this study, it was issuing
roughly 95 percent of the total number of ID cards per day in the city — approximately 1,200 cards per day.

    To renew a national ID card, an individual needs to bring a proof of identity to the Identiﬁcation Unit,
and pay an application fee of BS 17 (USD 2.5). Acceptable documents as proof of identity include expired
ID card, birth certiﬁcate, current (i.e. not expired) driving license, military ID card, passport, school ID
card, or electoral list fraud prevention card. Upon presentation of a valid proof of identity, the applicant gets
randomly assigned to a renewal table at the Unit. In the downtown Identiﬁcation Unit, the setting for this
study, there are 41 renewal tables, each of whom has a police oﬃcer permanently assigned to it. As soon
as the applicant gets to his renewal table, he needs to hand over his proof of identity and the token with
the renewal table number assigned to. The police oﬃcer assigned to the table then needs to locate the vital
records of the applicant, which are kept at a Vital Records Archive maintained by the Police located at the
basement of the building and only accessible to police oﬃcers. Once the vital records of the applicant have
been located, the last name of the applicant is called and the applicant needs then to go through a series
of steps to complete the renewal process. These renewal steps include paying for the application fee at a
Financial Services and Cashier Operations oﬃce, getting a photograph taken, ﬁngerprinting and, if needed,
getting marital status, occupation, and residence updated. Upon completion of all these steps, the ID card
renewal process is considered completed and the card is sent for lamination. The individual then can pick
up the ID card within 24 hours from the Identiﬁcation Unit.

    The simple administrative steps required to complete the renewal process are, in practice, a lengthy
process. Renewing a national ID card in Bolivia has long been associated with red tape, bureaucratic
delay, corruption, and the provision of diﬀerent service quality by police oﬃcers to applicants based on their
characteristics (e.g. World Bank (2000), Mansilla (2003), Quintana (2003), and Wanderley (2007)). Further,
administrative shortcomings are pervasive within this process. For instance, vital records are often reported
as missing.3 The Identiﬁcation Unit has a poor archiving system, which is based only on the last name of the
applicant, and therefore results in many missing vital records. To the extent that the Unit holds more than 1
    3
     Other reasons why the applicants might not be able to complete the renewal process include misspelling of names
(due to typing mistakes incurred by the police oﬃcers), duplicate cards, and long waiting times.



                                                         4
million records in its archives, and that these are all stacked in a small basement, vital records are often lost.
Yet, what it is not clear is the extent to which the issue of missing vital records aﬀects applicants randomly
or is the result of a shortcoming incurred by police oﬃcers systematically. Another practice, which is believed
to be quite common among police oﬃcers, is the provision of diﬀerent service quality to applicants based
on their observable characteristics. Police oﬃcers might not be very helpful with applicants from relatively
disadvantaged backgrounds or might not call their names on a ﬁrst-come ﬁrst-served basis but rather at their
own discretion. In practice, the prevalence of administrative shortcomings, and more generally the possibility
of exercising discretion at completing some of the renewal steps, often leads to police oﬃcers being willing
to accept, or implicitly asking for, extra-legal payments in order to bend some of the rules and expedite
the process (United Nations Development Program,, 2006).4 All the red tape present within this process is
further exacerbated by the lack of information on the steps that should be followed to renew an ID card, the
overcrowding of applicants, and the poor signage at the Identiﬁcation Unit.



3       Two unique natural experiments

Since 2006, the Police started a large eﬀort to digitize vital records of citizens across the country. This
eﬀort was aimed both at improving the provision of ID cards to citizens and curbing electoral fraud and
corruption. By the time this study took place, vital records of all citizens in the city of La Paz had been
digitized, and put into a vital records dataset. This newly created dataset called for a full transformation of
the renewal process. As part of this transformation process, the Identiﬁcation Unit introduced a new digital
renewal process, which consisted of accessing the vital records of the applicants online using a computer,
ﬁlling the applicants’ information online, getting the photograph taken using a digital camera connected to
that computer, and getting the ID card printed out in a laser printer. That is, the digital process allowed
for all of the renewal steps to be performed at the renewal table, except for the payment of the application
fee. This was in sharp contrast to the old manual renewal process, which required the applicant to get his
photograph taken out at a diﬀerent building and pick-up his photograph at a developing ﬁlm oﬃce, which
was also located at a diﬀerent building within the Unit. At the end of the day, however, ID cards issued
under the manual and digital process were identical except for the fact that the digital ones were issued
following the digital renewal process.

    For a short period of time, the downtown Identiﬁcation Unit in the city of La Paz was simultaneously
following both the manual and digital renewal process. This existence of this dual renewal system was the
result of budget constraints, which did not allow the Police to introduce the new technology in all of the
41 renewal tables at the Unit simultaneously. To avoid complaints, the Police decided to randomly assign
both police oﬃcers and applicants to each one of these two renewal processes. On the one hand, police
oﬃcers were randomly assigned to either one of the processes by lottery at the beginning of the transition
period and remained at the same table throughout their time at the Identiﬁcation Unit. On the other hand,
    4
     Extra-legal payments are usually on the order of 2 to 10 USD per ID card. This is a signiﬁcant amount in Bolivia
considering that the minimum monthly wage is around 92 USD, and that the median monthly wage is around 363 USD
(UDAPE, 2009).



                                                         5
applicants were randomly assigned to each one of these two processes by the following a simple sequential
rule. Upon presentation of the valid document as proof of identity, the applicant was sequentially assigned
to one of the 41 renewal tables located across the Identiﬁcation Unit — 23 of them issuing manual cards
and 18 of them issuing digital ones. As the type of renewal was randomly allocated across police oﬃcers,
the numerical correspondence of tables was completely unrelated to the type of process followed at each
renewal table. Moreover, to assure that applicants did not try to change their randomly assigned renewal
table number, applicants’ thumbnails were marked at the randomization table with election ink. This simple
device, strictly enforced in practice, prevented applicants from starting a new renewal process within the
same day (or couple of days until the ink had faded away) if they were not assigned to their preferred type
of renewal process.

    A unique feature of this study is the existence of technical failures. Technical failures aﬀect only tables
that follow a digital renewal process and occur frequently. In this setting, technical failures refer to lack of
printer consumables or temporarily out-of-order computers. Roughly 19 percent of the digital tables report
at least one technical failure each week. Because of the administrative procedures followed by the Police,
technical failures could not be addressed the same day. So, if a computer broke down for example, it would
be down for the rest of the day. Also, if a printer ran out of toner, it would only be replaced at the end
of the day. This introduced a second natural experiment in this setting. In particular, to avoid delays and
overcrowding of applicants, the Police decided to allow all digital tables to continue issuing manual cards
when a technical failure suddenly arose. In practice, this boiled down to allowing them to keep the old
typewriter they were using during the manual system, and instructing them to switch immediately to the
manual process if a technical failure arose.

    Although applicants and police oﬃcers were assigned to the digital renewal process randomly as described
above, it is useful to examine whether the digital renewal process is ex-post correlated with some police
oﬃcer and applicant characteristics of interest. Table 1 explores this by reporting marginal eﬀects of probit
regressions for the probability of being randomized into the digital process as a function of 5 police oﬃcers,
and 6 applicant characteristics. As expected, given the randomization, the magnitudes of these marginal
eﬀects are small and not jointly-signiﬁcant predictors of the probability of being assigned into a digital renewal
process at standard levels (joint p -values 0.17, 0.12, 0.18, 0.11, and 0.10 depending on the speciﬁcation). This
is reassuring and suggests that the administrative procedures put in place by the Police at the Identiﬁcation
Unit were closely followed and enforced in practice — at least along the observable dimensions. However, as
several of these covariates (police oﬃcer tenure, police oﬃce rank, male applicant rural status, and female
applicant education level) are individually signiﬁcant at the 5 and 10 percent levels, we estimate the main
experimental results including these covariates. The main results of the paper, however, remain largely
unchanged when adding these covariates as control variables.




                                                    6
4       Estimation framework

The causal eﬀect of information technology, over traditional technology, on the provision of ID cards for
citizens can be estimated using the following regression model for applicant i assigned to police oﬃcer j ’s
renewal table on day t :


                                        yijt = α + βdigitalij + ωt + ξijt                                         (1)


    where y is either: (i) indicator for whether the renewal process was successfully completed; or (ii) time
it takes to complete the renewal process conditional on successfully completing it; digital is an indicator for
whether the table uses a digital renewal process; ω is a vector of 28 renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects; and ξ is a
normally distributed error term independently and identically distributed over i and t, and clustered at the
police oﬃcer level.

   As explained in the previous section, a unique feature of this study is the existence of technical failures.
To the extent that technical failures aﬀect renewal tables following the digital process randomly, they can
be used to estimate the causal eﬀect of information technology on ID card provision outcomes by comparing
applicant-police oﬃcer pairs randomly assigned to the digital process after controlling for police oﬃcer ﬁxed
eﬀects. This allows controlling for unobserved heterogeneity at the police oﬃcer level in the model. Formally:


                                         yijt = δ + γdigitalit + θj + ξijt                                        (2)


    where digital is an indicator for whether the police oﬃcer follows a digital renewal process on day t ; and
θ is a vector of 41 police oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects. To the extent that we only look at renewals in this study, an
important thing to highlight here also is that diﬀerential paperwork quality among applicants to complete
the process should not be a source of bias in this setting.5

    There are several mechanisms through which information technology might aﬀect renewal outcomes in
this setting. First, information technology may aﬀect renewal success rates by reducing administrative
shortcomings, reducing transaction costs, and limiting the possibility that police oﬃcers exercise discretion
as far as missing vital records. Second, information technology may aﬀect the time it takes to complete
a renewal process through two diﬀerent channels. On the one hand, information technology may increase
productivity among police oﬃcers by introducing eﬃciencies within the process, such as accessing the vital
records of the applicants online, getting the picture taken at the renewal table, etc. On the second hand,
information technology may reduce the probability that red tape aﬀects applicants by allowing them to
perform all of the renewal steps at the renewal table.

    The use of information technology might also aﬀect renewal outcomes through the aplicants’ and po-
    5
    We are not able to use a speciﬁcation of the model that includes both police oﬃcer and renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects
because data on technical failures from administrative records are only collected on a daily basis. This means that we
do not have variation in type of renewal by police oﬃcer within day of renewal.


                                                          7
lice oﬃcers’ characteristics. First, applicants’ characteristics might be important determinants of renewal
outcomes. For instance, if an applicant ﬁnds it hard to navigate the renewal process steps because he is illit-
erate, this would translate into diﬀerential renewal outcomes based on the level of education of the applicant.
Second, police oﬃcers’ characteristics such as age, rank, and education may be important determinants of
variation in eﬃciency within the administrative procedures required to complete the renewal process. For
instance, if the skills required to complete the process are highly correlated with police oﬃcers’ character-
istics, these might translate into diﬀerent renewal outcomes based on police oﬃcers’ characteristics. Third,
police oﬃcers’ tenure may aﬀect the renewal process through a learning eﬀect. For instance, police oﬃcers
who have been working at the Identiﬁcation Unit for a longer time might be more familiar with the process
and, thus, be able to outperform compared to police oﬃcers recently brought into the process. To formally
explore all of these hypotheses, we use the following three regression models:


                          yijt = α + β (digitalit ∗ Ai ) + ψdigitalit + δAi + ωt + ξij                           (3)


                          yijt = α + β (digitalit ∗ Ai ) + ψdigitalit + δAi + ωj + ξit                           (4)


                          yijt = α + β (digitalit ∗ Pj ) + ψdigitalit + µPj + ωt + ξij                           (5)


    where Ai is a vector of applicant characteristics including age, education, gender, rural status, attended
private school (which serves as a proxy of social status), indigenous language spoken, and indigenous attire;
and Pj is a vector of police oﬃcer characteristics including tenure at the Identiﬁcation Unit, tenure at the
renewal table, rank, age, education, and gender.



5       Data

The data for this paper come from multiple sources and combine diﬀerent methods of inquiry. The primary
data collected at the applicant level include the following: (i) starting and completion renewal times; (ii) re-
newal table number; and (iii) basic socioeconomic and demographic characteristics. The administrative data
collected at the police oﬃcer level include the following: (i) renewal table number; (ii) basic socioeconomic
and demographic characteristics; and (ii) technical failures at renewal tables. All of the data were collected
between October 27 and December 5, 2009.


5.1     Primary data

The primary data were collected using a very simple software speciﬁcally designed for this study. Figure
1 shows a screenshot of the software interface used for the data collection.6 The software collected basic
    6
     The software was installed in three computers located next to the randomization table, and two computers located
at the exit door. All of the ﬁve computers were operated by police oﬃcers from the Identiﬁcation Unit, which were


                                                         8
information for the applicants including starting and completion times, renewal day, renewal table number,
sex, age, rural status, education level, whether the applicant ever attended a private school, whether the
applicant spoke an indigenous language, and neighborhood of residence. We also collected information on
indigenous attire for female applicants only, who can easily and objectively be classiﬁed across indigenous-
status by simple inspection of their clothing — which is not the case for men.7 The information on sex,
age, rural status, education level, and residence was directly collected from the expired ID card. If another
document was used as proof as identity, then this information was directly collected from the applicant. The
information about indigenous language and private school status was self-reported by applicants, and the
information about indigenous attire was collected from direct observation.


5.2    Administrative data

The basic socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of police oﬃcers were collected from administrative
records provided by the Identiﬁcation Unit. These data included sex, age, rank, years of education, tenure
at the Identiﬁcation Unit, and tenure at the renewal table. The information on technical failures among the
digital tables was also collected from administrative records and it was collected on a daily basis.


5.3    Subpopulation of analysis

The subpopulation of analysis in this study are all individuals who oﬃcially applied for an ID card renewal, in
the city of La Paz, during the data collection time period. This subpopulation of analysis is not representative
of the whole population, but rather of those individuals who decide to apply for an ID card renewal. The
sample of applicants used in the subsequent analysis excludes all applicants younger than 21 years old and
those older than 100 years old.


5.4    Descriptive statistics

The summary statistics of the data used in the study are presented in Table 2. The statistics are estimated
separately by completion status and type of renewal process. The type of renewal process for digital tables
does not correspond to the original renewal process, but rather to an ex-post measure already adjusted
for technical failures. Panel A presents the ex-post average values for the outcome variables considered
in the paper, which are measured at the police oﬃcer-applicant pair level. Panels B and C report the
basic characteristics of applicants and police oﬃcers. These are ex-ante characteristics measured at the
randomization table. Panel D summarizes technical failures measured at the renewal day-table level. The
aim of this summary table is twofold. First is to verify that police oﬃcers’ and applicants’ characteristics are
well balanced across type of renewal process. Second, is to explore whether ex-post successful and unsuccessful
unrelated to the renewal process and just hired to perform this task.
   7
     Indigenous women wear their hair in two long braids decorated with tassels, and dress in distinctive skirts over
puﬀy petticoats.



                                                         9
applicants might vary systematically along some of these characteristics.

   The average age of an applicant for both the digital and manual renewal tables is 40 years old, with
roughly 48 percent of them being women in both groups. About 63 percent of applicants in both groups
have ﬁnished high school, and a low 14 percent of those who ever attended school were enrolled in a private
school across the two types of renewal groups. Roughly 16 percent of the applicants assigned to either of the
renewal processes are from the rural area. On average, 56 percent of applicants who start the renewal process
speak an indigenous language (55.5 percent in the digital tables group and 56.3 percent in the manual tables
group), and 30 percent of women wear an indigenous attire (29.6 percent in the digital tables group and 31.1
percent in the manual tables group). The diﬀerences in sample means along all these basic characteristics of
applicants are not signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level.8

    As for public oﬃcials, the average tenure at the renewal table is 1 year (1.18 for public oﬃcials at
digital renewal tables and 0.96 for those at manual ones). A typical police oﬃcer has been working at the
Identiﬁcation Unit for about 3 years (2.97 for public oﬃcials at digital renewal tables and 3.04 for those at
manual ones). Further, a typical police oﬃcer is 35 years old (33.94 for those digital renewal tables and 37.91
for those at manual ones), and has 13 years of completed school (13.44 for those at digital renewal tables and
12.78 for those at manual ones). About 64 percent of police oﬃcers are low rank (61.11 at digital renewal
tables and 67.83 at manual ones), and only 24 percent are women (22.2 for those at digital renewal tables
and 26.1 for those at manual ones). Although some of the diﬀerences in means seem large (police oﬃcer age,
sex, and rank), none of the diﬀerences in means are signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. Overall, the statistics
reported above suggest a good balance of applicants and police oﬃcers across type of renewal process.

    The table also shows that only 66 percent of applicants assigned to a manual table get to complete the
renewal process. In contrast, almost 82 percent of applicants assigned to a digital table get to complete
the renewal process successfully. The diﬀerence in sample means across type of renewal process is large
and signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. For applicants who get to complete the process, a typical renewal
process takes roughly 85 minutes at a digital table and 129 minutes at a manual one. The diﬀerence in
sample means across type of renewal process is again signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. Despite the fact that
ex-ante characteristics of applicants do not vary substantially across type of renewal process, ex-post the
characteristics of applicants vary substantially across completion status. For instance, comparing Column
(3) with Column (5), and comparing Column (4) with Column (6), we see that applicants who do not get
to complete the renewal process are on average less educated, come from the rural area, are less likely to
have attended a private school, and are more likely to be of indigenous descent (either speak an indigenous
language or wear indigenous attire). The diﬀerences in sample means for all of the applicants’ characteristics
(except for age) are signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level (both for successful and unsuccessful applicants).
   8
     Census data for the city of La Paz report the following average characteristics for the population: 51 percent women,
44 percent completed high school (average years of education is 9.4), 22 years old, 38 percent live in the rural areas, and
68 percent are indigenous.




                                                            10
6     Discussion of experimental results

6.1    Renewal success rates

Table 3 presents the eﬀects of information technology on the probability of successfully completing a renewal
process. All the coeﬃcients reported are marginal eﬀects from probit regressions, and are separately estimated
for male and female applicants to exploit the indigenous attire data collected for the subsample of female
applicants.9 The eﬀect of information technology over traditional technology after controlling for renewal
day ﬁxed eﬀects — that is, the coeﬃcient β in Equation 1 — is presented in columns (1) and (3) for male and
female applicants, respectively. Columns (2) and (4) present instead the eﬀect of information technology over
traditional technology after controlling for police oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects — that is, the coeﬃcient γ in Equation 2.
The estimation of these two regression models allows for assessing the extent to which unobserved police oﬃcer
characteristics might be correlated with the ability to successfully complete a renewal process. Columns (5)
to (8) show the results of estimating Equations 3 and 4, which control for the characteristics of the applicants
and allow for technology to interact with these characteristics. Columns (5) and (6) show the estimates for
the subsample of male applicants, while those for female applicants are reported in columns (7) and (8).
These alternative speciﬁcations allow assessing the extent to which applicants’s characteristics might be
important determinants of success rates across type of renewal process.

    The results in Table 3 show that the adoption of information technology resulted in an overall improvement
in the service provided by the Police within the process of renewing an ID card. Male applicants randomly
assigned to the digital renewal process have on average between 11.55 and 13.22 percentage points higher
probability of completing the process as compared to those randomly assigned to the manual one — 11.55
when controlling for renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects and 13.22 when controlling for police oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects. All
of these eﬀects are statistically signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. The estimates in columns (3) and (4)
corroborate these ﬁndings for the subsample of female applicants. Female applicants randomly assigned to
the digital renewal process have on average between 10.43 and 13.59 percentage points higher probability of
completing the process as compared to those randomly assigned to the manual one — 13.59 when controlling
for renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects and 10.43 when controlling for police oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects. All these eﬀects are
also statistically signiﬁcant at the 1 percent.

    The characteristics of applicants should not aﬀect success rates. In practice, however, they might if
police oﬃcers do not provide a homogeneous service across the population or if applicants are aﬀected by
bureaucracy diﬀerently based on their characteristics. Next, we explore the possibility that applicants’
characteristics might be important determinants of success rates. The results of this exercise are presented
in columns (5) to (8) and interestingly present strong evidence that indeed success rates vary systematically
across renewal process based on the characteristics of the applicants. Applicants from relatively disadvantaged
backgrounds are much less likely to complete the renewal process. On average, applicants from rural areas
are 10 percentage points less likely to complete the renewal process as compared to those from the urban
    9
      Table A1-1 in the Appendix reports the results for the pooled sample, and shows that the sex of the applicant is
not an important determinant of renewal outcomes.



                                                         11
area — 9.17 to 11.80 percentage points depending on the sex of the applicant and speciﬁcation of the
model. Applicants who did not complete high school are roughly 4 percentage points less likely to complete
the renewal process as compared to those who did complete high school — 4.28 to 4.91 percentage points
depending on the speciﬁcation. Senior people are 3 percentage points less likely to complete the renewal
process as compared to relatively younger applicants — 2.03 to 3.27 percentage points depending on the
speciﬁcation. Moreover, applicants who never attended private school and, thus, belong to a lower social
status, are 10 percentage points less likely to complete the renewal process as compared to those who attended
a private school — 9.93 to 11.37 percentage points depending on the speciﬁcation. Lastly indigenous male
applicants, as measured by the ability to speak an indigenous language, are roughly 7 percentage points
less likely to complete the renewal process as compared to non-indigenous male applicants — 7.32 to 7.39
percentage points depending on the speciﬁcation. Female applicants wearing an indigenous attire are instead
13 percentage points less likely to complete the renewal process as compared to those female applicants who
were not wearing an indigenous attire — 13.26 to 13.38 percentage points depending on the speciﬁcation. All
of these correlations are statistically signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. Interestingly, speaking an indigenous
language does not seem to be relevant to explain success rates among female applicants after the wearing of
an indigenous attire has been controlled for. This suggests that visual inspection might be a more important
aspect of being indigenous for citizens’ lives as opposed to speaking an indigenous language. Further, it
suggests that clothing inspection might be a better measure to classify ethnicity among Bolivian women as
opposed to language spoken.

    A natural next question that arises is whether the adoption of information technology within the renewal
process might have reduced some of these observed gaps in success rates across the characteristics of the
applicants. To examine this, we look at whether the impacts of information technology diﬀer across applicants
with diﬀerent background characteristics. The estimates are reported in columns (5) to (8), and present one
of the most important ﬁndings of this paper namely that the digital renewal process is able to reduce most of
the observed disparities in renewal outcomes across the characteristics of applicants. In particular, the eﬀect
of coming from the rural area is smaller in magnitude and opposite in sign to the magnitude of the eﬀect
of the interaction of coming from the rural area with being assigned to a digital process (0.1522 to 0.1622,
depending on the speciﬁcation). These interactions are all signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. The magnitude
of the eﬀect of having completed high school is similar in magnitude and opposite in sign to the magnitude of
the eﬀect of the interaction of having completed high school with being assigned to a digital process (0.0426
to 0.0647, depending on the speciﬁcation). All of these interactions are signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level.
The diﬀerence in success rates among senior and younger applicants is reduced by roughly 5 percentage
points when applicants are randomly assigned to the digital process as compared to the manual one, though
this diﬀerence is only signiﬁcant at standard levels for male applicants. In particular, the magnitude of
the eﬀect of being a senior applicant is similar in magnitude and opposite in sign to the magnitude of the
eﬀect of the interaction of having completed high school with being assigned to a digital process (0.0573
to 0.0574, depending on the speciﬁcation). All of these interactions are again signiﬁcant at the 1 percent
level. Moreover, the gap in success rates between indigenous and non-indigenous applicants as measured
by the knowledge of an indigenous language, is reduced by around 5 percentage points when applicants are
randomly assigned to the digital renewal process as opposed to the manual one. The magnitude of the eﬀect

                                                   12
of speaking an indigenous language is similar in magnitude and opposite in sign compared to the magnitude
of the eﬀect of the interaction of being a rural applicant with being assigned to a digital process (0.0511 to
0.0574, depending on the speciﬁcation). All of these interactions are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. Lastly,
the diﬀerence in success rates between indigenous and non-indigenous females as measured by indigenous
attire, is reduced by around 8 percentage points when applicants are randomly assigned to the digital renewal
process as compared to the manual one (0.0814 and 0.0839, depending on the speciﬁcation, all signiﬁcant at
the 5 percent level).

    As a ﬁnal exercise, we look at whether the characteristics of police oﬃcers might in practice aﬀect success
rates. Technology and skills are often believed to be complementary (e.g. Van Reenen and Chennells (2002)
and Machin, McNally, and Silva (2006)). Yet, given the homogeneity of police oﬃcers and the simple skills
required to complete the renewal process, the characteristics of police oﬃcers are a priori not expected to
aﬀect success rates in this setting. Table A1-2, in the Appendix, presents the results of this exercise. As
expected given the nature of the police oﬃcers’ randomization process, background characteristics of police
oﬃcers are not signiﬁcantly correlated with success rates. Moreover, the interactions between technology
and police oﬃcers’ characteristics are small in magnitude and never signiﬁcant at standard levels. This is
reassuring and suggests that the variation in success rates observed in the data is not the result of observed
diﬀerences in police oﬃcer characteristics.


6.2   Time it takes to complete renewal

Table 4 presents the eﬀect of information technology on the time it takes to complete a renewal process. For
the estimation of these coeﬃcients, we focus on the subsample of applicants who were successful at completing
the renewal process. All coeﬃcients are again separately estimated for male and female applicants to exploit
the data about indigenous attire collected only for the subsample of female applicants. Columns (1) and (2)
present the results from the two basic speciﬁcations of the model (Equations 1 and 2) for the subsample of
male applicants. Columns (3) and (4) present analog estimates for the subsample of female applicants. In
columns (5) and (6), we present estimates from the augmented models (Equations 3 and 4) for the subsample
of male applicants. Finally, in columns (7) and (8), we report the results of these two augmented models for
the subsample of female applicants.

    The results in Table 4 show that information technology allows for important eﬃciencies within the
renewal process of renewing an ID card, which directly translate into an improvement in the quality of
service provided by the Police to applicants. Male applicants randomly assigned to the digital renewal
process take on average between 40.01 to 43.64 fewer minutes to complete the renewal process as compared
to those randomly assigned to the manual process — 40.01 when controlling for renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects
and 43.64 when controlling for police oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects. All these eﬀects are statistically signiﬁcant at the
1 percent level. The estimates in columns (3) and (4) corroborate these ﬁndings for the subsample of female
applicants. Female applicants randomly assigned to the digital renewal process take on average between
39.14 to 43.57 fewer minutes to complete the renewal process as compared to those randomly assigned to
the manual process — 43.57 when controlling for renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects and 39.14 when controlling for

                                                   13
police oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects. Again, all of these coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. Looking
across all the speciﬁcations shown, we conclude that information technology is reducing the time it takes to
renew an ID card by an average of about 40 minutes. Compared with a level of 128 minutes among manual
renewal tables, these point estimates imply a reduction in the time it takes to complete the renewal process
of about 31 percent compared to the level in manual renewal tables, which is quite substantial. Figure 2
shows these results graphically presenting for each type of renewal process the estimated probability density
function, where the function is estimated using an Epanechnikov kernel. The results show that the time it
takes to complete a renewal process is lower for the digital renewal process along all of the percentiles in the
distribution. The two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic testing for equality of both density functions is
0.5817 (p -value=0.000).

    The eﬀect of applicants’ characteristics on the time it takes to renew an ID card shows a similar pattern to
that reported for the probability of completing the renewal process. Applicants from relatively disadvantaged
backgrounds take longer to complete the renewal process when randomly assigned to the digital renewal
process as compared to the manual one. Applicants from rural areas take on average 17 minutes more to
complete the renewal process as compared to those from the urban area (roughly 13 percent more of the
mean renewal time among applicants assigned to the manual process). Applicants who did not complete
high school take on average 11 minutes more to complete the renewal process as compared to those who
did complete high school (roughly 8.5 percent more of the mean renewal time among applicants assigned
to the manual process). Senior people take on average 2 minutes more to complete the renewal process
as compared to younger applicants, though this is only signiﬁcant among female applicants (roughly this
corresponds to 7 percent of the mean renewal time among applicants assigned to the manual process).
Moreover, applicants who attended a public school, and thus belong to lower socioeconomic strata, take
approximately 6 minutes more to complete the renewal process as compared to those who attended private
school (this roughly corresponds to 5 percent more of the mean renewal time among applicants assigned to
the manual process). Finally, indigenous male applicants, as measured by the ability to speak an indigenous
language, take on average 3 minutes more to complete the renewal process as compared to those of non-
indigenous descent (2 percent more of the mean renewal time among applicants assigned to the manual
process). Female applicants wearing an indigenous attire take on average 4 minutes more to complete the
renewal process as compared to female applicants not wearing an indigenous attire (3 percent more of the
mean renewal time among applicants assigned to the manual process). Consistent with previous ﬁndings,
speaking an indigenous language is not relevant to explain renewal time for renewal among female applicants
after wearing of an indigenous attire has been controlled for. All these coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant
at the 5 percent level.

    Table 4 also reports the interactions between the information technology coeﬃcient and the characteristics
of the applicants. These estimates present evidence that information technology does have diﬀerent eﬀects
on the time it takes to complete a renewal process based on the characteristics of the applicants. These
eﬀects, however, are relatively modest compared to those found for success rates. On average, information
technology reduces the gap between rural and urban applicants by 14 minutes — this is roughly 11 percent
of the mean renewal time among applicants assigned to the manual process. Information technology also


                                                   14
reduces the gap in success rates among applicants who completed high school and those who did not. The
reduction in the gap is around 10 minutes, which roughly corresponds to 8 percent of the mean renewal time
among applicants assigned to the manual process. Lastly, the gap in success rates between applicants who
never attended private school and those who did is reduced by 4 minutes, which corresponds to 3 percent
of the mean renewal time among applicants assigned to the manual process. The magnitude of all of these
coeﬃcients is consistent across all speciﬁcations of the model and the sex of the applicant. Further, all these
interactions are signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level.

    For completeness, Table A1-2, in the Appendix, explores also whether information technology might
aﬀect the time it takes to complete the process by interacting with some of the observed characteristics of
police oﬃcers. Consistent with the previous ﬁndings for success rates, the characteristics of police oﬃcers
have no power to explain variation in the time it takes to complete a renewal process. Estimates are always
small in magnitude and never signiﬁcant at standard levels.


6.3   Are diﬀerences in renewal outcomes based on characteristics of applicants fully
      eliminated by the digital process?

An interesting exercise is checking whether the use of technology in this setting is able to eliminate the
diﬀerences in renewal outcomes based on the characteristics of applicants. To do so, we test for whether
the diﬀerent characteristics of applicants and its interaction with the type of renewal process are jointly
signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level. The intuition behind this test is the following. If we fail to reject the null
that a speciﬁc characteristic of an applicant and its interaction with the digital renewal process is signiﬁcant,
that would indicate that disparities in renewal outcomes along that dimension have been eliminated by the
digital process. That is, it would mean that under the digital process it would no longer matter whether the
individual is from the rural or urban area, whether he is from an indigenous background or not, and so on
and so forth.

    The results of these tests of signiﬁcance are presented in Table 5. The statistics correspond to the estimates
reported in columns (5), (6), (7), and (8) of Tables 3 and 4, which correspond to the full speciﬁcation of
the model estimated separately for the subsample of male and female applicants using the two identiﬁcation
strategies. The reported coeﬃcients are the combined estimates of the null hypotheses reported in the left
hand side. The p-values correspond to the χ2 and F statistics for the null hypotheses of the success indicator
and duration outcomes, respectively. The statistics suggest that the digital renewal process is successful at
eliminating many of the observed diﬀerences in success rates among male applicants, including those resulting
from the educational level and indigenous background of the applicant. In fact, under the digital renewal
process rural male applicants are actually between 3.47 and 4.09 percent more likely to complete the renewal
process than male applicants from the urban areas depending on the speciﬁcation, and senior male applicants
are between 1.42 and 2.53 percent more likely to complete the renewal process as compared to younger male
applicants. In contrast, male applicants from poorer backgrounds as measured by attendance to a public
school are still between 5.02 and 5.52 percent less likely to complete the renewal process as compared to
those from relatively better oﬀ backgrounds.

                                                    15
    The digital renewal process is also successful at eliminating the diﬀerences in success rates among female
applicants based on educational level, indigenous attire, and socioeconomic status as measured by whether the
female applicant attended public school. Further, under the digital renewal process, rural female applicants
are actually between 6.86 and 6.95 percent more likely to complete the renewal process than male applicants
from the urban areas, depending on the speciﬁcation, senior female applicants are between 0.56 and 4.89
percent more likely to complete the renewal process as compared to younger female applicants, and female
applicants from indigenous backgrounds as measured by attire are between 4.96 and 5.11 percent more likely
to complete the renewal process as compared to those from non-indigenous backgrounds.

    Moreover, the digital renewal process is also successful at eliminating most of the observed diﬀerences
in time it takes to successfully complete a renewal process based on the characteristics of applicants. All
diﬀerences observed among male applicants in the manual process based on their characteristics are eliminated
within the digital process, except for those based on the rural status of the applicant and the socioeconomic
status as measured by whether the male applicant attended public school. Yet, under the digital renewal
process, rural male applicants still take between 3.07 and 3.15 more minutes to complete the renewal process
as compared to male applicants from urban areas, depending on the speciﬁcation, and male applicants from
poorer backgrounds as measured by attendance to a public school take on average 1.44 more minutes to
complete the renewal process as compared to those from relatively better oﬀ backgrounds. In contrast,
all diﬀerences observed among female applicants in the manual process based on their characteristics are
eliminated within the digital process, except for those based on the indigenous attire and socioeconomic
status as measured by whether the female applicant attended a public school. Under the digital process,
female applicants from relatively poorer backgrounds as measured by attendance to a public school still take
on average 1.94 more minutes to complete the renewal process as compared to those from relatively better
oﬀ backgrounds, and female applicants from indigenous backgrounds as measured by attire take on average
3.16 more minutes to complete the renewal process as compared to those from non-indigenous backgrounds.



7    Interpretation

A natural question that arises is why information technology might be aﬀecting renewal outcomes and, even
more interesting, why in this setting they are so eﬀective at lowering barriers in access to ID cards by citizens.
To the extent that we only look at renewals in this study, diﬀerential paperwork quality among applicants
required to complete the process is not a possible explanation for the variation in renewal outcomes observed
in the data. More speciﬁcally, individuals applying for an ID card renewal are applicants who ﬁve years ago
(i.e. the renewal time frame) were able to successfully obtain an ID card. This implicitly means that the
Identiﬁcation Unit should already have all the paperwork required to complete the renewal process for each
of those applicants. Moreover, if selection bias based on paperwork quality might be an issue here, we would
expect to observe exactly the opposite. Given that rural applicants face higher time and money costs to
access the Identiﬁcation Unit, rural applicants should in general have higher quality paperwork conditional
on getting to the Unit.



                                                    16
    Information technology in this setting clearly introduces eﬃciencies within the renewal process, including
accessing the vital records of the applicants online and reducing administrative shortcomings such as deﬁcient
record keeping, typing mistakes, etc. Further, information technology signiﬁcantly facilitates the process
for applicants by allowing them to perform all of the renewal process steps within one physical location.
Yet, the diﬀerential eﬀects of this technology across the characteristics of applicants, and the fact that
the characteristics of applicants are important determinants of variation in renewal outcomes, is not fully
consistent with a simple story of eﬃciencies within this process. In particular, the fact that the characteristics
of applicants are important predictors of variation in renewal outcomes is consistent with four hypotheses.
First, police oﬃcers might not be providing a homogeneous service across the population, wherein police
oﬃcers provide diﬀerent service quality to applicants based on their intrinsic characteristics. The provision
of diﬀerent service quality to applicants in detriment of applicants of relatively disadvantaged backgrounds
has been previously reported as an important barrier in access to ID cards by citizens in Bolivia (e.g.
World Bank (2000), Mansilla (2003), Quintana (2003), and Wanderley (2007)). The results of this study are
consistent with all of this previous evidence based on qualitative data. Further, to the extent that information
technology reduces the possibility of exercising discretion as far as missing vital records across applicants,
this hypothesis is also consistent with the observed reduction in success rates gaps across applicants resulting
from the use of this technology. Yet, if diﬀerential service quality provision to applicants based on their
characteristics were the only mechanism operating to lower barriers in access to ID cards in this setting, we
would not expect to observe changes in the time it takes to complete a renewal resulting from the adoption
of this technology. In particular, information technology does not introduce any particular incentive for
police oﬃcers to change their service provision patterns based on the type of renewal. To this end, it is
plausible that something else, in addition to diﬀerential service quality provision to applicants based on their
characteristics, might be operating here that is forcing police oﬃcers to discriminate less frequently against
relatively disadvantaged applicants when randomly assigned to the digital process.

    A second hypothesis that is consistent with the fact that applicants’ characteristics are important determi-
nants of access to ID cards is that police oﬃcers might be practicing selective enforcement of rules. Selective
enforcement of rules is possible, in this setting, because of the opportunities that police oﬃcers have to
exercise discretion in completing some of the renewal steps. The intuition behind the selective enforcement
of rules is as follows. To maximize the possibility of extracting bribes from applicants, police oﬃcers would
purposely complicate the process to create incentives for applicants to incur in extra-legal payments and
ﬁnish with the process. Applicants at higher risk of being targeted are those from relatively disadvantaged
backgrounds, which tend to be less demanding and less likely to voice complaints. These results would be
consistent with previous literature on petty corruption within public service delivery in several developing
countries, and would also be consistent with the possibility that information technology might act as a brake
to curb petty corruption within this speciﬁc bureaucratic process.10 Moreover, the existence of petty corrup-
   10
      The literature on corruption within public service delivery has looked mainly at how bureaucrats price discriminate
when setting bribes and the social and economic costs of corruption. Svensson (2003) and Fisman and Svensson (2007)
ﬁnd evidence that corrupt bureaucrats act as price discriminators in determining access to public services. Olken and
Barron (2009) collect ﬁeld data on bribe payments by truckers to road post oﬃcials, in Indonesia, and ﬁnd evidence
that corrupt bureaucrats behave like price discriminating proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrms. Bertrand, Djankov, Hanna, and
Mullainathan (2007) provide experimental evidence that bureaucrats undercut existing regulations on obtaining a driving



                                                           17
tion within the the Bolivian Police has already been documented (United Nations Development Program,,
2006). In an interesting nationally representative survey about the bureaucratic services provided by the
Police, only 28 percents of citizens agreed that it was possible to successfully complete a bureaucratic process
involving the Police without having to incur an extra-legal payment, 47 percent of citizens admitted to have
paid at least an extra-legal payment in the last year in order to facilitate the completion of a bureaucratic
process, and 30 percent of citizens reported explicitly being asked for a bribe by a police oﬃcer in order to
complete a process. By eliminating the possibility that police oﬃcers might lie about not ﬁnding the vital
records of an applicant, information technology implicitly adds an accountability mechanism into the renewal
process. This accountability mechanism might be successfully operating in this setting to reduce barriers in
access to ID cards by explicitly altering the probability of detecting malpractices among police oﬃcers.

    The third hypothesis consistent with the fact that applicants characteristics are important determinants
of renewal outcomes is that excessive bureaucracy or red tape aﬀects applicants diﬀerently based on their
characteristics. For instance, illiterate applicants might ﬁnd it harder to navigate the renewal process steps
than those applicants with some schooling because they are not able to read the signs at the Unit. This
would be further exacerbated by the fact that police oﬃcers seem to be quite eﬃcient at identifying relatively
disadvantaged applicants so as to search for opportunities to extract bribes. Excess bureaucracy might be
intimidating to many people, particularly so to groups socially excluded from the mainstream. It is usually
believed that people from relatively disadvantaged backgrounds are less able to access and process informa-
tion, in part because they have relatively limited education. Endogenous red tape might be introducing an
important inequality dimension into the renewal process by requiring some skills from applicants to success-
fully complete the process. To the extent that these skills are not necessarily uniformly distributed across
applicants, this would directly translate into diﬀerential renewal outcomes based on the characteristics of the
applicants. By allowing applicants to perform all the renewal steps within one physical location, information
technology might be signiﬁcantly facilitating the process for the applicant and, thus, reducing observed gaps
in renewal outcomes based on the characteristics of applicants.

    Lastly, bureaucratic delay might aﬀect applicants based on their time preferences and, therefore, aﬀect
the success rates based on their intrinsic characteristics. For instance, applicants who ﬁnd bureaucratic delay
overwhelming might decide to drop out at some point in the middle of the renewal process and come back at
some other point in time to the Identiﬁcation Unit to start a new renewal process (renewal processes cannot
be put on hold — if they are not completed by the end of the day, the applicant needs to start a whole
new renewal process). Because of the nature of the data collection, drop-outs are implicitly classiﬁed as
unsuccessful applicants in the sample. Yet, it is highly unlikely that drop-outs represent a large proportion
of unsuccessful applicants. In particular, applicants deciding to drop-out in the middle of the renewal process
face transportation expenses and substantial time costs. Because of the marking ink used to mark applicants’
thumbnails at the randomization table, applicants cannot start a new renewal process right away but need
to wait for at least a couple of days until the marking ink has faded away. Further, deciding to drop-out
in the middle of the renewal process is very costly for the applicant to the extent that queuing time at the
license, in India, responding to the needs of private agents. Sequeira and Djankov (2008) ﬁnd empirical evidence that
bureaucrats working in ports within Southern Africa price-discriminate according to characteristics of the shipments and
products when setting bribes.


                                                          18
randomization table can easily take between 40 to 60 minutes. Therefore, drop-outs should be minimal in
the sample and occur only randomly across the population of applicants. In addition, there is a piece of
evidence against the possibility that drop-outs might be occurring systematically in the sample. Applicants
from relatively stronger backgrounds are, in general, expected to have a higher opportunity costs of their
time (e.g. Frey (1971), Shaw (1992)). If diﬀerences in time preferences might be driving the results, we would
expect to observe that applicants from relatively better-oﬀ backgrounds tend to be more unsuccessful, perhaps
dropping-out to look for an unoﬃcial way to get their ID cards. However, we observe the opposite in the
sample. Applicants from relatively disadvantaged backgrounds tend to be more unsuccessful. Therefore, my
results present little evidence to support the hypothesis that bureaucratic delay might be aﬀecting applicants’
renewal outcomes based on their intrinsic time preferences.



8    Concluding remarks

Public service delivery in developing countries is rife with red tape, corruption, and bureaucratic delay. As
information technology continues to rapidly evolve, policy makers and regulators in developing countries are
increasingly adopting new technology as a tool to enhance government eﬃciency, public administration, and
transparency. This paper builds on the empirical micro literature about the eﬀects of information technology
on public service delivery, and provides evidence that it might be possible to dramatically improve the quality
of public service delivery by the adoption of simple information technology. Further, it shows evidence that
under the right set of conditions, information technology might prove to be an eﬀective tool in lowering
barriers in access to public services.

    We investigate the potential of information technology to improve public service delivery in the context
of two unusual randomized natural experiments occurring within one particular bureaucratic process: the
renewal of a national identiﬁcation card by the Bolivian Police. The results of this paper show that the
introduction of information technology into this bureaucratic process led to signiﬁcant improvements in the
quality of service provided to citizens. Applicants assigned to the digital renewal process are on average 12
percentage points more likely to complete the renewal process as compared to those assigned to the traditional
old manual process. Further, applicants assigned to the digital renewal process who are able to complete
the process take, on average, 31 percent less time to complete the process as compared to those assigned
to the manual one. In this setting, information technology seems to be translating into an improvement
in overall eﬃciency within this bureaucratic process by allowing for eﬃciencies within the renewal process,
including accessing the vital records of the applicants online, and reducing administrative shortcomings such
as deﬁcient recording, typing mistakes, etc.

    Moreover, the results present strong evidence that the use of information technology within this bureau-
cratic process is an eﬀective tool at lowering barriers in access to national identiﬁcation cards by citizens and,
thus, an eﬀective tool at promoting equitable public service delivery. Information technology, in this setting,
seems to be translating into a more homogeneous quality of service across applicants by reducing transac-
tion costs (allowing applicants to perform all of the renewal process steps within one physical location) and


                                                    19
improving accountability (eliminating the possibility that police oﬃcers might lie about not ﬁnding the vital
records of an applicant as now they can access vital records online that allow applicants to directly monitor
this process).11 We discuss several mechanisms through which information technology might be promoting
equitable public service delivery within this bureaucratic process. Overall, the ﬁndings are consistent with
the existence of diﬀerential service quality provision to applicants based on their characteristics and selective
enforcement of rules by police oﬃcers, and the possibility that red tape might aﬀect applicants diﬀerently
based on their intrinsic characteristics.

    Given the signiﬁcant low quality of public service delivery in developing countries, and the relatively low
cost of adopting information technology, the results presented in this paper are encouraging. Despite that
the role of technology will clearly vary from place to place and from service to service, the results of this
paper present strong evidence that information technology has the potential to transform the way in which
governments interact with citizens and the manner in which services are delivered to the public. This paper
provides some insights into attempts at public service reform in developing countries and suggests that, under
the right set of circumstances and government implementation capacity, information technology can serve as
an eﬀective tool to advance development objectives.




  11
    Under the manual renewal process, the vital records of the applicants are accessed directly from a Vital Records
Archive maintained at the basement of the building which is only accessible to police oﬃcers


                                                        20
References
Bertrand, M., S. Djankov, R. Hanna, and S. Mullainathan (2007): “Obtaining a Driver’s
 License in India: An Experimental Approach to Studying Corruption,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 122(4), 1639–1676.

Bresnahan, T., and R. Gordon (1997): The Economics of New Goods (National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research Studies in Income and Wealth), vol. 58. University of Chicago Press.

Colecchia, A., and P. Schreyer (2001): “ICT Investment and Economic Growth in the 1990s: Is
 the United States a Unique Case? A Comparative Study of Nine OECD Countries,” Oecd science,
 technology and industry working papers, OECD, Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry.

Draca, M., R. Sadun, and J. V. Reenen (2006): “Productivity and ICT: A Review of the
 Evidence,” CEP Discussion Papers dp0749, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.

Duryea, S., A. Olgiati, and L. Stone (2006): “The Under-Registration of Births in Latin Amer-
 ica,” RES Working Papers 4443, Inter-American Development Bank, Research Department.

Fisman, R., and J. Svensson (2007): “Are corruption and taxation really harmful to growth? Firm
  level evidence,” Journal of Development Economics, 83(1), 63–75.

Frey, B. S. (1971): “Why do High Income People Participate More in Politics?,” Public Choice, 11,
 pp. 101–105.

Griliches, Z. (1998): “Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint,” in R&D and Productivity:
 The Econometric Evidence, NBER Chapters, pp. 347–374. National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc.

Inter-American Development Bank (2011): “Development Connections,” Flagship publication, Wash-
  ington DC.

Machin, S., S. McNally, and O. Silva (2006): “New Technology in Schools: Is There a Payoﬀ?,”
 CEE Discussion Papers 0055, Centre for the Economics of Education, LSE.

Mansilla, H. C. F. (2003): La Polic´                          odigos informales y los intentos de
                                     ıa Boliviana: Entre los c´
            on. Plural Editores, La Paz-Bolivia.
 modernizaci´

Olken, B. A., and P. Barron (2009): “The Simple Economics of Extortion: Evidence from
 Trucking in Aceh,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(3), 417–452.

Quintana, J. R. (2003): Polic´ıa y Democracia en Bolivia: Una pol´ ıtica institucional pendiente.
                        on Estrat´
 Programa de Investigaci´        egica en Bolivia, La Paz-Bolivia.

Schreyer, P. (2000): “The Contribution of Information and Communication Technology to Output
  Growth: A Study of the G7 Countries,” OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers
  2000/2, OECD, Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry.

                                               21
Sequeira, S., and S. Djankov (2008): “On the Waterfront: An Empirical Study of Corruption in
  Ports,” Mimeograph, Harvard University.

Shaw, W. D. (1992): “Searching for the Opportunity Cost of an Individual’s Time,” Land Economics,
  68(1), 107–115.

Stiroh, K. J. (2001): “Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do the
  Industry Data Say?,” Staﬀ Reports 115, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Sunden, S., and G. Wicander (2006): Information and communication technology applied for
  developing countries in a rural context. Faculty of Economic Sciences, Communication and IT,
  Information Systems, Karlstad University.

Svensson, J. (2003): “Who Must Pay Bribes And How Much? Evidence From A Cross Section Of
  Firms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 207–230.

                               ısticas, Unidad de An´
UDAPE (2009): “Dossier de Estad´                                 ıticas Sociales y Econ´
                                                    alisis de Pol´                     omicas, vol
 19,” La Paz, Bolivia.

United Nations Development Program, (2006): “Polic´ ıa Nacional y seguridad ciudadana,” Programa
 de las Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo, La Paz-Bolivia.

Van Reenen, J., and L. Chennells (2002): “The eﬀects of technical change on skills, wages and
 employment: A survey of the micro-econometric evidence,” in Productivity, inequality, and the
 digital economy: A transatlantic perspective, ed. by N. Greenan, Y. L’Horty, and J. Mairesse. MIT
 Press, Cambridge, Mass.

                                      ıa En Bolivia: Sociolog´
Wanderley, F. (2007): Ejercer Ciudadan´                      ıa Del Estado. Informe de Desarrollo
 Humano (IDH) - PNUD.

World Bank (2000): “From Patronage to a Professional State: Bolivia Institutional and Governance
 Review,” .

World Bank (2011): “Capturing Technology for Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Group
 Activities in Information and Communication Technologies,” The Independent Evaluation Group,
 Washington DC.




                                               22
9      Chapter 1 Figures and Tables

    Figure 1: Software platform used for the data collection at the Identiﬁcation Unit, La Paz, Bolivia, 2009




       Figure 2: Empirical distribution of the time it takes to complete a renewal, La Paz, Bolivia, 2009




                    Note: The empirical probability distribution function is estimated using an Epanechnikov kernel.
                    BW=5. The two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of distribution functions yields
                      0.5817 (p-value=0.000).




                                                                  23
Table 1: Relationship between the probability of being assigned to the digital renewal
process, police oﬃcers, and applicant characteristics, La Paz, Bolivia, 2009a
                                                             Digital        Digital      Digital       Digital      Digital
                                                             process        process      process       process      process
                                                                (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)
                                                            All police             Male                      Female
                                                             oﬃcers              applicants                 applicants


 Police oﬃcer has low tenure at renewal table               -0.0647**
                                                              (0.035)
 Police oﬃcer is low rank                                    0.0481*
                                                              (0.032)
 Police oﬃcer did not go to college                          -0.0211
                                                              (0.173)
 Police oﬃcer is a senior (>35 years old)                    -0.1826
                                                              (0.167)
 Police oﬃcer is female                                      -0.0145
                                                              (0.187)
 Applicant is from the rural area                                           -0.0394*     -0.0405*      -0.0072       -0.0052
                                                                             (0.023)      (0.023)       (0.016)       (0.016)
 Applicant did not ﬁnish high school                                         0.0191       0.0196       -0.0298*     -0.0288*
                                                                             (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.016)       (0.016)
 Applicant speaks an indigenous language                                     0.0045       0.0031        0.0026       0.0035
                                                                             (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.016)       (0.016)
 Applicant is a senior (>40 years old)                                      -0.0168       -0.0158      -0.0063       -0.0056
                                                                             (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.013)       (0.012)
 Applicant attended a public school                                         -0.0023       -0.0022      -0.0137       -0.0148
                                                                             (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.020)       (0.019)
 Female applicant wearing indigenous attire                                                             0.0121       0.0096
                                                                                                        (0.016)       (0.016)
 Renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects                                        No             No          Yes           No            Yes
 Renewal table ﬁxed eﬀects                                      No             No           No           No             No
 Observations                                                   41           10,029       10,029        9,513         9,513
 p -value of all listed variables                              0.17           0.12         0.18         0.11           0.10
 a
     Estimates reported are marginal eﬀects from probit regressions. Standard errors in parentheses robust against
     arbitrary heteroskedasticity in the variance-covariance matrix, and clustered at the table level across all speciﬁcations
     that include a police oﬃcer-applicant pair level variable as dependent variable.
     *** Signiﬁcant at 1 percent.
     ** Signiﬁcant at 5 percent.
     * Signiﬁcant at 10 percent.




                                                               24
Table 2: Summary statistics of renewal outcomes, applicants’ characteristics, police oﬃcer char-
acteristics, and technical failures, Bolivia, 2009a
                                                            All                Applicants who                 Applicants who
                                                         applicants           completed renewal           did not complete renewal
                                                     Digital     Manual       Digital      Manual        Digital          Manual
                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)               (6)

 Panel A: Applicant-police oﬃcer pair

 Renewal time (in minutes)                              -            -          85.16       128.99*         -                 -
                                                        -            -         (28.05)      (36.56)         -                 -
 Success rate (%)                                     81.97       66.29*          -            -            -                 -
                                                     (38.44)      (47.28)         -            -            -                 -

 Observations                                         6,690       12,852       5,484         8,519        1,206             4,333
                                                     Digital     Manual       Digital      Manual        Digital          Manual
 Panel B: Applicant characteristics

 Age of the applicant (in years)                      40.26        40.99        40.09        39.99        41.04             42.98
                                                     (14.08)      (14.60)      (14.20)      (14.40)      (13.51)           (14.78)
 Applicant ﬁnished high school (%)                    63.96        62.09        64.55       68.78*        61.28            48.95*
                                                     (48.01)      (48.52)      (47.84)      (46.34)      (48.73)           (49.99)
 Applicant is female (%)                              48.09        48.99        47.25       49.49*        51.91            48.00*
                                                     (49.97)      (49.99)      (49.93)      (50.00)      (49.98)           (49.97)
 Applicant is from the rural area (%)                 15.08        16.71        15.12       12.00*        14.93            25.99*
                                                     (35.79)      (37.31)      (35.82)      (32.49)      (35.65)           (43.86)
 Applicant attended private school (%)                14.90        14.19        15.26       17.11*        13.27             8.45*
                                                     (35.61)      (34.90)      (35.97)      (37.67)      (33.94)           (27.81)
 Applicant speaks an indigenous language (%)          55.52        56.34        55.54       50.45*        55.39            67.92*
                                                     (49.70)      (49.60)      (49.70)      (50.00)      (49.73)           (46.68)
 Female applicant wears indigenous attire (%)         29.59        31.08        29.91       23.08*        28.27            47.31*
                                                     (45.65)      (46.29)      (45.80)      (42.14)      (45.07)           (49.94)

 Observations                                         6,690       12,852       5,484         8,519        1,206             4,333
                                                                 Digital                                     Manual
 Panel C: Police oﬃcer characteristics

 Tenure at renewal table (in years)                                 1.18                                   0.96
                                                                   (1.47)                                 (1.45)
 Tenure at Identiﬁcation Unit (in years)                            2.97                                   3.04
                                                                   (2.28)                                 (2.12)
 Police oﬃcer is low rank (%)                                      67.83                                  61.11
                                                                  (51.08)                                (50.16)
 Police oﬃcer age (in years)                                       33.94                                  37.91
                                                                   (8.95)                                 (8.92)
 Police oﬃcer years of education                                   13.44                                  12.78
                                                                   (2.75)                                 (1.78)
 Police oﬃcer is female (%)                                        22.22                                  26.09
                                                                  (42.78)                                (44.90)
 Police oﬃcer speaks an indigenous language (%)                   100.00                                 100.00
                                                                   (0.00)                                 (0.00)

 Observations                                                       18                                      23
                                                                 Digital                                     Manual
 Panel D: Renewal table characteristics

 Technical failure rate (%)                                        19.05                                    -
                                                                  (39.31)                                   -

 Observations                                                         18                                     23
 a
   Standard deviations in parentheses. Asterisks in columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) correspond to p<0.05 of the diﬀerence in means across
   type of renewal process.




                                                                   25
     Table 3: Information technology, probability of successfully completing a renewal process, and applicants’ characteristics, La Paz,
     Bolivia, 2009a
                                                            Completed        Completed         Completed        Completed        Completed        Completed        Completed         Completed
                                                             process          process           process          process          process          process          process           process
                                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)
                                                                  Male applicants                  Female applicants                   Male applicants                  Female applicants

      Digital renewal process                                 0.1155***        0.1322***        0.1359***         0.1043***         0.0838***       0.1104***         0.0880***       0.0943***
                                                               (0.009)          (0.015)          (0.010)           (0.017)           (0.032)          (0.034)          (0.033)          (0.038)
      Applicant is from the rural area                                                                                             -0.1180***       -0.1175***       -0.0936***       -0.0917***
                                                                                                                                     (0.019)          (0.018)          (0.016)          (0.016)
      Applicant did not ﬁnish high school                                                                                          -0.0491***       -0.0489***       -0.0434***       -0.0428***
                                                                                                                                     (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.014)          (0.015)
      Applicant speaks an indigenous language                                                                                      -0.0739***       -0.0732***         -0.0022          -0.0015
                                                                                                                                     (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.016)          (0.016)
      Applicant is a senior (>40 years old)                                                                                        -0.0316***       -0.0327***       -0.0220***       0.0203***
                                                                                                                                     (0.012)          (0.011)          (0.012)          (0.012)
      Applicant attended a public school                                                                                           -0.1137***       -0.1124***       -0.0993***       -0.0999***
                                                                                                                                     (0.018)          (0.019)          (0.016)          (0.016)
      Female applicant wearing indigenous attire                                                                                                                     -0.1326***       -0.1338***




26
                                                                                                                                                                       (0.014)          (0.015)
      Digital*(Applicant is from the rural area)                                                                                   0.1529***        0.1522***        0.1622***         0.1612***
                                                                                                                                     (0.026)         (0.026)           (0.018)          (0.018)
      Digital*(Applicant did not ﬁnish high school)                                                                                 0.0435**        0.0426**          0.0647**         0.0624**
                                                                                                                                     (0.019)         (0.019)           (0.026)          (0.027)
      Digital*(Applicant speaks an indigenous language)                                                                             0.0573**        0.0574**          0.0533***        0.0511**
                                                                                                                                     (0.025)         (0.025)           (0.020)          (0.020)
      Digital*(Applicant is a senior)                                                                                               0.0469*          0.0469*            0.0276           0.0286
                                                                                                                                     (0.024)         (0.024)           (0.018)          (0.018)
      Digital*(Applicant attended a public school)                                                                                  0.0635*           0.0572          0.0991***       0.1008***
                                                                                                                                     (0.036)         (0.037)           (0.032)          (0.033)
      Digital*(Female applicant wears indigenous attire)                                                                                                              0.0814***       0.0839***
                                                                                                                                                                       (0.032)          (0.031)
      Renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects                                    Yes              No                Yes              No               Yes                No               Yes              No
      Renewal table ﬁxed eﬀects                                  No               Yes               No               Yes               No                Yes              No              Yes
      Mean of dependent variable among applicants
      in manual tables                                         0.7175           0.7175            0.7155           0.7155            0.7175            0.7175           0.7155           0.7155
      Observations                                             10,029            3,473             9,513           3,217             10,029             3,473            9,513           3,217
      a
        Estimates reported are marginal eﬀects from probit regressions. Standard errors in parentheses robust against arbitrary heteroskedasticity in the variance-covariance matrix, and clustered
        at the table level across all speciﬁcations.
        *** Signiﬁcant at 1 percent.
        ** Signiﬁcant at 5 percent.
        * Signiﬁcant at 10 percent.
     Table 4: Information technology, time it takes to complete a renewal process, and applicants’ characteristics, La Paz,
     Bolivia, 2009a
                                                              Renewal        Renewal        Renewal         Renewal        Renewal        Renewal        Renewal        Renewal
                                                               time           time           time            time           time           time           time           time
                                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)
                                                                 Male applicants              Female applicants               Male applicants              Female applicants

      Digital renewal process                                -43.6358***     -40.0082***    -43.5728***    -39.1417***    -34.5492***    -30.9552***    -33.5596***     -28.4754***
                                                               (1.092)         (2.291)        (1.258)        (1.532)         (1.867)        (2.564)        (2.331)         (2.275)
      Applicant is from the rural area                                                                                    17.3564***      17.3355***    16.6534***      16.6164***
                                                                                                                             (1.900)        (1.990)        (1.947)         (2.029)
      Applicant did not ﬁnish high school                                                                                 12.0994***      11.8235***    10.5576***      10.4431***
                                                                                                                             (1.720)        (1.800)        (1.788)         (1.774)
      Applicant speaks an indigenous language                                                                               2.4421**       2.2770*          1.2377          1.0767
                                                                                                                             (1.181)        (1.253)        (1.209)         (1.215)
      Applicant is a senior (>40 years old)                                                                                  1.3130         1.4344         2.1740*        2.4276**
                                                                                                                             (0.990)        (1.065)        (1.204)         (1.199)
      Applicant attended a public school                                                                                   4.8434***      4.8970***       6.8059***      7.0495***
                                                                                                                             (1.320)        (1.342)        (1.238)         (1.348)
      Female applicant wearing indigenous attire                                                                                                          4.1958**         4.0158*




27
                                                                                                                                                           (2.069)         (2.174)
      Digital*(Applicant lives in the rural area)                                                                         -14.2871***    -14.1852***    -14.7504***     -14.8551***
                                                                                                                            (2.573)        (2.686)         (2.752)         (2.892)
      Digital*(Applicant did not ﬁnish high school)                                                                       -12.5569***    -12.3343***     -8.8256***      -8.8414***
                                                                                                                            (1.915)        (1.982)         (2.252)         (2.236)
      Digital*(Applicant speaks an indigenous language)                                                                     -0.9662        -1.2330         -0.5273         -0.5214
                                                                                                                            (1.774)        (1.742)         (1.757)         (1.807)
      Digital*(Applicant is a senior)                                                                                       -1.0575        -0.8821         -2.3749         -2.2950
                                                                                                                            (1.750)        (1.839)         (1.784)         (1.679)
      Digital*(Applicant attended a public school)                                                                         -3.4048**      -3.8505**      -4.8664***      -5.3645***
                                                                                                                            (1.516)        (1.573)         (1.657)         (1.806)
      Digital*(Female applicant wearing indigenous attire)                                                                                                 -1.0328         -1.3765
                                                                                                                                                           (2.600)         (2.727)
      Renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects                                    Yes            No             Yes             No              Yes             No             Yes             No
      Renewal table ﬁxed eﬀects                                  No             Yes            No              Yes             No             Yes             No              Yes
      Mean of dependent variable among applicants
      in manual tables                                         128.55         128.55         129.45          129.45          128.55          128.55         129.45         129.45
      Observations                                              7,196          2,893          6,807           2,591           7,196          2,893           6,807          2,591
      a
        Estimates reported are OLS coeﬃcients. Standard errors in parentheses robust against arbitrary heteroskedasticity in the variance-covariance matrix, and clustered at the
        table level across all speciﬁcations.
        *** Signiﬁcant at 1 percent.
        ** Signiﬁcant at 5 percent.
        * Signiﬁcant at 10 percent.
                                                                         Table 5: ]
     Tests of signiﬁcance for estimates on information technology and interactions with applicants’ characteristics, La Paz, Bolivia, 2009†
                                                                                                                          Probability of successfully                               Time it takes to successfully
                                                                                                                         completing a renewal process                               complete a renewal process
                                                                                                             Combined        p-value of     Combined      p-value of     Combined       p-value of    Combined     p-value of
                                                                                                             coeﬃcients     χ2 -statistic   coeﬃcients   χ2 -statistic   coeﬃcients     F-statistic   coeﬃcients   F-statistic

                                                                                                                Male applicants              Female applicants             Male applicants             Female applicants
                                                                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)

      Panel A: Within renewal-day variation speciﬁcation

          Ho:   Applicant lives in the rural area+Digital*(App lives in the rural area)=0                       0.0409        0.0130*         0.0686       0.0000*        3.0693         0.0275*        1.903        0.3231
          Ho:   Applicant did not ﬁnish high school+Digital*(App did not ﬁnish high school)=0                  -0.0056         0.8467         0.0213        0.1599        -0.4575         0.6469        1.732        0.2601




28
          Ho:   Applicant speaks an indigenous language+Digital*(App speaks an indigenous language)=0          -0.0166         0.4757         0.0511        0.001*        1.4759         0.2946         0.7104       0.2033
          Ho:   Applicant is a senior+Digital*(Applicant is a senior)=0                                        0.0153         0.0002*         0.0056       0.0378*        0.2555         0.8469        -0.2009       0.8815
          Ho:   Applicant attended a public school+Digital*(App attended a public school)=0                    -0.0502        0.0370*        -0.0002        0.9021        1.4386         0.0742*        1.9395      0.0890*
          Ho:   Female applicant wears indigenous attire+Digital*(Fem app wears indigenous attire)=0                                         -0.0512        0.2406                                      3.163       0.0860*

      Panel B: Within police-oﬃcer variation speciﬁcation

          Ho:   Applicant lives in the rural area+Digital*(App lives in the rural area)=0                       0.0347        0.0127*         0.0695       0.0000*        3.1503         0.0296*        1.7613       0.3740
          Ho:   Applicant did not ﬁnish high school+Digital*(App did not ﬁnish high school)=0                  -0.0063         0.8158         0.0196        0.1515        -0.5108         0.6163        1.6017       0.2844
          Ho:   Applicant speaks an indigenous language+Digital*(App speaks an indigenous language)=0          -0.0158         0.5019         0.0496       0.0001*         1.044         0.4266         0.5553       0.2518
          Ho:   Applicant is a senior+Digital*(App is a senior)=0                                               0.0142        0.0002*         0.0489       0.0286*        0.5523         0.6859         0.1326       0.9151
          Ho:   Applicant attended a public school+Digital*(App attended a public school)=0                    -0.0552        0.0257*         0.0009        0.9331        1.0465         0.2286          1.685       0.1537
          Ho:   Female applicant wears indigenous attire+Digital*(Fem app wears indigenous attire)=0                                         -0.0499        0.2572                                      2.6393       0.1564

      †
          NOTE.- All statistics computed based on estimates reported in columns (5), (6), (7), and (8) of Tables 3 and 4.
          * Signiﬁcant at the 10 percent.
Table A1-1: Information technology, applicant characteristics, and renewal outcomes:
Pooled sample, La Paz, Bolivia, 2009a
                                                                 Completed        Completed         Renewal          Renewal
                                                                   time             time             time             time
                                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)

 Digital renewal process                                          0.0854***        0.1044***       -34.4385***      -30.2110***
                                                                     (0.033)         (0.035)          (1.695)          (1.888)
 Applicant is a woman                                              0.0169*          0.0167*           0.3232           0.3556
                                                                     (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.792)          (0.807)
 Applicant is from the rural area                                -0.1205***       -0.1208***       17.5266***       17.4644***
                                                                     (0.011)         (0.011)          (1.379)          (1.401)
 Applicant did not ﬁnish high school                             -0.0931***       -0.0926***       11.7325***       11.6634***
                                                                     (0.008)         (0.008)          (1.480)          (1.519)
 Applicant speaks an indigenous language                         -0.0648***       -0.0646***          1.2326           1.1600
                                                                     (0.008)         (0.009)          (0.896)          (0.930)
 Applicant is s senior (>40 years old)                           -0.0210***        -0.0204**         1.9634**         2.2259**
                                                                     (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.834)          (0.852)
 Applicant attended a public school                              -0.1030***       -0.1026***        5.7138***        5.7979***
                                                                     (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.870)          (0.866)
 Digital*(Applicant is woman)                                     0.0509***        0.0508***         -0.5912          -0.6777
                                                                     (0.016)         (0.016)          (1.030)          (1.048)
 Digital*(Applicant is from the rural area)                       0.1128***        0.1127***       -14.7005***      -14.7137***
                                                                     (0.013)         (0.013)          (1.844)          (1.881)
 Digital*(Applicant did not ﬁnish high school)                    0.0662***        0.0655***       -10.7895***      -10.8966***
                                                                     (0.015)         (0.015)          (1.633)          (1.679)
 Digital*(Applicant speaks an indigenous language)                0.0731***        0.0733***         -0.7500          -0.8998
                                                                     (0.011)         (0.011)          (1.378)          (1.363)
 Digital*(Applicant is a senior)                                   -0.0059          -0.0062          -1.7370          -1.7900
                                                                     (0.017)         (0.017)          (1.279)          (1.296)
 Digital*(Applicant attended a public school)                     0.0806***        0.0800***       -4.0229***        -4.3694***
                                                                     (0.025)         (0.025)          (1.150)          (1.165)
 Renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects                                              Yes             No                Yes              No
 Renewal table ﬁxed eﬀects                                            No              Yes               No               Yes
 Mean of dependent variable among applicants
 in manual tables                                                   0.6629           0.6629           128.99           128.99
 Observations                                                       19,542           19,542           14,003           14,003
 a
     Estimates reported are marginal eﬀects from probit regressions. Standard errors in parentheses robust against arbitrary
     heteroskedasticity in the variance-covariance matrix, and clustered at the table level across all speciﬁcations.
     *** Signiﬁcant at 1 percent.
     ** Signiﬁcant at 5 percent.
     * Signiﬁcant at 10 percent.




                                                                29
Table A1-2: Information technology, renewal outcomes, and police oﬃcers’ characteristics,
La Paz, Bolivia, 2009a
                                                                     Completed         Completed          Renewal          Renewal
                                                                      process           process            time             time
                                                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                                        Male            Female             Male            Female
                                                                      applicants       applicants        applicants       applicants


 Digital renewal process                                               0.1223***        0.1260***       -47.5886***      -45.6537***
                                                                         (0.023)          (0.027)          (2.754)           (3.718)
 Police oﬃcer has low tenure at renewal table                           -0.0122           0.0089           0.3889           3.0254*
                                                                         (0.014)          (0.014)          (1.082)           (1.763)
 Police oﬃcer is low rank                                                0.0018           0.0073           -0.2834          -2.6698
                                                                         (0.014)          (0.016)          (1.341)           (1.792)
 Police oﬃcer did not go to college                                      0.0097           0.0076           0.4980           0.3146
                                                                         (0.014)          (0.016)          (1.786)           (2.270)
 Police oﬃcer is a senior (>35 years old)                               -0.0045          -0.0258           0.4742           2.0677
                                                                         (0.013)          (0.017)          (1.313)           (1.793)
 Police oﬃcer is a woman                                                -0.0043          -0.0185           -1.5828          2.1145
                                                                         (0.012)          (0.014)          (1.379)           (1.783)
 Digital*(Police oﬃcer has low tenure at renewal table)                 -0.0126          -0.0013           1.6685           -0.9293
                                                                         (0.023)          (0.026)          (2.287)           (2.971)
 Digital*(Police oﬃcer is low rank)                                     -0.0223           0.0191           0.8561           1.3386
                                                                         (0.021)          (0.023)          (2.492)           (2.749)
 Digital*(Police oﬃcer did not go to college)                            0.0110          -0.0197           2.8066           3.0501
                                                                         (0.022)          (0.028)          (2.455)           (3.001)
 Digital*(Police oﬃcer is a senior)                                     -0.0154           0.0299           1.8210           0.2713
                                                                         (0.021)          (0.023)          (2.230)           (2.592)
 Digital*(Police oﬃcer is a woman)                                       0.0206           0.0058           2.9751           3.2942
                                                                         (0.023)          (0.032)          (2.869)           (3.078)
 Renewal day ﬁxed eﬀects                                                  Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Renewal table ﬁxed eﬀects                                                No               No                No               No
 Mean of dependent variable among
 applicants in manual tables                                             0.7175           0.7155           128.55           129.45
 Observations                                                            10,029            9,513            7,196            6,807
 a
     Estimates for the completion of the renewal are marginal eﬀects from probit regressions. Estimates for the time it takes to
     complete renewal are OLS coeﬃcients. Standard errors in parentheses robust against arbitrary heteroskedasticity in the
     variance-covariance matrix, and clustered at the table level.
     *** Signiﬁcant at 1 percent.
     ** Signiﬁcant at 5 percent.
     * Signiﬁcant at 10 percent.




                                                                   30
