                                              WPS8057


Policy Research Working Paper                8057




              Collecting the Dirt on Soils
 Advancements in Plot-Level Soil Testing and Implications
               for Agricultural Statistics

                          Sydney Gourlay
                         Ermias Aynekulu
                          Keith Shepherd
                         Calogero Carletto




Development Data Group
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8057


  Abstract
 Much of the current analysis on agricultural productivity                          for scale-up. In this study, the first large scale study of its
 is hampered by the lack of consistent, high quality data                           kind, enumerators spent approximately 40 minutes per
 on soil health and how it is changing under past and cur-                          plot collecting soil samples, not a particularly prohibitive
 rent management. Historically, plot-level statistics derived                       figure given the proper timeline and budget. The correlation
 from household surveys have relied on subjective farmer                            between subjective indicators of soil quality and key soil
 assessments of soil quality or, more recently, publicly avail-                     properties, such as organic carbon, is weak at best. Evi-
 able geospatial data. The Living Standards Measurement                             dence suggests that farmers are better able to distinguish
 Study of the World Bank implemented a methodological                               between soil qualities in areas with greater variation in
 study in Ethiopia, which resulted in an unprecedented data                         soil properties. Descriptive analysis shows that geospatial
 set encompassing a series of subjective indicators of soil                         data, while positively correlated with laboratory results
 quality as well as spectral soil analysis results on plot-spe-                     and offering significant improvements over subject assess-
 cific soil samples for 1,677 households. The goals of the                          ment, fail to capture the level of variation observed on the
 study, which was completed in partnership with the World                           ground. The results of this study give promise that soil
 Agroforestry Centre and the Central Statistical Agency of                          spectroscopy could be introduced into household panel
 Ethiopia, were twofold: (1) evaluate the feasibility of inte-                      surveys in smallholder agricultural contexts, such as Ethi-
 grating a soil survey into household socioeconomic data                            opia, as a rapid and cost-effective soil analysis technique
 collection operations, and (2) evaluate local knowledge of                         with valuable outcomes. Reductions in uncertainties in
 farmers in assessing their soil quality. Although a cost-                          assessing soil quality and, hence, improvements in small-
 lier method than subjective assessment, the integration of                         holder agricultural statistics, enable better decision-making.
 spectral soil analysis in household surveys has potential




  This paper is a product of the Development Data Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
  access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working
  Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at gcarletto@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
     Collecting the Dirt on Soils: Advancements in Plot-Level Soil Testing and Implications for
                                               Agricultural Statistics


                Sydney Gourlay1, Ermias Aynekulu2, Keith Shepherd2, Calogero Carletto3


                                 1
                                     The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
                         2
                             World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), Nairobi, Kenya,
                                         3
                                             The World Bank, Rome, Italy




Key words: Land productivity; household survey; soil spectroscopy; soil fertility; local knowledge
JEL classification: Q10; Q12; Q24; C81



                                                                                                     1
1. Introduction
“Noting that soils constitute the foundation for agricultural development, essential ecosystem functions
and food security and hence are key to sustaining life on Earth,” the UN General Assembly declared 2015
the International Year of Soils (A/RES/68/232).1 The recent increased attention afforded to soil health is
for naught, however, if soil health measurements are inaccurate or of inadequate resolution. This is
especially critical in the face of increased variability in weather conditions brought on by climate change.
Renewed interest in increasing agricultural productivity to meet food security needs and increasing
resilience of agricultural systems in developing countries, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, makes
understanding soil fertility constraints and trends ever more important.

Much of the current analysis on agricultural productivity is hampered by the lack of consistent, high
quality data on soil health and how it is changing under past and current management. This is beginning
to change, however. As soil testing methods become increasingly rapid and affordable, data constraints
lessen. In Ethiopia, for example, an innovative national-scale soil mapping operation is underway. The
Ethiopia Soil Information Service (EthioSIS) project, supported by the World Bank-funded Agricultural
Growth Program and implemented by the Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency, has begun to
reveal its value (World Bank, 2016).2 Although the project has yet to be completed at full scale,
knowledge acquired through EthioSIS and disseminated by extension agents has already led to the
reformulation of critical inputs and substantial increases in wheat yields (Sawa, 2016). The early
successes of EthioSIS illustrate the potential agricultural gains that can be unlocked by improving the
detail and geographical scope of soil data.

With an ever-expanding population and finite land resources, soils will become more and more taxed as
we strive to produce sufficient food to meet the needs of the world population. Not only will there be a
need to increase food production to accommodate the growing population, but at present roughly 795
million people are estimated to be undernourished, 98 percent of whom are in developing regions (FAO et
al., 2015). Land, although of finite quantity, can be used more productively, as evidenced by startling
yield gaps observed across the world. The magnitude of yield gaps varies significantly across crops and
context. For example, Lobell et al. (2009) clearly illustrate the variation in maize yield gaps, as average
tropical lowland maize yields in Africa are less than 20 percent of yield potential, while tropical lowland
maize yields reach approximately 40 percent of yield potential on average in East and Southeast Asia.
Rice exhibits consistently smaller yield gaps, with average rice yields exceeding 80 percent of yield

1
    A/RES/68/232: http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/68/232&Lang=E.
2
    To learn more about EthioSIS, please visit: http://www.ata.gov.et/highlighted-deliverables/ethiosis/.


                                                                                                            2
potential in Bangladesh, Indonesia, and Nepal, among others (Lobell et al., 2009). Insufficient soil health
is commonly used to explain, at least partially, said yield gaps (Cassman, 1999; Lobell et al., 2009;
Tittonell et al., 2008).


Several methods for closing yield gaps have been identified by the scientific community. According to the
FAO, the use of sustainable soil management techniques, such as zero tillage and agroforestry, could
boost food production by as much as 58 percent (FAO, 2015). The use of improved crop varieties and
chemical input use have been shown to improve productivity and/or resilience exponentially (Cassman,
1999; Duflo et al., 2008). Additionally, Kumar and Quisumbing (2011) draw positive linkages between
improved varieties and nutritional status. However, the uptake of such practices has been unenthusiastic,
particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa. Marenya and Barrett (2009) suggest that farmer demand for fertilizer
use is variable on soil carbon level, with higher carbon content plots achieving greater marginal product
of fertilizer, suggesting that soil quality has implications for adoption of fertilizer use. As will be
illustrated in this paper, relying on subjective farmer assessments of soil quality as a proxy for carbon
content may provide data unsuitable for use in targeting of fertilizer adoption programs.


Productivity has also been observed to vary with farm size. Soil quality has long been argued to explain
the inverse farm-size productivity puzzle, which suggests that small farms are more productive than larger
farms (Bhalla and Roy, 1988; Barrett et al., 2010; Carletto et al, 2013; Carletto et al., 2015; Lamb, 2003;
Tatwangire and Holden, 2013). Despite the results from Barrett et al.’s (2010) experimental study which
concluded that soil properties did not explain away the inverse productivity relationship, much research
suggests that omitted high quality data on soil properties is at least partially responsible for the inverse
relationship (for example, Bhalla and Roy (1988)).


Yield gaps and the quantity of crop production are not the only concerns related to soils, food security,
and nutrition. The quality of food produced can vary, and lack of micronutrients can lead to hidden
hunger (Cakmak, 2002; FAO, 2015). With a direct link between the micronutrient content found in crops
and the soils from which they grew, soil health measurement and monitoring could lead to the
identification and, ideally, prevention of micronutrient malnutrition.


Agricultural analysis is multidimensional. Knowing the quantity of production alone, or even
productivity, is not sufficient to analyze determinants of strong yields, estimate adoption of sustainable or
improved farm management practices, or establish causal links between agriculture and nutrition. These
data, however, are most readily available in household-level surveys with a focus on agriculture, such as

                                                                                                           3
the Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA;
www.worldbank.org/lsms). Historically, plot-level soil statistics derived from household surveys have
relied on subjective farmer assessments of soil quality or on linking with soil raster data (when plots are
geo-referenced). Direct systematic measurement of soil fertility as part of a large-scale household-level
data collection operation has rarely been attempted due to the high costs of soil sampling and analysis.
Recently developed rapid low-cost technology for assessing soil characteristics using infrared
spectroscopy, however, has increased the potential for direct soil fertility characterization in large studies.

The value of soil data is unquestionable, but the sources, quality, and resolution of such data vary widely.
And while platforms like EthioSIS provide invaluable information on soil from an agronomic perspective,
having soil data integrated with household-level or plot-level data on input use, farm management
practices, agricultural labor, agricultural production, and household socioeconomic characteristics holds
extensive analytical value. Soil data from household and farm surveys also provide great opportunities for
validation of information obtained through other means. However, the quality of the subjective soil data
that are most often found with such inclusive agricultural household surveys has rarely been validated. In
this paper, we seek to compare subjective farmer assessment of plot-level soil quality against objective
laboratory analyses, by utilizing the data purposively collected for methodological validation under the
LSMS Methodological Validation Program.

Using a unique plot-level data set collected by the Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) of the
World Bank in collaboration with the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) and the Central Statistical
Agency of Ethiopia, and with funding from UK Aid, which consists of a menu of subjective farmer-
estimated indicators of soil quality and results from objective conventional and spectral soil tests, this
paper analyzes the impacts of relying on subjective farmer estimates of soil quality for policy-based
decision making through comparison of subjective and objective measures of soil properties. Results from
the methodological experiment data suggest that smallholder farmers are unable to clearly discriminate
between soil fertility levels, which we hypothesize may partially explain the slow adoption of improved
agricultural practices and inputs often observed in Africa.

Building on the few previously existing studies, such as those by Dawoe et al. (2012), Desbiez et al.
(2004), Odendo et al. (2010), and Gray and Morant (2003), we aim to validate the use of subjective soil
quality indicators against objective measures. Specifically, we compare a multidimensional farmer
assessment of soils with plot-level soil analysis conducted using conventional and spectral testing, similar
to the data used by Marenya and Barrett (2009).




                                                                                                              4
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the specific subjective and objective
soil data collected in the Ethiopia Land and Soil Experimental Research (LASER) project and provides
descriptive statistics on each. Analytical comparison of the measurement methods is explored in Section
3, with an emphasis on the ability of respondents with various characteristics to more or less accurately
assess the quality of their soils against the objective benchmark. Section 4 concludes.



2. Data

2.1 LASER Study
In an effort to collect the highest quality data possible in a large-scale household survey context, the
Living Standards Measurement Study has prioritized methodological research in recent years through
implementation of the LSMS Methodological Validation Program. With the aim of identifying the
magnitude and (potential) systematic nature of measurement error associated with various measurement
methods, and with financial support from UK Aid, the LSMS has designed several methodological
experiments focused on key aspects of agricultural analysis, including soil fertility. Such methodological
experiments strive to find balance between quality and scalability, and ultimately implement the most
appropriate methods in future surveys.

Nationally representative LSMS-ISA surveys commonly include basic subjective questions on soil
fertility, often asked to the head of household or plot-manager. Additionally, when plots are geo-
referenced, indicators of soil health such as nutrient availability, toxicity, and salinity are derived from
outside sources including the Harmonized World Soil Database and provided as supplementary data along
with the full LSMS-ISA data set. However, in order to know how well the subjective assessments of soil
quality correlate with true soil fertility measures, and whether there are any systematic measurement
biases based on topography or respondent characteristics, the subjective measures must be taken
alongside objective, plot-level measures. This was the motivation behind the Land and Soil Experimental
Research (LASER) project.

Data collection for the LASER study was conducted in 3 zones of the Oromia region in Ethiopia (refer to
Figure 1). Oromia region was selected because it represents a large area of Ethiopia and encompasses
areas with great variation in rainfall, elevation, and agroecological zones. In total, 85 enumeration areas
(EAs) were randomly selected using the Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia’s Agricultural Sample
Survey (AgSS) as the sampling frame. Within each EA, 12 households were randomly selected from the
AgSS household listing completed in September 2013.




                                                                                                          5
                        Figure 1. Location of the study area: markers indicate fields
                        where soil samples are collected from interviewed households
                        in Borena, East Wellega, and West Arsi zones of the Oromia
                        region, Ethiopia.



Fieldwork was conducted in multiple waves. Post-planting activities were conducted during September –
December 2013. Post-harvest activities were conducted from January to March 2014. Crop-cutting was
conducted at any point during this period when the maize was deemed ready for harvest by the
respondent. The post-planting, crop-cutting, and post-harvest questionnaires were administered using
computer-assisted personal interviewing.



2.2 Farmer Subjective Assessment
Prior to the collection of physical soil samples, a series of subjective plot-level questions was
administered to the self-identified ‘best informed’ household member on each plot. These questions
ranged from a categorical coded-response “what is the soil quality of [field]?” to questions on soil color,
texture, and type (clay, sand, loam, etc.). It is worth noting that the subjective questions were
administered at the dwelling, not upon direct respondent observation of the soils, as the study was aimed
at assessing farmer knowledge for larger-scale surveys that may not allow for visitation of each plot.
Refer to Annex I for the relevant portion of the questionnaire instrument.

                                                                                                         6
        Table 1. Subjective Assessment Summary

                                                  Plots with Objective Soil Analysis                          Full Sample
                                      East
                                                   Borena        West Arsi              Total                      Total
                                     Wellega
                                N     589             496           592          1677           100%        4149           100%
       Soil Quality
                            Good       128            276           304           708           42%         1458           35%
                             Fair      419            193           274           887           53%         2445           59%
                            Poor        42             27            14            83           5%          246            6%
       Soil Color*
                            Black       97            128           413           638           38%         1362           33%
                             Red       403            270            87           761           45%         2170           52%
                      White/Light       88             84            92           264           16%         592            14%
                          Yellow        1             14             0            14            1%           24            1%
       Soil Type
                           Sandy       143            123           93            360           21%         803            19%
                             Clay      291            250           360           901           54%         2292           55%
            Mixture of Sand/Clay        92            120           139           351           21%         785            19%
                           Other       63              3             0            65            4%          269            6%
       Soil Texture°
                        Very Fine       4              26            26            56           3%           87            2%
                             Fine      240            225           404           870           52%         2070           50%
       Between Coarse and Fine         259            187           140           586           35%         1584           38%
                          Coarse        81             56            21           158           9%          390            9%
                     Very Coarse        5              2             1             8            0%           18            0%
       * Categories "White/Light" and "Yellow" combined for analysis
       ° Categories "Very Fine" and "Fine" were combined for analysis, as were "Coarse" and "Very Coarse"

While subjective assessments of soil quality are both cost- and time-efficient, the quality of results may
be questionable. Summary statistics of the subjective questions included in the LASER study, found in
Table 1, reveal little discrimination by respondents.3 The table focuses on the sample of plots for which
spectral soil analysis was completed, as this is the sample that will be compared to the laboratory results
in subsequent sections, but there is also a column for the full sample of plots. When asked about the
quality of soil on a particular plot, 94 percent of all plots were reported to have either good or fair soil (35
percent good, 59 percent fair). On the whole, only 6 percent of plots were reported to have poor soils.
This heavy-tailed distribution holds across administrative zone and agroecological zone, with no more
than 8 percent of plots in a single agroecological or administrative zone reported as poor. This finding is
not unique to the LASER data set. In nationally representative LSMS-ISA surveys from Uganda (2013-
14), Malawi (2013), and Tanzania (2012-13), only 3 percent, 12 percent, and 6 percent of plots were
reported as having poor soil, respectively (UBOS, 2013; Malawi NBS, 2013; Tanzania NBS, 2012). In

3
  The sample is limited to plots in which a topsoil sample was tested in the laboratory. Due to mislabeling of soil
samples and/or transportation between the field and the laboratories, 120 plots with subjective measurements do not
have matching objective measurements. These observations have been dropped. The number of samples lost to mis-
labeling was significantly reduced by the use of barcoded labels in a replication study.


                                                                                                                                  7
the most recent nationally representative LSMS-ISA survey in Ethiopia (2013-14), nearly 21 percent of
parcels (not fields, as measured in LASER) were reported as having poor soil quality (CSA, 2013).

Subjective assessments of soil fertility also suffer from a lack of intra-household variation. Of households
with more than one cultivated field in the sample, 63 percent reported the same soil quality on all plots.
Similarly, 71 percent reported the same soil type, 73 percent reported the same soil color, and 68 percent
the same soil texture. This is striking, especially given the high number of fields cultivated per household.
Figure 2 (A–D) illustrates the percentage of households reporting no variation in the abovementioned
indicators, by number of plots cultivated.

Descriptive analysis suggests that farmers use soil color and texture as indicators of soil quality. As
observed in Figure 3, self-reported dark and fine textured soils were categorized as good soils while red
and course textured soils were more frequently categorized as poor soils. While the more specific
subjective questions, such as texture and color, appear to be correlated with the overall quality
assessments, the value of these questions in terms of correlation with objectively measured soil properties,
believed to be the truest measure, remains to be analyzed. Section 3 will explore these correlations.




                                                                                                           8
Figure 2. Percent of households reporting no variation in subjective soil quality questions, by
number of plots cultivated per household.




                                                                                                  9
      Figure 3. Farmers use soil texture (left) and color (right) as indicators of soil quality.


2.3 Objective Data

Soil samples were collected from up to two randomly selected plots per household (where applicable, one
pure-stand maize plot was selected for crop-cutting). The in-field sampling protocol was designed with
ICRAF, adapting the Land Degradation Surveillance Framework of the African Soil Information Service
to fit the smallholder farm structure.4 From each selected plot, two samples were tested: (1) a composite
sample collected from four points within the plot at 0-20 cm depth following the layout in Figure 4
(referred to as topsoil), and (2) a single sample from the center of the plot at 20-50 cm depth (referred to
as subsoil). Field staff were trained by ICRAF personnel to ensure comparability of field protocols. A
thorough explanation of the soil collection, processing, and analysis protocols followed in LASER are
found in the guidebook by Aynekulu et al. (2016).

Soil samples were delivered to local processing laboratories within five days of collection to prevent
decomposition of organic matter. Local laboratories, which were also trained on ICRAF protocols, were
responsible for drying, grinding, sieving, and weighing the samples. After processing, samples were
shipped to ICRAF laboratories in Nairobi, Kenya for analysis. All analyses completed by ICRAF were
done following African Soil Information Service (AfSIS) protocols so as to ensure comparability of
results with separate pre-existing and ongoing research in the region. On average, soil sample collection
took approximately 40 minutes per field. In a replication study, also by the LSMS, this time was reduced
by incorporating implementation lessons from LASER, such as using barcoded labels rather than
handwritten labels (see the guidebook by Aynekulu et al. (forthcoming) for details).
4
 For more information on the Land Degradation Surveillance Framework see http://www.africasoils.net/data/ldsf-
description.


                                                                                                             10
                                                  Figure 4. Sample plot layout on agricultural plots,
                                                  with four points (dotted circles). The distance along
                                                  the radial arms between the center point and the
                                                  other three points is 12.2 m. Point 1 is the center of
                                                  the plot. The composite topsoil sample is composed
                                                  of samples from points 1, 2, 3, and 4.




Two objective measures were employed by ICRAF laboratories. Conventional soil analysis (CSA), which
includes traditional wet chemistry methods for soil nutrient extraction and some basic soil physical
analyses, was conducted on 10 percent of samples (n=361). Conventional analysis, while often regarded
as the gold standard in soil analysis, is expensive and destructive in nature. Spectral soil analysis (SSA),
or soil infrared spectroscopy, the second set of tests conducted under the LASER study, is significantly
less expensive and non-destructive, allowing for multiple tests over time.

Soil infrared spectroscopy (IR) is an emerging technology that makes large area sampling and analysis of
soil health feasible (AfSIS, 2014; Shepherd and Walsh, 2007) and overcomes the current impediments of
high spatial variability of soil properties and high analytical costs, which are key challenges in monitoring
soil health at a large scale (Conant et al., 2011). A review by Bellon-Maurel and McBratney (2011)
showed an exponential increase in the use of near infrared (NIR) and mid-infrared (MIR) reflectance
spectroscopy for soil analysis. Because spectral analysis is rapid, it greatly increases the quantity of soil
samples that can be processed while also expanding the number of fundamental soil properties that can be
simultaneously predicted with little increase in analytical costs. This reduces errors in quantifying soil
carbon and other key properties that are often caused by spatial heterogeneity of soils. Infrared data can
be integrated with geostatistic data (Cobo et al., 2010), remote sensing data and topographic information
for digital soil mapping at the landscape level (Croft et al., 2012). Rossel et al. (2014), for instance, used
infrared data to develop a soil carbon map of Australia.

The suite of spectral analyses includes the following tests: mid-infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
(MIR), laser diffraction particle size distribution analysis (LDPSA), x-ray methods for soil mineralogy
(XRD), and total element analysis (TXRF). MIR and LDPSA spectral tests were conducted on all top-
and sub-soil samples (n=3,611), while the x-ray tests, XRD and TXRF, were conducted on the same 10
percent on which conventional testing was executed. Ultimately, approximately 50 variables were
predicted for each top and subsoil sample, containing both chemical and physical soil properties.

                                                                                                           11
2.3.1 Predictions of Soil Properties from Spectra
Following the methods designed by Shepherd and Walsh (2002) the results of the CSA were used to
predict soil properties onto the full sample based on the spectral signatures, an example of which is found
in Annex II. Figure 5 illustrates the predictive power of the mid-infrared spectroscopy on key soil
properties, while Table 2 summarizes selected predicted properties, disaggregated by top- and sub-soil.
The predictive models are successful in that, of the variables predicted, the lowest correlation between
predicted value and actual value (using the reference sample upon which CSA was conducted) was 0.946
(prediction of zinc concentration using Mehlich 3 method). The highest correlation was in the prediction
of aluminum concentration by TXRF, with a rho of 0.989. Key soil properties such as total carbon
(percent), total nitrogen (percent), clay (percent), and pH were strongly predicted with correlation
coefficients of 0.984, 0.983, 0.988, and 0.985, respectively. The near-perfect predictions lend confidence
to our assumption that laboratory results obtained through spectral analysis are strong proxies for true
measures.

Table 2 illustrates that significant differences are observed between the top- and sub-soil samples,
motivating the need to analyze both separately if study objectives and resources allow. The rooting depth
of the crop(s) of interest should be considered when determining if top and/or sub-soils should be tested,
as it is preferable to test the soil properties at the level at which the plant absorbs the majority of its
nutrients (Lorenz and Lal, 2005). Levels of all presented properties are significantly different between
top- and sub-soil at the 1 percent level, with the exception of sand percentage, which is significant only at
the 10 percent level. In addition to variation across soil depths, levels of key soil properties vary across
administrative zone. Figure 6 illustrates that distribution of total carbon and pH by administrative zone.
Carbon levels are highest in the West Arsi zone, followed by East Wellega and Borena (means across
zones significantly different at the 1 percent level). High carbon and pH variability is observed in Borena,
likely due to the great variation in agroecological zones enclosed within its borders. East Wellega has
more acidic soils, which could be suitable for maize production (FAO, 1983).




                                                                                                          12
Figure 5. Mid-infrared spectroscopy strongly predicts multiple soil properties

                                                                                 13
Table 2. Selected Predicted Properties Summary
Soil properties                         Top Soil (0-20 cm)          Sub Soil (20-50 cm)   Difference in
                                       Mean             SD          Mean            SD       means
Physical
% Sand                                  12.2           7.0           11.8          7.4         0.4*
% Clay                                  65.0          12.8           67.3         13.3       -2.3***
% Silt                                  22.6           7.4           20.8          7.5       1.8***
Chemical
pH                                       6.3           0.6           6.3           0.6       0.0***
Macronutrients:
Total Carbon (%)                         3.4           1.2           2.9           1.0       0.5***
Total Nitrogen (%)                       0.3           0.1           0.2           0.1       0.1***
Exchangeable Calcium (mg kg^-1) +       3445          1826          3193          1933       252***
Potassium (mg kg^-1)+                    742           297           663           259        79***
Exchangeable Magnesium (mg kg^-1         540           192           510           198        30***
Micronutrients:
Iron (mg kg^-1)+                        160            62            148           55        12***
Zinc (mg kg^-1)+                        5.6             3            5.11           3       0.49***
Exchangeable Manganese (mg kg^-1        182            52            173           56        9***
+ Extracted with Mehlich 3 method
* Extracted with wet method
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: Data limited to plots with both top and subsoil samples (n=1599)




   Figure 6. West Arsi has the highest organic carbon content while soils from East Wellega
   are more acidic than Borena and West Arsi (top-soil levels reported).



                                                                                                          14
3. Comparison of Methods
Given the complexity of soil and the varying needs of different crops and agricultural systems, assessing
the overall quality of soil at an objective level can be difficult in itself. Comparing categorical subjective
questions to the array of objective measurements and evaluating how well those subjective data reflect the
true soil quality is even more challenging. To simplify the process, we first analyze the ability of
subjective questions to predict soil carbon levels, a proxy for overall soil health. We attempt to explain
which respondent and plot characteristics improve the ability of subjective questions to accurately (or
relatively more accurately) assess soil quality. Subsequently, in order to incorporate more of the rich
laboratory data and better capture the complex nature of the soil, we construct two variations of soil
quality indices. Basic OLS regression is then used to identify which subjective questions, if any,
significantly predict changes in the soil quality indicators. Finally, to reinforce the value of plot-level
spectral analysis, the spectral results are briefly compared with publicly available geospatial data. All
analyses are conducted using top soil (0-20 cm depth) measurements unless otherwise specified.5

3.1 Carbon as a proxy for overall soil quality
Carbon content is often considered to be the best single indicator of soil quality (IIASA/FAO, 2012).
Higher levels of organic carbon indicate greater soil fertility and more optimal soil structure
(IIASA/FAO, 2012). Carbon is also highly correlated with other key properties such as total nitrogen
(with rho of 0.974 in this data set). Do farmer assessments of overall soil quality reflect carbon levels?
Descriptive analysis reveals little relation between organic carbon content (percent) and the respondent’s
assessment of the soil as poor, fair, or good. As seen above, 42 percent, 53 percent, and 5 percent of the
household respondents classified the status of their soil as good, fair, and poor, respectively. T-test results
provide weak evidence of distinction between organic (or acidified) carbon content.6 In plots with
reportedly good or fair soils, there is a greater organic carbon content than in plots reported with poor
soils (difference is statistically significant at the 10 percent level). There is no significant difference in
organic carbon content on plots with good and fair soils. The significant difference in organic carbon
content on good and poor soils (3.36 percent and 3.10 percent, respectively) is consistent with other




5
  The regression analysis found in Section 3.2 was also conducted using sub-soil results. For brevity, the results are
not reported here. The findings using sub-soils are largely consistent with those using top soils, however subjective
indicators appear to be a slightly better predictor of top soil soil quality indices. Sub soil results available from the
authors.
6
  No significant difference is found between total carbon content in plots reported as good, fair, and poor. However,
correlation between total carbon and acidified carbon among top soil samples in the LASER data is very high
(0.9851).


                                                                                                                       15
    Figure 7. Scatter plot of organic carbon and clay/silt (%) by self-reported soil quality (left), and box
    plots of organic carbon by self-reported soil quality (right).

studies, such as Desbiez et al. (2004) and Mtambanengwe and Mapfumo (2005), but with those studies
finding a greater divergence in organic carbon content between categories.7

To better illustrate the distribution of carbon levels across self-reported soil quality categories, Figure 7
presents a scatter plot relating organic carbon, clay and silt content, and self-reported quality category
(left) and box plots of carbon levels disaggregated by self-reported quality category (right). The scatter
plot reveals that the soils reported as poor are not concentrated in areas with low carbon levels, but rather
seemingly randomly distributed. This suggests that the local assessment on overall soil quality may not be
a robust method for mapping soil quality and making decisions on potential interventions like fertilizer
recommendations to improve land productivity.

Disaggregating the self-reported indicators by respondent, geographic, and plot characteristics reveals
slightly more explanation. Splitting the data into two age categories above and below 40 years (excluding
the 68 observations in which the plot manager was not the respondent) shows that the younger
respondents were able to differentiate between poor and good soils (p < 0.05), and between fair and poor
soils (p < 0.01), but not between good and fair soils, where we define successful differentiation as a
relative measure (higher carbon levels in reportedly better soils). There is no significant difference in total
organic carbon levels across the three self-reported soil quality categories for the respondent age group of
greater than 40 years. One might expect farmer age to be inversely correlated with education and literacy,


7
  Both Desbiez et al. (2004) and Mtambanengwe and Mapfumo (2005) used a binary classification of plots, rather
than ‘good’, ‘fair’, and ‘poor’.


                                                                                                                 16
but when disaggregating by manager literacy, there is no significant difference in organic carbon levels
between subjective soil quality categories. Disaggregation by manager (and respondent) sex yields less
insight. Neither male nor female manager assessments of overall soil quality discriminate by carbon level.

Geographic characteristics, particularly the variation in soils in the immediate vicinity of the household,
may play a role in the correlation between subjective assessments of overall soil quality and objectively
measured indicators. Overall quality is a highly subjective and relative measure and thus, it is likely to
vary with the reference set available to the farmer. That is, in areas with greater variation in soil
properties, a farmer may be better able to distinguish between plots that have good, fair, and poor soil
because they have a wider range of soils against which they can make comparisons. This theory is
supported by the results in Table 3.

Limiting the sample to the enumeration areas with the highest and lowest quartile of variance in organic
carbon content indeed suggests that subjective assessment of overall soil quality better approximates
organic carbon content in areas with greater variation. In the enumeration areas with the highest quartile

          Table 3. Subjective Overall Soil Quality and Organic Carbon Content, by Geographic
          Area (top-soils reported)
                                             Mean Organic              Difference of Means
                                N
                                           Carbon Content (%)   Good            Fair         Poor
           All
           Good                 708               3.36                            -           *
           Fair                 886               3.37           -                            *
           Poor                  83               3.10           *               *
           EAs with lowest 25% variance
           Good                 151               2.66                            -           *
           Fair                 243               2.69           -                            *
           Poor                  23               3.13           *               *
           EAs with highest 25% variance
           Good                 184               3.65                           *           **
           Fair                 211               3.94            *                          ***
           Poor                  35               3.13           **             ***
           West Arsi
           Good                 304               3.83                            -           -
           Fair                 274               3.79           -                            -
           Poor                  14               3.53           -                -
           East Wellega
           Good                 128               3.56                            -           -
           Fair                 419               3.47           -                            -
           Poor                  42               3.42           -                -
           Borena
           Good                 276               2.76                           *            -
           Fair                 193               2.54           *                            -
           Poor                  27               2.38           -                -
           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                                                        17
of variance in organic carbon content, statistically significant differences are observed in the carbon
content of soils reported as good and poor, fair and poor, and, to a lesser degree, good and fair. In
enumeration areas with the lowest variance, not only are the differences only marginally significant, but
reportedly poor soils have a higher mean carbon content than soils reported as good and fair. Breaking
down the sample by administrative zone reveals some support to the idea of variation affecting the ability
of farmers to rate the overall quality of their plots, as Borena, the zone with the highest variance, is the
only zone in which any significant difference is observed between the three categories, albeit with weak
statistical significance.

Farm management practices and property rights may have implications on the ability of respondents to
assess overall soil quality. Although there is no significant difference in organic carbon levels between
plots that received and did not receive fertilizer (organic or inorganic), there is a difference in the
relationship between subjective quality assessments and carbon content. On plots on which fertilizer was
not used, respondents are better able to distinguish between lower and higher organic carbon levels. On
these plots there is a significant difference in carbon levels between plots identified as good and poor, and
fair and poor, but not between good and fair. No significant difference is found between plots of different
classifications on which fertilizer was used. In a similar trend, plots for which the household holds a title
are assessed more appropriately, again with a significant distinction between good and poor, and fair and
poor, but not between good and fair. There was no significant distinction on plots without a title, which is
potentially explained by reduced knowledge of plots that are not owned and perhaps have not been
farmed by the respondent over multiple growing periods.

                                                                Descriptive analysis suggests that on the
                                                                whole, farmers do not do well at assessing
                                                                 overall soil quality, at least in terms of
                                                                 carbon content. Above, Figure 3 provided
                                                                 evidence that suggested farmers use
                                                                 texture as an indicator of overall soil
                                                                 quality. In fact, there does appear to be a
                                                                 relationship between farmer-reported soil
                                                                 texture and percent sand. Figure 8 plots
                                                                 the distribution of sand concentration in
                                                                 soils reported as fine, coarse, and
Figure 8. Sand content (%) disaggregated by farmer
                                                                  between coarse and fine, with coarser
assessment of soil texture.
                                                                  soils   expected   to   have    a   higher


                                                                                                          18
concentration of sand as opposed to silt and clay.

The difference in sand concentration is significantly different than zero between all three categories, but
the levels are in an unexpected direction as reportedly fine soils have 12.4 percent sand while soils
reported between coarse and fine have 11.0 percent sand (reportedly coarse soil has 15.1 percent sand on
average). Theoretically, soil texture does have an impact on objective soil quality, with sandy soils having
less nutrient holding capacity. The impact of soil texture on soil quality indices is explored in the next
section.

3.2 Soil quality indices


While carbon is commonly used as a proxy for soil fertility, it may not be the primary limiting factor of
soils in the sample. To achieve a more dynamic measure of soil quality two indices are created. The
indices were constructed following the guidance set forth by Mukherjee and Lal (2014) in their
comparison of three approaches to soil quality indices. A simple additive and a weighted additive
approach were utilized.8 The indices proposed by Mukherjee and Lal include three components: root
development capacity, water storage capacity, and nutrient storage capacity. Data are only available for
the construction of the nutrient storage component, which is 40 percent of the complete weighted additive
SQI. Therefore, results presented here only indicate constraints related to nutrient storage capacity.

Mukherjee and Lal use their expertise and existing literature to assign linear scores to relevant soil
properties ranging from 0 to 3 based on the constraint posed by the level of the specific property
(Mukherjee and Lal, 2014). These linear scores are summed to create the simple additive soil quality
index (SA SQI). While Mukherjee and Lal assign scores for a multitude of soil properties, data in the
LASER study allow for the inclusion of pH, organic carbon content (percent), total nitrogen content
(percent), and electrical conductivity, the properties that together make up the nutrient storage capacity
component. Unlike the weighted additive index (discussed below), the SA SQI is not normalized on the
sample and therefore provides an indicator of overall soil quality that is not relative to the study sample.
The SA SQI ranges from 0 to 7, with a mean of 4.61.

The weighted additive index, referred to henceforth as the WA SQI, was constructed by assigning linear
scores to the relevant soil properties (pH, soil electrical conductivity, organic carbon (percent), and total
nitrogen (percent)), normalizing the scores for each individual property over the sample, and then



8
 Additionally, a principal component analysis was conducted following Mukherjee and Lal (2014). This was not the
preferred soil quality index method and is therefore not reported. Results available upon request.


                                                                                                             19
applying    the    indicated    weights    and
                                                  Table 4. Correlation of Soil Quality Indices
summing the scores.9 The linear scores for
each included property ranged from 0 to 1                                                               Organic
                                                                            SA SQI         WA SQI
                                                                                                       Carbon (%)
and were determined by dividing all               SA SQI                       1
observations by the highest value in the          WA SQI                     0.659           1
                                                  Organic Carbon (%)         0.830         0.800            1
sample for soil properties in which a
                                                  Note: All significant at the 1% level.
higher value is more beneficial (carbon
and nitrogen) and dividing the all observations by the lowest value in the sample for properties in which a
lower value is preferred. Soil electrical conductivity and pH have an optimal range, and these were treated
as such.10 This method follows Mukherjee and Lal (2014), who learn from Karlen and Stott (1994) and
Fernandes et al. (2011). WA SQI scores range from 0.32 to 0.86, with a mean of 0.46.

Table 4 presents the correlation matrix of the three abovementioned soil quality indicies, as well as the
organic carbon content. All correlation coefficients are significant at the 1 percent level.



     3.2.1 Soil quality indices: Regression analysis


In order to determine how well subjective soil indicators are correlated with objective measures, including
the soil quality indices and organic carbon content, basic ordinary least squares regression analysis is
conducted. The primary objective of the regression analysis is to determine how well subjective soil
assessments predict soil quality index measures, and which subjective questions perform best. The
following model is executed:

                                                 = 	 +	        +	 	                                                (2)


where SQI is one of the two soil quality indices defined above,          is a constant, X is a matrix of subjective
soil indicators, and     is a random error term with the usual desirable characteristics. Organic carbon
content is also run as a dependent variable for robustness. While several factors, such as plot slope and
various agricultural practices, may influence the soil quality on the plot, those covariates are excluded

9
  Scores for each of the four soil properties normalized as (observation score – sample min)/(sample max – sample
min). Weights were applied as follows: pH (0.3); electrical conductivity (0.3); organic carbon (0.2); total nitrogen
(0.2). Scores and weights taken from Mukherjee and Lal (2014).
10
   For properties that have an optimal range, the observations were split into those above and below the critical
thresholds (as defined by Mukherjee and Lal, 2014), with those below the threshold treated as though a higher value
is preferred and those above the threshold treated as though a lower value is preferred.


                                                                                                                    20
             from the simple model presented here. The objective is not to analyze the determinants of soil quality but
             rather to determine how well subjective measures of soil quality predict true measures (as proxied by
             laboratory results). The models are first run with individual subjective indicators in order to identify how
             well each variable predicts the index score independently, then with all subjective variables, in order to
             analyze the predictive power of the subjective indicators as a whole. Note that subjective soil texture was
             included rather than type, as the “other, specify” category of the soil type question consisted primarily of
             soil colors and as such, correlation between soil type and color was a concern.

             Results of the regression analysis are presented in Table 5. Immediately evident is the low explanatory
             power of the subjective indicators of soil quality, as expressed by the R2, which ranges from 0.002 to
             0.060. Specifications (1), (2), and (3), which look at the individual subjective indicators separately,
             suggest that soil color explains more of the variation in the soil quality indices and carbon content than do
             the subjective questions on overall quality and texture. The direction of the coefficients on red and
             white/light soils are as expected – they have a lower soil quality index score or organic carbon content
             than black soils. Coarse soils would be expected to have lower levels of nutrient availability, and
             therefore greater soil fertility, and this is reflected in the results, albeit with limited magnitude in the WA
             SQI model.

             The descriptive analysis on the subjective assessment of overall soil quality invoked little confidence in
             its relationship with objective soil quality, at least in this particular sample. This sentiment is reflected in
             the regression analysis. The subjective assessment of overall soil quality had no significant relationship
             with the WA SQI when self-reported soil color and texture were controlled for. In the model on the SA


     Table 5. SQI Regression Analysis, No Fixed Effects
Dependent Variable:                                  SA SQI                                          WA SQI                                     Organic Carbon (%)
Specification:                       (1)       (2)            (3)       (4)        (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)        (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)
self-reported soil quality
                              fair -0.024                             0.138*     -0.009**                                -0.002       0.003                             0.143**
                             poor -0.375*                             -0.011     -0.017**                                -0.005     -0.265**                             0.023
self-reported color
(collapsed, 'black' omitted)
                             red            -0.623***                -0.640***              -0.033***                   -0.032***              -0.570***                -0.588***
                     white/light            -0.889***                -0.866***              -0.027***                   -0.025***              -0.609***                -0.586***
self-reported soil texture
(collapsed, 'fine' ommitted)
       between coarse and fine                            -0.067       -0.02                                  -0.008*    -0.005                              -0.054   -0.022
                         coarse                         -0.428***     -0.239*                                -0.015**    -0.009                            -0.379*** -0.265**
constant                           4.640*** 5.039*** 4.675*** 5.001*** 0.461***             0.475***         0.460*** 0.478*** 3.364*** 3.712*** 3.409*** 3.674***
N                                   1677      1677           1677      1677       1677       1677             1677        1677       1677        1677           1677      1677
R2                                  0.002     0.048          0.006     0.052      0.005      0.041            0.004       0.043      0.002       0.053          0.008     0.060
      Independent Var Mean:                           4.61                                            0.46                                               3.35
    Independent Var. Std Dev:                         1.59                                            0.08                                               1.22
Robust standard errors.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                                                                                                                   21
            SQI and organic carbon, the results in specification (4) suggest that soils reported as fair are of greater
            quality than those reported as good.

            The results presented in Table 5 do not control for inter-household differences. Within the full sample,
            and not controlling for differences across households, the subjective indicators of soil quality do not
            exhibit strong predictive power of the soil quality indices or organic carbon content, but there is some
            relationship. Looking strictly at intra-household effects by including household fixed effects (and limiting
            the sample to households which had top soil samples for two plots), suggests that within household,
            subjective indicators have even less relationship with soil quality indices (refer to Table 6). After
            controlling for household fixed effects the strength of the model is reduced, as evidenced by the lower R2
            values. This is potentially associated with the lack of intra-household variation of subjective indicators
            illustrated previously.

            Although the amount of variation in the soil quality indices and carbon content explained by the
            subjective indicators falls with the inclusion of fixed effects, there is one positive outcome. The
            coefficients on subjective overall soil quality gain statistical significance and move in the right direction,
            with self-reported poor soil possessing a negative coefficient (marginally significant in the WA SQI and
            carbon models, not significant in the SA SQI model), suggesting that plots may be ranked appropriately
            within households. Overly positive conclusions on the ability of subjective questions to reflect soil quality
            should not be drawn from this result, however, given the lack of intra-household variation observed and
            the low magnitude of the coefficients.

            Several differences are observed in relationship between subjective indicators and the various soil quality


Table 6. SQI Regression Analysis, Household Fixed Effects
Dependent Variable:                                   SA SQI                                     WA SQI                               Organic Carbon (%)
Specification:                         (1)      (2)            (3)    (4)        (1)       (2)            (3)     (4)        (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
self-reported soil quality
                              fair    -0.188                         -0.172    -0.015**                          -0.012*    -0.166*                         -0.138
                             poor     -0.109                         -0.096   -0.033***                         -0.030**   -0.404**                        -0.364*
self-reported color
(collapsed, 'black' omitted)
                             red               -0.049                -0.041               -0.014                 -0.013               -0.151               -0.138
                     white/light                0.165                 0.191                0.004                  0.006               -0.192               -0.171
self-reported soil texture
(collapsed, 'fine' ommitted)
       between coarse and fine                            -0.252*    -0.238                          -0.021**   -0.020**                       -0.219**    -0.201*
                         coarse                            0.047      0.096                           -0.027*    -0.023                         -0.222      -0.200
constant                             4.841*** 4.732*** 4.822*** 4.899*** 0.467*** 0.463*** 0.467*** 0.479*** 3.548*** 3.538*** 3.540*** 3.711***
N                                   1384       1384        1384      1384       1384      1384        1384       1384       1384      1384       1384      1384
R2                                 0.003       0.002       0.006     0.011      0.010     0.005       0.010      0.023      0.009     0.002      0.006     0.016
Robust standard errors.
All specifications include HH Fixed Effects.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                                                                                                     22
indices. The SA SQI, which is not normalized on the sample, exhibits a weaker relationship with
subjective indicators than the WA SQI, particularly when household fixed effects are included. This is
likely explained by the fact that the WA SQI is normalized on the sample and, therefore, is more a
measure of relative soil quality.

    3.2.2 Spectral Analysis & Geospatial Data


To provide further confidence in the value of conducting spectral soil analysis on plot-level soil samples,
a brief comparison is made with publicly available geospatial data. Admittedly, comparison may be made
with more than one source of geospatial data. However, the AfSIS data have among the highest
resolutions currently available in public data sets (250m) for Ethiopia (for details see Hengl et al, 2015).
They also may be the most comparable to the LASER data in a methodological sense considering both are
conducted by the ICRAF. For these reasons, the comparisons made here may present an upper bound of
comparability, at least in this particular context. Values were extracted from the AfSIS geospatial data set
using the GPS coordinates of the specific plots. Comparison is made between organic carbon content
(percent) as measured by plot-level spectral testing and that indicated in the AfSIS map.

Table 7 summarizes the mean organic carbon content observed in LASER and AfSIS. In the full sample,
the difference in means between the two data sets is statistically different from zero at the 1 percent level.
Although the magnitude of the difference may be immaterial depending on the research question of
                                                             interest, it is important to note that the
Table 7. Soil Organic Carbon (%) in LASER and                correlation between the two measures is only
                          Organic Carbon (%)                 0.586.
                                          Difference
                    LASER       AFSIS      in Means          Concerns with the use of geospatial data are
All Top-Soil
                                                             often related to their (in)ability to capture
Mean                3.350           3.476      ***
Standard Dev.       1.216           1.192                    variation in soil properties within small areas.
Correlation                         0.586
                                                             Indeed, a closer look at the correlation
N                                   1674
EAs with lowest 25% variance                                 between    the   spectral   analysis   and   the
Mean                2.775           2.884       **
                                                             geospatial data reveals that the correlation
Standard Dev.       1.200           1.045
Correlation                         0.715                    falls when limiting the sample to the EAs with
N                                    412
                                                             the highest quartile of variance in carbon
EAs with highest 25% variance
Mean                3.739           3.767       -            content (as measured by spectral analysis). In
Standard Dev.       1.418           1.189
Correlation                         0.387
                                                             EAs with the highest variance, correlation is
N                                    429                     only 0.387, while in EAs with the lowest
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Difference in means: T-test

                                                                                                           23
variance, the correlation is 0.715 (refer to Table 7).

4. Conclusions
Knowledge of soil quality indicators and overall health is becoming increasingly important as food
security issues become more pressing and climate change threatens to change the face of agriculture. Soil
health, both perceived and actual, can have impacts on the targeting and uptake of improved agricultural
practices, which can improve both the quality and quantity of food produced. For instance, Marenya and
Barrett (2009) show that fertilizer effectiveness, and in turn, demand, is dependent on soil carbon content.
However, results of the LASER study suggest that subjective soil quality indicators fail to effectively
reflect true levels of organic carbon, thereby limiting the value of subjective assessments of soil quality in
policy making.

Certainly, asking a farmer to categorically rate overall soil quality has limited benefit. This particular
subjective soil quality question does not successfully distinguish between soil carbon levels or predict soil
quality index scores, at least within this sample in Ethiopia. Subjective questions on soil color and texture
were more effective in predicting soil quality index scores and organic carbon content, although the low
explanatory power of these variables leaves much to be desired. The value of subjective soil quality
indicators is further questioned by the severe lack of intra-household variation observed. Further research
validating different subjective questions, potentially formulated with soil scientists, may yield more
optimistic results. However, the questions included in the LASER study are those that have been
historically included in LSMS-ISA surveys in multiple countries.

From a fieldwork implementation standpoint, the experience of the LASER study gives promise that the
integration of soil spectroscopy into socioeconomic household panel surveys is feasible. The
methodology is a relatively rapid and cost-effective soil measurement technique that could unlock further
understanding of the effects of farm management practices and changes in soil health over time. Detailed
guidance on implementation strategies and protocols implemented in the LASER study can be found in
Aynekulu et al. (2016).

Despite the weak correlation observed here between laboratory analysis and subjective assessment,
several studies find subjective assessments of soil quality to be a significant determinant of plot-level
productivity (for example, Carletto et al., 2013). This suggests that if subjective soil quality assessments
are not capturing true soil properties, they must be capturing something else relevant to agricultural
production. As a potential explanation for this, we echo the sentiments of Tittonell et al. (2008) and
others, who suggest that farmers have a ‘holistic’ view of soils, and that rather than assessing the soil
properties explicitly, they often incorporate other components such as overall agricultural productivity


                                                                                                           24
and likelihood of crop theft, for example. This finding would indeed render subjective assessments of soil
quality significant predictors of agricultural productivity, but largely leaving true soil quality omitted.

Additional research is needed (and ongoing) to determine the effects of including these objectively
measured soil properties in productivity analysis as opposed to, or in addition to, subjective assessments.
Additionally, while a brief comparison of plot-level spectral analysis and AfSIS geospatial data was
included to illustrate the ability of plot-level analysis to capture a greater degree of variation within small
areas, further research in this arena would be valuable, including, for instance, a comparison of LASER
results with the EthioSIS national soil map. Geospatial data on soil quality have been recently compared
with subjective data by Kelly and Anderson (2016), who find a similar pattern in that farmers are often
over-optimistic about the fertility of their soils with respect to the Harmonized World Soil Database. This
line of work could be extended to include plot-level soil analysis and further validate the need for
objective plot-level analysis.

Ethiopia is poised to benefit greatly from advancements in soil testing, particularly with the rollout of
projects like EthioSIS combined with the upscaling of data collection efforts at the farm household level.
The results of the LASER study, which bring subjective estimates of soil quality under scrutiny and point
to the need for more direct, yet practical, soil measurements, show the potential value of the
complementarities between platforms like EthioSIS, and household-level data collection, based on which
accurate soil information can be made available as part of rich data sets on the socioeconomic condition
and farming practices of farming units. Soil data collection through household and farm surveys may also
provide a much needed vehicle to groundtruth remote sensing information and calibrate soil models. In
this vein, fostering stronger linkages between national EthioSIS soil data and surveys like the Ethiopian
Rural Socioeconomic Survey, a household panel survey supported by the LSMS-ISA, offers great
opportunities from the research and operational perspectives.

Evidence from the Ethiopia LASER study suggests that subjective farmer assessments of soil quality
poorly explain objective laboratory results and lack intra-household variation. Spectral analysis has been
proven to near-perfectly predict key soil parameters as measured by conventional wet chemistry methods
while providing highly detailed data that can be useful in policy aimed at increasing agricultural output,
such as fertilizer input programs and identifying optimal crop selection, as well as agricultural
productivity analysis. Improving agricultural statistics by reducing the uncertainties in soil quality
assessment via objective measurement can enable better decision-making, both at micro and macro levels.




                                                                                                              25
References
AfSIS. 2014. The Africa soil information service. <http://www.africasoils.net> (Accessed 2015.07.10)

Aynekulu, E., Carletto, C., Gourlay, S., Shepherd, K. (forthcoming). Spectral Soil Analysis & Household
    Surveys: A Guidebook for Integration. The World Bank, Washington, D.C., and World Agroforestry
    Centre, Nairobi.

Aynekulu, E., Carletto, C., Gourlay, S., Shepherd, K. (2016). Soil Sampling in Household Surveys:
    Experience from Ethiopia. The World Bank, Washington, D.C., and World Agroforestry Centre,
    Nairobi. Available at: http://go.worldbank.org/PYIZRV60K0

Barrett, C.B., Bellemare, M.F., and Hou, J.Y. (2010). “Reconsidering Conventional Explanations of the
     Inverse Productivity-Size Relationship”, World Development, 38(1), pp. 88-97.

Bellon-Maurel V., McBratney A. 2011. Near-infrared (NIR) and mid-infrared (MIR) spectroscopic
     techniques for assessing the amount of carbon stock in soils e Critical review and research
     perspectives. Soil Biology & Biochemistry 43:1398-1410.

Bhalla, S. and P. Roy (1988). ‘Mis-Specification in Farm Productivity Analysis: The Role of Land
     Quality’, Oxford Economic Papers, New Series 40(1): 55-73.

Cakmak, I. (2002). “Plant nutrition research: Priorities to meet human needs for food in sustainable
    ways,” Plant and Soil, 247, pp. 3-24.

Carletto, C., S. Savastano and A. Zezza (2013). ‘Fact or Artefact: The Impact of Measurement Errors on
     the Farm Size-Productivity Relationship’, Journal of Development Economics, 103: 254–26.

Carletto, G., Gourlay, S., and Winters, P. (2015). “From Guesstimates to GPStimates: Land Area
     Measurement and Implications for Agricultural Analysis,” Journal of African Economies, first
     published online May 29, 2015 doi:10.1093/jae/ejv011.

Cassman, K.G. (1999). “Ecological intensification of cereal production systems: Yield potential, soil
    quality, and precision agriculture,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
    States of America, 96(11), pp: 5952-5959; doi:10.1073/pnas.96.11.5952.

Cobo JG, Dercon G, Yekeye T, Chapungu L, Kadzere C, Murwira A, Delve R, Cadisch J. (2010).
    Integration of mid-infrared spectroscopy and geostatistics in the assessment of soil spatial variability
    at landscape level. Geoderma 158:398–411.

Conant RT, Ogle S, Paul EA, Paustian K. (2011). Measuring and monitoring soil organic carbon stocks in
    agricultural lands for climate mitigation. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 9:169–173.

Croft H, Kuhn NJ, Anderson, K. (2012). On the use of remote sensing techniques for monitoring spatio-
     temporal soil organic carbon dynamics in agricultural systems. Catena 94: 64–74

CSA (Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia). (2013). Dataset from Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey
   (2013-14) / Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture. Retrieved
   from: http://go.worldbank.org/ZK2ZDZYDD0


                                                                                                         26
Dawoe, E.K., Quashie-Sam, J., Isaac, M.E. and Oppong, S.K. (2012). “Exploring farmers’ local
   knowledge and perceptions of soil fertility and management in the Ashanti Region of Ghana”,
   Geoderma, Elsevier B.V., Vol. 179-180, pp. 96–103.

Desbiez, A., Matthews, R., Tripathi, B. and Ellis-Jones, J. (2004). “Perceptions and assessment of soil
    fertility by farmers in the mid-hills of Nepal”, Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 103(1), pp.
    191–206.

Duflo, E., Kremer, M. and Robinson, J. (2008). “How High Are Rates of Return to Fertilizer? Evidence
    from Field Experiments in Kenya,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 98(2), pp.
    482-488.

FAO. (1983). Guidelines: Land Evaluation for Rain-fed Agriculture. Soil Bulletin No 52, Food and
   Agriculture Organization, Rome, pp. 237.

FAO. (2015). “Healthy soils are the basis for healthy food production,” I4405E/1/02.15. Available from:
   http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4405e.pdf (Accessed 07/21/2015).

FAO, IFAD and WFP. (2015). The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2015.

    Meeting the 2015 international hunger targets: taking stock of uneven progress. Rome, FAO.

Fernandes, J.C., Gamero, C.A., Rodrigues, J.G.L., and Miras-Avalos, J.M.. (2011). Determination of the
    quality index of a Paleudult under sunflower culture and different management systems. Soil and
    Tillage Research, 112: pp. 167–174.
Gray, L.C. and Morant, P. (2003). “Reconciling indigenous knowledge with scientific assessment of soil
    fertility changes in southwestern Burkina Faso”, Geoderma, 111(3-4), pp. 425–437.

Hengl T, Heuvelink GBM, Kempen B, Leenaars JGB, Walsh MG, Shepherd KD, et al. (2015) Mapping
   Soil Properties of Africa at 250 m Resolution: Random Forests Significantly Improve Current
   Predictions. PLoS ONE 10(6): e0125814. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0125814

IIASA/FAO. (2012). Global Agro‐ecological Zones (GAEZ v3.0). IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria and FAO,
    Rome, Italy.
Karlen, D.L., and Stott, D.E. (1994). A framework for evaluating physical and chemical indicators of soil
     quality. In: Doran JW, Coleman DC, Bezdicek DF, Stewart BA, editors. Defining soil quality for a
     sustainable environment. Madison, WI: Soil Science Society of America. pp. 53–72.

Kelly, Allison C. and C. Leigh Anderson. (2016). “Comparing farmer and measured assessments of soil
     quality in Tanzania: Do they align?”, Journal of Natural Resources and Development, 06, pp. 55-65.

Kumar, N., and A. R. Quisumbing. (2011). “Access, Adoption, and Diffusion: Understanding the Long-
   Term Impacts of Improved Vegetable and Fish Technologies in Bangladesh.” Journal of
   Development Effectiveness 3 (2): 193–219.

Lamb, R.L. (2003). ‘Inverse Productivity: Land Quality, Labor Markets, and Measurement Error’,
   Journal of Development Economics, 71(1): 71-95.



                                                                                                      27
Lobell, D.B., Cassman, K.G., and Field, C.B. (2009). “Crop Yield Gaps: Their Importance, Magnitudes,
    and Causes,” Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 34, pp: 179-204.

Lorenz, K., & Lal, R. (2005). The depth distribution of soil organic carbon in relation to land use and
    management and the potential of carbon sequestration in subsoil horizons. Advances in
    agronomy, 88, 35-66.

Malawi NBS (National Bureau of Statistics). (2013). Dataset from Integrated Household Panel Survey
    (2013) / Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture. Retrieved from:
    http://go.worldbank.org/NOXNI9YDS0

Marenya, P., & Barrett, C. B. (2009). “Soil quality and fertility use rates among smallholder farmers in
    western Kenya”, Agricultural Economics, 40(5), pp. 561-572.

Mtambanengwe, F. and P. Mapfumo. (2005). “Organic matter management as an underlying cause for
    soil fertility gradients on smallholder farms in Zimbabwe”, Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 73,
    pp. 227-243.

Mukherjee A., and R. Lal. (2014). Comparison of Soil Quality Index Using Three Methods. PLoS ONE
   9(8): e105981. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0105981

Odendo, M., Obare, G. and Salasya, B. (2010). “Farmers’ perceptions and knowledge of soil fertility
    degradation in two contrasting sites in western Kenya”, Land Degradation & Development, 21(6),
    pp. 557–564.

Rossel RAV, Webster R, Bui EN, Baldoc JA. (2014). Baseline map of organic carbon in Australian soil
    to support national carbon accounting and monitoring under climate change. Global Change Biology
    20:2953–2970

Sawa, P. (2016, September 26). Ethiopia soil map arms farmers with new fertilisers in climate fight.
    Reuters. Retrieved from http://www.reuters.com/article/us-ethiopia-climatechange-agriculture-
    idUSKCN11Z197.

Shepherd, K.D., and Walsh, M.G. (2002). Development of reflectance spectral libraries for
    characterization of soil properties. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 66:988–998.

Shepherd, K.D., and Walsh, M.G. (2007). Infrared spectroscopy-enabling an evidence-based diagnostic
    surveillance approach to agricultural and environmental management in developing countries.
    Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy 15:1-19.

Tanzania NBS (National Bureau of Statistics). (2012). Dataset from Tanzania National Panel Survey
    (2012-13) / Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture. Retrieved
    from: http://go.worldbank.org/EJMAC1YDY0

Tatwangire, A. and Holden, S. (2013). Land Tenure Reforms, Land Market Participation and the Farm
    Size – Productivity Relationship in Uganda. In Land Tenure Reform in Asia and Africa, pp.187–210.

Tittonell, P., Shepherd, K.D., Vanlauwe, B., and K.E. Giller. (2008). “Unravelling the effects of soil and
     crop management on maize productivity in smallholder agricultural systems of western Kenya - An



                                                                                                       28
    application of classification and regression tree analysis”, Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment,
    123, pp. 137-150.

UBOS (Uganda Bureau of Statistics). (2013). Dataset from Uganda National Panel Survey (2012-13) /
   Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture. Retrieved from:
   http://go.worldbank.org/FS2M7AYE00

World Bank. (2016, November 8). Scaling Climate-Smart Agriculture in Ethiopia, from the Ground Up.
    Retrieved     from     http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2016/11/08/scaling-climate-smart-
    agriculture-in-ethiopia-from-the-ground-up.




                                                                                                      29
Annexes
Annex I. Subjective Soil Questionnaire Excerpt




                                                 30
    Annex II. Example of Spectral Soil Signatures
              0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8




                                                                                                                     Mid-infrared spectra signature
                                                                                                                     of soils with different level of soil
                                                                                                             (a)
Absorbance




                                                                                                                     organic carbon content collected
                                                4000     3500        3000   2500      2000    1500    1000     500   from the study area.
             1.8




                                                       SOC (%)
                                                                            1612               1551
             1.7




                                                            9.59
             1.6




                                                            8.64

                                                            0.60
             1.5




                                                            0.55
             1.4
             1.3




                                                                                                             (b)
             1.2




                                                1700               1650        1600            1550           1500
                                                                                         -1
                                                                    Wavenumber (cm )




                                                                                                                                                             31
