                                                      WPS8222


 Policy Research Working Paper                       8222




Corporate Debt Maturity in Developing Countries
                Sources of Long- and Short-Termism

                                 Juan J. Cortina
                                 Tatiana Didier
                               Sergio L. Schmukler




 Development Research Group
 Macroeconomics and Growth Team
   &
 Development Economics Vice Presidency
 Strategy and Operations Team
 October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8222


  Abstract
 This paper documents to what extent firms from develop-                            in international issuances (accounting for most of the pro-
 ing countries borrow short versus long term, using data                            ceeds) are significantly smaller. Developing country firms
 on corporate bond and syndicated loan markets. Contrary                            borrow longer term in syndicated loan markets, which they
 to claims in the literature based on firm balance sheets,                          partially use for infrastructure projects. However, only large
 firms from developing countries borrow through bonds and                           firms from developing countries (similar in size to those
 syndicated loans at maturities similar to those obtained                           from developed ones) issue bonds and syndicated loans. The
 by developed country firms. The composition and use of                             short-termism in developing countries is partly explained
 financing matters. Firms from developing countries borrow                          by a lower proportion of firms using these markets, with
 shorter term in domestic bond markets, but the differences                         more firms relying on other shorter-term instruments.




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group and the Strategy and
  Operations Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at jcortinalorente@
  worldbank.org, tdidier@worldbank.org, and sschmukler@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                Corporate Debt Maturity in Developing Countries:
                           Sources of Long- and Short-Termism



               Juan J. Cortina                     Tatiana Didier             Sergio L. Schmukler *




JEL Classification Codes: F34, F65, G0, G10, G15, G21, G32
Keywords: capital raising, corporate bonds, domestic and international debt markets, developing
countries, firm financing, issuance maturity, long-term debt, short-term debt, syndicated loans


* We received very helpful comments from Andreas Antoniades, Roberto Fattal Jaef, Stephany Griffith-Jones, Ruth Llovet,
Andrea Presbitero, María Soledad Martínez Pería, Luis Servén, two anonymous referees, and participants at related
presentations held at the ASSA Annual Meetings (Chicago), Bocconi University, Borsa Istanbul, Central Bank of
Argentina, Central Bank of Chile, CSEF-University of Naples Federico II, Georgetown University, the International
Monetary Fund, University of Buenos Aires, University of Cape Town, and the World Bank (Washington, DC and Malaysia
Knowledge and Research Hub). For financial support, we are grateful to the World Bank Knowledge for Change Program
(KCP) and Strategic Research Program (SRP) and to the Assonime/CEPR Research Programme on Restarting European
Long-Term Investment Finance (RELTIF). The paper is part of the background work prepared for the World Bank 2016
Global Financial Development Report and is forthcoming in World Economy.
Email addresses: jcortinalorente@worldbank.org, tdidier@worldbank.org, sschmukler@worldbank.org.
1.       Introduction

The perceived lack of long-term finance for firms in developing countries is a major concern for

academics and policy makers (G20, 2013; Beck, 2016; World Bank, 2016). Long-term debt allows

firms to pursue costly investments that take time to mature. Moreover, the relative short-term liability

structure, or “short-termism,” in corporate balance sheets can lead to costly financial crises if short-

term debt becomes difficult to roll over.1 However, little evidence exists on the actual maturity of

firms’ liabilities. Most of the empirical evidence is based on the so-called “short- and long-term debt”

(below and above one year) gathered from firm-level balance sheet information. Using this type of

evidence, studies find that the ratio of long-term debt (maturity greater than one year) to total liabilities

is typically lower in developing countries than in developed ones (Mayer, 1990; Caprio and Demirgüç-

Kunt, 1998; Demirgüç-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1999; Giannetti, 2003; Fan et al., 2012; Demirgüç-Kunt

et al., 2015). Similar evidence has been shown using bank-level balance sheet data, which focuses on

total bank credit granted to corporations, aggregated in broad maturity buckets (World Bank, 2016).

         In this paper, we aim to complement this literature by examining with more granularity the

maturity at which firms from developing countries borrow in primary debt markets, and by

systematically analyzing where there might be significant differences in the debt maturity at issuance

between developing and developed countries. Hence, we are able to assess the extent to which firms

borrow at the short end (maturities closer to one year) vs. the long end (maturities closer to ten years

or longer) of the maturity spectrum. Moreover, we analyze the debt issued by developing and

developed country firms when using different instruments and market locations, when borrowing for

different purposes, and when firms vary by size. We also contrast the evidence on maturity from

primary debt markets with that from firm balance sheets.


1For a broader discussion on short-termism in developing countries including the sovereign sector, see Eichengreen and
Hausmann (1999), Rodrik and Velasco (2000), Tirole (2003), Borensztein et al. (2005), Brunnermeier (2009), Jeanne (2009),
Raddatz (2010), Broner et al. (2013), and Opazo et al. (2015), among others.

                                                           1
         To conduct the analysis, we study corporate bond and syndicated loan markets, which have

become key sources of new external finance for corporations in both developing and developed

countries. These markets have rapidly expanded over the last decades, achieving a hefty size.2 For

instance, the annual amount of debt financing raised in these markets increased more than 6-fold from

1991 to 2014, when it reached $5.1 trillion or about 7 percent of world gross domestic product (GDP).

We work with transaction-level data on publicly and privately placed corporate bonds and syndicated

loans issued in both domestic and international markets during 1991-2014. Issuers of bonds and

syndicated loans encompass both listed and unlisted firms domiciled in developed and developing

countries. The data set includes 266,539 individual debt issuances conducted by 57,513 firms from 82

countries (39 developed and 43 developing).

         Our analysis shows that, on aggregate, firms from developing countries raise capital through

corporate bonds and syndicated loans at maturities slightly longer than those issued by firms from

developed countries. In particular, the (value) weighted average maturity of the debt issued by firms

from developing and developed countries is 7.3 and 6.2 years, respectively. In fact, the average

maturity of debt at issuance is, if anything, shorter in countries with higher GDP per capita and higher

private credit-to-GDP ratios. The differences in debt maturity at issuance between developed and

developing countries become statistically insignificant once we control for industry-year effects.

Developing countries with larger debt markets do not drive these patterns. In sum, contrary to what

one might expect, firms from developing countries do not borrow shorter term in these markets.

         The pattern in aggregate debt maturity across firms from developing and developed countries

masks substantial differences in bond and syndicated loan markets, domestic and foreign markets, and


2 The development of regulated secondary loan markets and independently rated loan issuances have made syndicated
loan and corporate bond markets converge as two different, but complementary sources of financing for firms (Altunbas
et al., 2010). Some studies estimate that syndicated loans account for roughly one-third of the total outstanding loans, and
their relative importance has increased over time. Moreover, syndicated loans also tend to be larger than other types of
loans (Godlewski and Weill, 2008; Ivashina and Scharfstein, 2010; Huang, 2010; Cerutti et al., 2015).

                                                             2
the use of proceeds. The maturities of bonds issued domestically in developing countries are, on

average, 2.6 years shorter than those issued domestically in developed countries. However, domestic

bond markets are less important in developing countries. Firms issue substantially larger amounts of

bonds abroad, at significantly longer maturities, than in domestic markets. In fact, the differences in

maturity between developing and developed countries are much smaller for international bond

issuances (about 7 months shorter in developing countries). Furthermore, the maturities of syndicated

loans issued by developing countries are, on average, 2.6 years longer than those in developed

countries. Underlying this pattern, firms from developing countries borrow more heavily for

infrastructure projects (project finance), which entail rather long maturities (more than 11 years on

average). But even within syndicated loans for project financing (as well as for all other uses of

proceeds), developing country firms issue loans that are about 6 months longer than those issued by

developed country firms. The remaining differences in maturities come mostly from the use of

domestic syndicated loan markets, which provide longer-term financing in developing countries, even

after controlling for the use of proceeds, industry-year fixed effects, currency, and type of rate (fixed

vs. floating). Syndicated loans issued internationally show similar maturities in developed and

developing countries after controlling for those factors.

        Importantly, the patterns mentioned above apply mostly to a select group of large

corporations. In fact, developing country firms accessing bond and syndicated loan markets are of

size similar to those from developed countries, even though smaller firms typically operate in

developing countries (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014; Poschke, 2014; Bento and Restuccia, 2017). Among

the bottom quantiles of the firm size distribution (FSD) of debt issuers (comprised largely of domestic

issuers), firms from developing countries are even larger than those from developed ones. Moreover,

the debt maturity patterns documented above hold across the FSD of debt issuers. That is, firms from

developing countries access debt markets at maturities similar to (and sometimes even longer than)

                                                   3
those from developed ones across the entire FSD of debt issuers. Within country groups, the largest

firms capture the bulk of the debt financing through both bonds and syndicated loans and typically

borrow at longer terms than smaller corporations.

       The short-termism in developing countries’ debt observed in firm balance sheets is partly

explained by a lower proportion of firms using bond and syndicated loan markets, which are longer

term than other debt instruments not analyzed here. We arrive to this conclusion by matching the

transaction-level data on bond and syndicated loan issuances with balance sheet data for publicly listed

firms. Balance sheet data show that the median firm from developing countries holds a lower ratio of

long-term debt to total liabilities than firms from developed countries (15 percent and 19 percent,

respectively). However, when considering only firms that use bond or syndicated loan markets, the

ratio of long-term debt to total liabilities goes up and becomes similar across developing and developed

countries (30 and 31 percent, respectively). These patterns are consistent with the findings in this

paper using transaction-level data, but contrast with the evidence in the existing literature based on

balance sheets from firms (or banks) that argues that developing country firms borrow shorter term

than developed country ones. Moreover, when focusing on firms that do not use bond or syndicated

loan markets, the ratio of long-term debt to total liabilities drops to 12 and 14 percent for developing

and developed countries, respectively. This indicates that other debt instruments (not explicitly

analyzed here) are relatively shorter term. Additional evidence suggests that the ratio of listed firms

using bond and syndicated loan markets to all listed firms correlates positively with the level of GDP

per capita, reinforcing the idea that a greater proportion of firms from developing countries use these

shorter-term instruments.

       Overall, our results suggest that debt short-termism in developing countries is rooted in certain

areas. One source is domestic bonds, which firms from developing countries issue at shorter maturity

than firms from developed countries. Another one lies in more traditional bank loans or other types

                                                   4
of debt. These other debt instruments seem to be shorter term for both developing and developed

countries, as reflected in the balance sheet evidence. Developing country firms appear to use these

other markets more heavily. A third source can be smaller firms (outside of our sample) that might

borrow shorter term than larger ones, to the extent that the patterns shown in this paper hold for

them. Thus, the composition of instruments and firms matters when comparing the overall maturity

structure across countries and when trying to understand its determinants.

        Our findings are related to three other strands of the literature. First, this paper is related to

recent research examining several debt instruments at once based on issuance data (as opposed to the

vast number of papers focused on a single instrument). For example, a few studies analyze syndicated

loan-bond substitutions during credit crises (Adrian et al., 2013; Becker and Ivashina, 2014; Cortina et

al., 2016). By examining two widely used instruments across domestic and international markets, this

paper provides new evidence on the firms’ aggregate debt maturity that contrasts with the evidence

based on firm or bank balance sheets. We are able to characterize where the long-term debt financing

comes from for firms from developing countries. Moreover, by distinguishing the use of domestic

versus international bond markets, we provide evidence suggesting that firms from developing

countries might consider these markets as complements, using international bond markets for longer-

term financing and domestic bond markets for shorter-term financing.

        Second, several policy reports and academic papers discuss the perils associated with the recent

debt expansion in emerging markets (Shin, 2013; Acharya et al., 2015; IMF, 2015; McCauley et al.,

2015; Sobrun and Turner, 2015; The Economist, 2015, 2016). These studies argue that the rise in

foreign currency debt has increased corporate vulnerability to the extent that debt burdens would get

exacerbated in the event of capital flights or sudden currency depreciations. Moreover, part of the

literature argues that a large proportion of the foreign borrowing by developing countries has been

held in cash, implying an increase in risk taking by firms that use that cash to lend to other corporations

                                                    5
(Bruno and Shin, 2017). However, little attention has been devoted to the maturity structure of this

new debt. We provide evidence that much of the corporate debt that developing countries raised

recently is at the longer end of the maturity spectrum, possibly diminishing the risks associated with

foreign currency financing. As benchmark, we use the borrowing patterns of firms from developed

countries.

         Third, another strand of the literature focuses on the firm-level determinants of debt maturity.

Existing theories are based on underlying hypotheses of agency costs, asymmetric information,

liquidation risks, and differentiated tax treatments.3 In particular, to the extent that larger firms are

relatively less opaque, size and maturity will be positively correlated. Our results are consistent with

this prediction as they show that larger firms issue bonds and syndicated loans at longer maturities

than smaller firms. Hence, should smaller firms gain access to debt markets in a certain country over

time, the aggregate maturity structure of that country would naturally decline (Custodio et al., 2012).

         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3

examines differences in aggregate maturity by developed and developing country firms. Section 4

analyzes how compositional factors can affect the maturity of debt issued, focusing on where and

which types of firms obtain long-term finance. Section 5 uses balance sheet information to compare

the type of debt issued by publicly listed firms across countries. Section 6 concludes.



2.       Data

To assess the debt maturity at issuance for firms from developing and developed countries, we

assemble a comprehensive transaction-level data set covering capital raising activity in corporate bonds



3 Myers (1977), Diamond (1991), and Rey and Stiglitz (1993) provide theoretical foundations on why firm-specific factors
can influence the maturity structure of liabilities. Several papers provide evidence consistent with these theories for
individual (mostly developed) countries. See, for example, Barclay and Smith (1995), Guedes and Opler (1996), Berger et
al. (2005), and Highfield (2008).

                                                           6
and syndicated loans around the world from 1991 through 2014. Our data on firm debt issuances

come from the Thomson Reuters Security Data Corporation (SDC) Platinum database (June 2015

version), which provides information on new issuances of publicly and privately placed bonds and

syndicated loans with an original maturity of more than one year.4 Given that the SDC Platinum

database does not collect data on debt issuances with maturities shorter than one year, the data set

does not cover commercial paper. We exclude all financial sector issuances and focus our analysis on

financing to the non-financial sector. We also exclude all public sector issuances, comprising securities

issued by national, local, and regional governments, government agencies, regional agencies, and

multilateral organizations. The data set includes 57,513 (listed and unlisted) firms and 266,539 capital

raising issuances: 105,734 bond issuances and 160,805 syndicated loan issuances.5

         One source of variation in debt maturity studied in the paper is the market location, namely,

domestic and international markets. For corporate bonds, we compare the market location in which

bonds are issued to the issuing firm’s nationality to classify the capital raising issuances as domestic or

international. For offerings that take place simultaneously in more than one market, we consider

tranches in each market as separate issuances. The data set includes 80,162 bond issuances in domestic

markets and 25,572 bond issuances in international markets. For syndicated loans, we compare the

nationality of the banks that participate in the deal with the issuing firm’s nationality to distinguish

between domestic or cross-border bank lending. Domestic loans are those in which only domestic

banks participate in the syndication, whereas international loans entail the participation of at least one

foreign bank.6 The data set includes 77,712 domestic syndicated loans and 83,093 international

syndicated loans.


4
  The data set does not include mortgage-backed securities or any other asset-backed securities.
5 Unlisted firms issued about 45 and 36 percent of the bonds and syndicated loans, respectively, in the sample.
6 For robustness, we consider two alternative definitions of international syndicated lending: when only foreign banks

participate in the deal; or when more than half of the banks that participate in the deal are foreign. The results are
qualitatively similar to the ones reported here.

                                                          7
         To examine balance sheet data and the comparative use of debt markets across countries, we

match the data set on security issuances from SDC Platinum with firm-level balance sheet information

from the Bureau van Dijk’s Orbis database from 2003 to 2011. The latter covers publicly listed

companies, providing a rather homogeneous sample of firms. By omitting unlisted firms from the

analysis using the matched data, the sample excludes firms that are (1) relatively small and sometimes

informal, (2) likely to have different accounting standards, and (3) less likely to issue in capital markets.

After matching the data sets, we are left with a sample of 56,615 listed firms with 77,458 debt issuances

for this part of the analysis.

         To study how firm size relates to the use of debt markets, we proxy firm size by the average

size of its issuances over the entire sample period. For robustness, we explore two alternative measures

of firm size. First, we examine the firms’ total assets at the time of issuance, which is available in the

SDC data set. However, this information has limited coverage: 48 percent of the corporate bond

issuances and 34 percent of the syndicated loan issuances. Second, we restrict the analysis to listed

firms and study the total assets reported in their balance sheets (from Bureau Van Dijk’s Orbis

database). The results are quantitatively and qualitatively similar to the ones reported in the paper.

         We classify the sample of countries in the paper as either developing or developed, following

the World Bank classification as of 2012. Developed countries are those with a gross national income

(GNI) per capita in 2011 above $12,476. All other countries are classified as developing countries.

The final data set comprises 82 countries, 39 of them are developed and 43 developing.7 All reported

statistics are in U.S. dollars at 2011 constant prices. Appendix Table 1 reports the number of issuances

and issuers of corporate bonds and syndicated loans per country, splitting between developed and

developing countries. The results are robust to two alternative definitions of developing countries.



7 Strictly speaking, and as noted in Appendix Table 1, a couple of the countries we analyze are economies rather than self-
standing countries. But for ease of exposition, we use the generic term “countries.”

                                                            8
Specifically, we consider as developing countries those outside the G20 group of countries and non-

OECD countries. The results in the paper also hold when excluding the two largest developing

countries by population: China and India.



3.       Cross-country Comparison of Debt Maturity at Issuance

The capital raising activity through corporate bonds and syndicated loans has rapidly expanded

worldwide since the early 1990s. In developing countries, the total amount of debt issued in 2014 was

about $0.5 trillion, 13 times larger than in 1991. In developed countries, there was about a 6-fold

increase over the same period, with total issuance reaching about $4.6 trillion in 2014. Despite the

rapid growth, these debt markets (measured by the total amount raised over GDP) remained smaller

in developing countries (at 2.1 percent) than in developed countries (at 10 percent) in 2014.

         Notwithstanding these differences in relative market size, the aggregate maturity at issuance in

these primary debt markets is slightly longer in developing countries than in developed ones. In

particular, the weighted average maturity of all bonds and syndicated loans issued per year by firms

from developing countries is 7.3 years during 1991-2014 (Table 1). Surprisingly, the maturity for the

debt issued by firms from developed countries is shorter, averaging 6.2 years over the same period.

Debt issuances with maturity beyond 10 years capture 22 percent of the total in developing countries

and 15 percent of the total in developed ones. Moreover, the weighted average maturity remains fairly

stable over the sample period, especially during the 2000s, for both developing and developed

countries (Figure 1).8

         To assess whether these differences in debt maturity at issuance between developed and

developing countries are statistically significant, we regress the maturity of bond and syndicated loan



8 Cortina et al. (2016) show that the stability in overall debt maturity around the global financial crisis of 2008-09 can be
traced back to firms actively switching from relatively shorter-term markets toward longer-term ones.

                                                             9
issuances on a dummy variable indicating whether the issuance is from a firm from a developing

country. The results in Table 2 (columns a and b) show that firms from both sets of countries borrow

debt at similar maturities after industry-year effects are considered. Moreover, countries with larger

financial systems do not drive these debt maturity patterns. In fact, there is a negative correlation

between the average debt maturity at issuance per country and both the ratio of GDP per capita and

private credit to GDP (Figure 2, Panel A).9



4.       Debt Composition and Maturity

Next, we examine whether the similarity in debt maturity between firms from developing and

developed countries that issue corporate bonds and syndicated loans holds across several dimensions.

In particular, we analyze if there is some compositional heterogeneity between developing and

developed countries across types of debt instruments, use of proceeds, market location, and firm size.



4.1.    Type of Instrument

Although the weighted average maturity of all debt issued by developing and developed countries is

similar, the split between bonds and syndicated loans unveils significant differences in debt maturity

across countries. Corporate bonds are on average shorter term in developing countries, whereas the

opposite occurs for syndicated loans (Table 1). The weighted average maturity of bonds issued by

firms from developing and developed countries is 7.9 years and 9.8 years, respectively, a difference of

almost 2 years. In contrast, syndicated loans for firms from developing countries have an average

maturity of 7.1 years, about 2.6 years longer than the average 4.5 years obtained by firms from

developed countries.



9Appendix Figure 1 presents more detailed information on the weighted average maturity of debt at issuance per country
during 1991-2014. It shows that there is no clear pattern of which types of countries issue longer-term debt.

                                                         10
          The sectorial composition of issuing firms does not explain these differences in borrowing

maturities between developing and developed countries. Whereas there are differences in the amount

raised across firms from different sectors, corporate bonds issued by firms across all major sectors

(but for construction) typically have shorter average maturities in developing countries than in

developed ones (Figure 3, Panel A). An analogous pattern in the opposite direction holds for

syndicated loan markets. That is, syndicated loans to firms from developing countries have longer

average maturities than those to firms from developed countries across all major sectors (but for retail

trade).

          To formally test these differences across bonds and syndicated loans, we regress separately the

maturity of bond and syndicated loan issuances on a developing country dummy, controlling in some

specifications for time-varying industry-specific factors (Table 2, columns c-f). The estimated

differences in maturity in bond and syndicated loan markets between developing and developed

countries are large and significant. Differences across industries for issuing firms have little effect on

the estimates. For example, the estimates indicate that debt issuances by firms from developing

countries are around 2 years shorter in bond markets, but around 1.6 years longer in syndicated loan

markets when compared to issuances by firms from developed countries. In line with these results,

the negative correlation at the country level between the average debt maturity at issuance and both

the level of GDP per capita and private credit to GDP becomes steeper when focusing only on

syndicated loans, but turns positive when focusing on corporate bond issuances (Figure 2, Panels B

and C).10




10In unreported results, we find very similar results when using other measures of financial market development, such as
the level of private bond market capitalization to GDP.


                                                          11
4.2.     Use of Proceeds

The transaction-level data on capital raising activity contain detailed information on the use of

proceeds from syndicated loan issuances.11 There is significant heterogeneity across countries in the

amount raised for different purposes. Such a heterogeneity is arguably an important factor underlying

the relatively longer maturity terms for syndicated loans from developing countries in comparison to

those from developed countries.

         Specifically, developing country firms use the proceeds from syndicated loans more intensively

for project finance than firms from the developed world, about 35 percent of all syndicated loans

contracted by developing countries versus about 5 percent of those by developed countries (Figure 3,

Panel B). Importantly, syndicated loans for project finance, which consists primarily of infrastructure

projects, have the longest average maturity (about 11 years) across syndicated loans for all types of

purposes.12

         Panel regressions on the transaction-level issuance data confirm the relevance of the

differences in the use of proceeds for the maturity of syndicated loans. We regress the maturity of the

issuances on four dummy variables that capture broad categories of how firms use the funds raised

through syndicated loans: general corporate purposes, project finance, refinancing and capital

structure management, and others. Acquisition financing and leveraged buyout operations is the

omitted category, and thus the reference group in the estimations. The specification also includes

industry-year dummies. The results, reported in column a of Table 3, are consistent with the summary

statistics. They show that the maturity of syndicated loan issuances significantly varies across the types



11 For corporate bond market issuances, the data on the use of proceeds is much less informative. More than 60 percent
of the issuances are categorized as general corporate purposes. Nonetheless, the differences in maturity at issuance between
developing and developed countries is consistent across bond issuances within a given use of proceeds. Bond issuances
are typically shorter in the former than in the latter countries.
12 In fact, most of the financing for infrastructure projects comes from syndicated loans. Engel et al. (2014) provide

evidence that in the United States and other developed countries the ratio of bonds to syndicated loans for infrastructure
financing is 1:5 and 1:6, respectively. The ratio in Asia (excluding China) is 1:8 and in Latin America 1:3.

                                                            12
of projects funded. Project finance is the one with the longest average maturity, even after controlling

for industry-year effects. Project finance syndicated loans are almost 5 years longer than syndicated

loans financing acquisitions and leveraged buyout operations. Nonetheless, firms from developing

countries issue syndicated loans at longer maturities within any given use of proceeds (but for

acquisition financing and leverage buyout or LBO) than firms from developed countries (Figure 3,

Panel B).

        We then evaluate the extent to which these differences in syndicated loan maturity across the

different uses of proceeds explain the differences in aggregate maturity at issuance between developing

and developed countries. To do so, we regress the maturity of syndicated loan issuances on a

developing country dummy and dummies for the different use of proceeds raised, controlling for time-

varying industry-specific effects. Because debt transactions contracted at floating rates might be more

prominent for some types of countries and have different maturity terms than those contracted at

fixed rates, we also include a floating rate dummy in some specifications. These regressions are

estimated using either all syndicated loan issuances, only project finance syndicated loans, or only non-

project finance syndicated loans. The results are reported in columns b-e of Table 3.

        The estimated differences in syndicated loan maturities between developing and developed

countries become smaller after controlling for the use of proceeds, about 6 months (down from 1.6

years). This result is not surprising to the extent that, as discussed earlier, there is more syndicated

loan financing for project finance in developing countries than in developed ones. However, there are

still significant differences in maturity not explained by the use of proceeds. In other words, even

within syndicated loan issuances for project financing, the estimations show that developing country

firms issue loans about 6 months longer than those issued by developed country firms. Similar

differences in syndicated loan maturities are observed for non-project finance syndicated loans.




                                                   13
4.3.     Market Location

In an era of globalization and market integration, the distinction between domestic and international

debt markets is important. This is especially the case for firms from developing countries to the extent

that international markets, which tend to be located in the world’s most developed financial centers,

might offer these firms access to financing that is not available domestically.

         International markets account for a significant share of debt financing. They account for over

80 percent of the total amount raised in the median country in the sample.13 International markets

represent more than 50 percent of the total capital raising activity through bonds in 66 of the 82

countries analyzed (Figure 4).

         International markets also play a key role in the provision of long-term bond financing for

developing countries. Indeed, firms from developing countries issue bonds abroad at longer maturities

than at home markets.14 Bond issuances by firms from developing countries have an average maturity

of 9.6 years when issued abroad, contrasting with an average maturity of 6.6 years when issued

domestically. On the other hand, firms from developed countries issue domestic and international

bonds at similar maturities.

         These patterns suggest that the reported difference in the average maturity of bond financing

between developing and developed countries comes, to a significant extent, from the capital raising

activity in domestic bond markets. Figure 5 clearly displays this point. The cumulative distribution

function (CDF) for international bonds issued by firms from developing countries lies to the right of

the CDF for domestic bond issuances, indicating that shorter terms are obtained in local markets.

Moreover, the distribution of international issuances by developing countries closely resembles the


13 In aggregate terms, the total amount of debt issued abroad accounts for about 40 percent of the total amount raised by
firms from both developing and developed countries. Most of the international debt issuances are conducted in a few
developed countries. International bond issuances take place mostly in the Euro area (61 percent), the United States (16
percent), and the United Kingdom (8 percent).
14 Consistent with this finding, Schmukler and Vesperoni (2006) show that firms in developing countries with access to

international markets lengthen the maturity structure of their balance sheets during periods of financial liberalization.

                                                           14
CDF of bond issuances by developed countries, suggesting that capital is raised abroad at similar

maturities.

        To test whether the differences in the maturity between domestic and international bonds

across countries are statistically significant, we regress the maturity of issuances on a developing

country dummy. In an alternative specification, we also include a dummy variable indicating whether

the bonds are issued in international markets and an interaction between the international market and

the developing country dummies. All the specifications include industry-year fixed effects as well

dummies for the use of proceeds. We also want to ensure that the finding that developing country

firms issue abroad at relatively longer maturity does not simply reflect differences in other well-known

factors. For instance, issuances abroad are typically denominated in foreign currency, and bonds

denominated in hard currencies such as the U.S. dollar tend to have longer maturities. Hence, we

include in the regressions a dummy for bond issuances denominated in foreign currency and another

dummy for floating rate bonds.

        Overall, the results reported in Table 4 show that firms from developing countries not only

lengthen the maturity of their debt issuances by going abroad, but also do so relative to developed

countries. The estimates show that bond issuances by firms from developing countries are about 2

years shorter than those by firms from developed countries when controlling for industry-year effects,

use of proceeds, type of rate, and currency of denomination. Once the sample is restricted to

international bond issuances, the differences in maturity at issuance decrease to about 7 months,

implying a greater difference in bond maturity between developed and developing countries in local

markets. Indeed, the estimations in column c of Table 4 show that domestic issuances by firms from

developing countries are about 2.6 years shorter than domestic issuances by firms from developed

countries (as captured by the developing country dummy). This specification also shows that in

developed countries there are no significant differences in maturity between domestic and

                                                  15
international bond issuances (captured by the international dummy), but international issuances are

significantly longer term (about 2 years) than domestic ones in developing countries.

         Akin to the patterns in corporate bonds markets, for which international markets are sizeable,

a large share of loans is syndicated with the participation of foreign banks. For instance, syndicated

loans with at least one foreign bank account for 78 percent and 72 percent of the total lending to

developing and developed countries. The value of syndicated loans comprising only domestic banks

is in fact very low in many countries. The largest values of syndicated lending are originated within a

few economies, mainly the United States and the economies of Western Europe.15 India and China

are the only developing economies whose domestic markets capture more than 50 percent of the total

syndicated loan financing (Appendix Figure 2).

         In terms of maturity, the patterns for syndicated loans stand in sharp contrast to those for

bonds. The regression estimates in Table 4 show that domestic syndicated loans in developing

countries are linked to longer maturities relative to both developed countries and international

syndicated loans. For instance, the results in column d show that syndicated loan issuances by firms

from developing countries are about 4 months longer than those by firms from developed countries

when controlling for industry-year effects, use of proceeds, type of rate, and currency of

denomination. This difference becomes insignificant once only international syndicated loan issuances

are considered. Taken jointly, these two estimates indicate that, relative to firms from developed

countries, firms from developing countries borrow at greater maturities in domestic markets. Indeed,

the results in column f show that domestic issuances by developing countries are estimated to be 1.6

years longer than domestic issuances by developed countries (as captured by the developing country

dummy). This last specification also shows opposing patterns for domestic vs. international borrowing



15Banks in the United States and Western Europe originate around 31 percent and 36 percent of the syndicated loans to
developing countries.

                                                         16
through syndicated loans for developing and developed countries. Whereas firms from developing

countries tend to borrow at shorter terms (by 1.3 years) in foreign markets than in local markets, firms

from developed countries borrow at longer terms (6 months) abroad.



4.4.     Firm Size

Next, we examine the type of firms (in terms of size) that access debt markets in developing and

developed countries. Moreover, we study whether there is a positive correlation between firm size and

debt maturity (as some studies suggest) in the markets of bonds and syndicated loans, and whether

the patterns previously described hold across the FSD for debt issuers.16

         A noteworthy pattern emerges from the comparison of the FSD across countries: debt issuers

from developing countries are not smaller in size than those from developed countries (Figure 6). In

fact, the FSD for developing countries is to the right of that for developed countries in the bottom

quantiles, indicating that the smallest firms tapping the debt markets considered in this paper are

relatively larger in developing countries than in developed ones. In other words, the smallest

borrowers in bond and syndicated loan markets are predominantly from developed countries. This

contrasts with the evidence in the existing literature showing a positive correlation between the average

firm size and the country income level, using the universe of firms operating across countries.

         Panel regressions provide evidence consistent with the rightward-shifted FSD for developing

countries within the lower quantiles. The estimates show that domestic issuers, which are typically

smaller firms than those with access to international markets, are significantly larger in developing

countries, even after controlling for the industry fixed effects (Table 5). Specifically, the regression in



16 The analysis in this sub-section is conducted with data at the firm level, focusing on the weighted average maturity of
all issuances for each firm, calculated over the entire sample period. An analogous analysis conducted with data at the
transaction level provides results qualitatively similar to the ones reported here.


                                                           17
column a shows that issuers from developing countries are on average 22 percent larger than those

from developed countries.17 This pattern holds for both bond and syndicated loan issuers (columns d

and g). However, the estimates for international issuers only, defined as those firms with at least one

issuance abroad over the sample period, yield a different pattern. International debt issuers from

developing countries are as large as those from developed countries in bond markets, but smaller in

syndicated loan markets (columns e and h).

         The results imply that the larger size of the average issuer from developing countries is

explained by differences in the type of firms accessing domestic markets. Domestic bond and

syndicated loan issuers from developing countries are around 40 and 80 percent larger than those

from developed countries (columns f and i). This last set of regressions also shows that domestic bond

and syndicated loan issuers are smaller than international ones in both sets of countries, but the

differences in developing countries are smaller.18

         The value and maturity of debt issuances by firms from developing countries increase with

firm size. For instance, firms at the top decile of the FSD for developing country issuers capture about

51 percent of the total value of the debt issued with an average maturity of 8.7 years, whereas firms at

the bottom decile raise less than 1 percent of the total amount issued with an average maturity of 4.5

years (Figure 7, Panel A). This pattern for developing country firms is observed in both bond and

syndicated loan markets. Firms at the 10th decile raise 48 (54) percent of the bond (syndicated loan)

debt issued at an average maturity of 7.3 (9) years; firms at the 1st decile capture less than 1 percent of

the total value raised at an average maturity of 4.2 (5.2) years (Figure 7, Panels B and C). In bond


17 Because the dependent variable (firm size) is in logs, the regression coefficients in Table 5 show an approximation of
the percent change. They need to be transformed using the exponential form to obtain the actual percent change reported
in the text.
18 The larger size of international issuers vis-à-vis domestic issuers could be explained, at least in part, by the higher costs

associated with the use of international markets. For instance, to meet the liquidity and size demanded by international
buyers, the minimum deal size is typically much larger than in domestic markets (Zervos, 2004; Gozzi et al., 2015). Debt
issuances abroad could also be associated with higher legal costs to meet international regulations and international rating
fees.

                                                              18
markets, the higher maturity obtained by the largest firms is partially related to their use of international

markets as the share of bonds issued in international markets increases with firm size. For instance,

the amount raised abroad accounts for 5 percent and 40 percent of the total amount raised for firms

at the 1st and 10th decile, respectively, of the FSD in developing countries. Still, the size-maturity

correlation in bond markets also takes place within domestic and international markets. Thus, the

largest firms that capture most of the financing in bond and syndicated loan markets are key for the

aggregate maturity patterns based on weighted averages at the country level.19

          Importantly, relative to developed countries, the maturity of debt at issuance for developing

country firms is similar (if not longer) across the entire FSD (Figure 7, Panel A). However, consistent

with the findings in the previous sections, there are differences between bond and syndicated loan

markets. Across all deciles of the FSD, firms from developing countries typically go shorter in bond

markets but longer in syndicated loan markets when compared to their counterparts from developed

countries (Figure 7, Panels B and C). For example, bond issuing firms at the 10th and 5th deciles of the

FSD for developing countries raise capital with an average maturity of 7.3 and 5.1 years, respectively,

both shorter (by about 2.5 years) than the maturity of bonds issued by firms at the same deciles of the

FSD for developed countries. In syndicated loan markets, firms at the top decile of the FSD for

developing countries borrow at maturities of about 9 years, 3.7 years longer than their counterparts in

developed countries.

          We then assess more formally whether the differences in debt maturity between developing

and developed countries documented throughout this paper hold across the FSD, as indicated by the

statistics in Figure 7. We pool all firms together and split them into five equal-sized groups based on

their size. For each of these quintiles, we estimate firm-level regressions of the average debt maturity


19These largest firms do not capture the bulk of the number of debt transactions. In fact, the distribution of the number
of capital raising issuances is evenly split across firms of different sizes. Hence, these largest firms do not drive the estimates
conducted at the transaction level.

                                                               19
across all issuances on a developing country dummy. We also estimate these regressions separately for

bond and syndicated loan issuers.

            The estimates in Table 6 confirm the robustness of our findings across the FSD. They show

that firms from developing countries access debt markets at maturities similar to (and sometimes even

longer than) those from developed ones across the entire FSD for debt issuers. The regressions also

show that bond financing is shorter term in developing countries for firms of all sizes, except for those

at the bottom quintile. The differences in bond maturity are relatively similar across the top three

quintiles at around 2.6 years. In syndicated loan markets, the estimates show that firms from

developing countries borrow longer term than those from developed countries across all quintiles of

the FSD (except for bottom one). Moreover, the differences in maturity at issuance for syndicated

loans increase with firm size. Whereas firms from developing countries at the 2nd quintile borrow with

maturities 1 year longer than those from developed countries, firms at the 5th quintile obtain syndicated

loans that are almost 3 years longer in maturity.20



5.          Long-term Debt in Balance Sheet Data

The results documented thus far based on transaction-level data stand in contrast with the short-

termism of debt in developing countries documented in the literature, which uses firm or bank balance

sheet data. Our results imply at least two possible reasons for the relatively shorter-term liability

structure of firms from developing countries. One is that other debt markets, such as non-syndicated

bank financing and commercial paper, are shorter term in developing countries. A second (not

mutually exclusive) possibility is that bond and syndicated loan markets (that are probably longer term)

represent a smaller share of the total external finance to firms from the developing world.




20   The results also hold when including industry fixed effects in the estimations.

                                                               20
         Although we do not directly observe the maturity in the markets outside those analyzed in this

paper, we shed light on the short-termism in developing countries by merging the transaction-level

data on debt issuances with balance sheet information for publicly listed firms for the period 2003-11.

We then compare the ratio of long-term debt to total liabilities between developed and developing

countries for all firms, for debt issuers (defined as firms tapping bond or syndicated loan markets at

least once during the sample period), and for other debt issuers (those using neither bonds nor

syndicated loans, so all the debt they hold in their balance sheets comes from other sources).21

         The evidence based on balance sheet data shows that debt issuers hold more long-term debt

in their balance sheets than the other listed firms (Figure 8, Panel A). Moreover, the ratio of long-term

debt in developing countries is lower than in developed ones when considering the whole sample of

firms, but similar when considering debt issuers only. The median ratio of long-term debt over total

liabilities is 15 and 19 percent for developing and developed countries, respectively. This ratio is much

higher, at 30 and 31 percent, for debt issuers from developing and developed countries. For other

debt issuers, this ratio drops to 12 percent and 14 percent, respectively. Furthermore, the evidence

shows that there is a positive correlation between the share of listed firms using debt markets and the

country level of GDP per capita (Figure 8, Panel B).22 We find a similar correlation when using

measures of financial market development, such as private credit or bond market capitalization to

GDP.

         These findings are important for reconciling our results with those in the literature and for

determining the drivers of short-termism in developing countries across firms. Consistent with the

existing literature are the patterns that the ratio of long-term debt is lower in developing countries


21We follow the literature and define long-term debt as all firms’ liabilities with maturity longer than one year.
22This finding is not driven by a better matching of the data for countries with higher levels of GDP per capita. Around
34 percent of the firms in the SDC database (which contains information for all debt issuers, including unlisted firms) are
found in Orbis. Although this percentage varies by country, it is not correlated with GDP per capita or financial market
development.

                                                            21
when considering the whole sample of listed firms. But the fact that this ratio (even when coming

from balance sheet data) is similar for debt issuers across countries is consistent with our novel results

using transaction-level data. Furthermore, the smaller ratio of long-term debt to total liabilities held

by other debt issuers (relative to debt issuers in bond or syndicated loan markets) indicates that the

debt instruments not analyzed in this paper are relatively shorter term.

        These patterns emerging from the balance sheet data also indicate that the greater proportion

of firms from developing countries using other shorter-term instruments is an important source of

short-termism in debt for these countries. Specifically, the difference in the ratio of long-term debt to

total liabilities between developing and developing countries is 1 percentage point for debt issuers

(bond and syndicated loan issuers) and 2 percentage points for other debt issuers. But the difference

for all firms is larger, 4 percentage points. Hence, the differences in debt maturity across firms in

developing and developed countries do not seem to come from large differences in maturity within

shorter- and longer-term markets, rather from differences in their relative use of longer-term bond

and syndicated loan markets versus other debt markets.

        To the extent that the proportion of publicly listed firms is smaller in developing countries

than in developed ones, these results could be extended to the universe of firms. That is, one would

find a lower ratio of long-term debt to total liabilities and a shorter-term liability structure in

developing countries when analyzing all firms. This notion is reinforced by the existing evidence

showing that, within developing countries, smaller firms make up a larger percentage of total firms,

whereas the size of those using bond and syndicated loan markets is similar across both sets of

countries (as shown in the previous section).




                                                   22
6.      Conclusions

Developing countries have actively participated in the expansion of debt markets that took place since

the 1990s. We use their activity over this relevant period to tackle an old debate in economics: whether

developing country firms borrow short term and, if so, what is the source of the short-termism.

Despite the importance of this question and the attention devoted in the literature, little evidence

exists on the actual maturity at which firms from developing countries borrow. To fill this void in the

literature, we use a large data set of transaction-level capital raising activity in domestic and

international primary bond and syndicated loan markets. Developed countries are used as the

benchmark for these comparisons.

        The evidence in this paper shows that firms from developing countries access corporate bond

and syndicated loan markets at maturities similar to those from developed countries. Thus, overall,

these markets cannot be considered a source of short-term borrowing for developing countries.

However, there is a substantial heterogeneity across several dimensions, such as instruments, market

location, use of proceeds, and firm size, indicating that composition matters. In corporate bond

markets, international issuances are particularly important in the provision of long-term financing to

developing countries as most of the proceeds are raised abroad and at longer maturities than in

domestic markets. Syndicated loan markets are also important for the long-term funding of developing

countries, whose firms borrow in these markets at longer-term maturities than firms from developed

countries. Firms from developing countries use syndicated loans in part to fund infrastructure projects,

which have relatively longer maturities.

        But not all firms borrow in these relatively long-term markets. Large corporations from

developing countries are those that issue bonds and syndicated loans. Among this group of large firms,

the largest ones typically issue debt at the longest maturities, and have better access to international




                                                  23
markets. Therefore, the long-term financing these markets provide is constrained to a selected group

of firms from developing countries.

        The evidence also shows that a lower proportion of firms from developing countries relative

to developed countries use long-term debt markets, explaining at least part of the differences in the

liability structure in firm balance sheets. Thus, a larger percentage of smaller firms from developing

countries have fewer alternatives when they need long-term external finance to realize investment

opportunities. Consequently, they would have to rely, at least for a while, on shorter-term instruments

such as traditional bank loans or commercial paper.

        A first order issue to understand in future research is whether firms are unable or unwilling to

tap longer-term financing in developing countries. If long-term finance is indeed not available for

deserving firms (a problem in the supply-side of funds), policy makers could focus on trying to

broaden access to long-term capital markets to firms beyond the selected group of large corporations

that already tap those markets. In fact, our results show a shorter-term maturity profile and a larger

average firm size for issuing firms in domestic bond markets in developing countries compared with

their counterparts in developed economies, suggesting that local bond markets might indeed be

relatively underdeveloped in the former set of countries. Policies aimed at reducing the transaction

costs associated with the issuance process could expand the number of firms able to access capital

markets, with positive spillover effects on secondary markets. However, to the extent that these

markets are already competitive in some countries, reducing the costs through government

interventions could prove difficult. Another way to facilitate smaller, lower-rated firms to issue

securities in capital markets could be to develop capital markets specialized in SMEs, innovative

instruments (such as minibonds), and securitization (Borensztein et al., 2008; Giovannini et al., 2015).

But those solutions still need to be tested.




                                                  24
References
Adrian, T., Colla, P., Shin, H.S., 2013. “Which Financial Frictions? Parsing Evidence from the
      Financial Crisis of 2007–09.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012 27: 159–214.
Altunbas, Y., Alper, K., Marques-Ibañez, D., 2010. “Large Debt Financing: Syndicated Loans versus
      Corporate Bonds.” European Journal of Finance 16(5): 437–58.
Acharya, V., Cecchetti, S., De Gregorio, J., Kalemli-Ozcan, Ş., Lane, P., Panizza, U., 2015. “Corporate
      Debt in Emerging Economies: A Threat to Financial Stability?” Committee for International
      Policy Reform, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Barclay, M., Smith, C.W., 1995. “The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt.” Journal of Finance 50(2):
      609–31.
Beck, T., 2016. “Long-term Finance in Latin America.” Inter-American Development Bank
      Discussion Paper 476.
Becker, B., Ivashina, V., 2014. “Cyclicality of Credit Supply: Firm-level Evidence.” Journal of Monetary
      Economics 62: 76–93.
Bento, P., Restuccia, D., 2017. “Misallocation, Establishment Size, and Productivity.” American
      Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9(3): 267–303.
Berger, A.N., Espinosa-Vega, M.A., Scott Frame W., and Miller H.N., 2005. “Debt Maturity, Risk,
      and Asymmetric Information.” Journal of Finance 60(6): 2895–2923.
Borensztein, E., Chamon, M., Jeanne, O., Mauro, P., Zettelmeyer, J., 2005. “Sovereign Debt Structure
      for Crisis Prevention.” IMF Occasional Paper 237.
Borensztein, E., Cowan, K., Eichengreen, B., Panizza, U., 2008. “Building Bond Markets in Latin
      America.” In Bond Markets in Latin America: On the Verge of a Big Bang? E. Borensztein, K. Cowan,
      B. Eichengreen, and U. Panizza (eds.), MIT Press Cambridge, MA.
Broner, F., Lorenzoni, G., Schmukler, S., 2013. “Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow Short Term?”
      11(s1): 67–100.
Bruno, V., Shin, H.S., 2017. “Global Dollar Credit and Carry Trades: A Firm-level Analysis.” Review of
      Financial Studies 30(3): 703–749.
Brunnermeier, M., 2009. “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008.” Journal of Economic
      Perspectives 23(1): 77–100.
Caprio, G., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., 1998. “The Role of Long-term Finance: Theory and Evidence.” World
      Bank Research Observer 13(2): 171–89.
Cerutti, E., Hale, G., Minoiu, C., 2015. “Financial Crises and the Composition of Cross-border
      Lending.” Journal of International Money and Finance 52: 60–81.
Cortina, J.J., Didier, T., Schmukler, S., 2016. “How Long Is the Maturity of Corporate Borrowing?
      Evidence from Bond and Loan Issuances across Markets.” World Bank Policy Research
      Working Paper 7815.
Custodio, C., Ferreira, M.A., Laureano, L., 2012. “Why Are U.S. Firms Using More Short-term Debt?”
      Journal of Financial Economics 108(1): 182–212.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 1999. “Institutions, Financial Markets, and Firm Debt Maturity.”
      Journal of Financial Economics 54(1): 295–336.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Martínez-Pería, M.S., Tressel, T., 2015. “The Impact of the Global Financial
      Crisis on Firms’ Capital Structure.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7522.
Diamond, D., 1991. “Debt Maturity and Liquidity Risk.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(1): 709–37.
                                                  25
Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R., 1999. “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility.” Federal Reserve Bank
      of Kansas City Proceedings: 329–68.
Engel, E., Fischer, R., Galetovic, A., 2014 “Finance and Public-Private Partnerships: A Roadmap.” In
      Financial Flows and Infrastructure Financing, A. Heath and M. Read (eds.), Reserve Bank of Australia,
      Sydney.
Fan, J., Titman, S., Twite, G., 2012. “An International Comparison of Capital Structure and Debt
      Maturity Choices.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44(1): 23–56.
G20 (Group of 20), 2013. “Long-term Investment Financing for Growth and Development;”
      Umbrella Paper.
Giannetti, M., 2003. “Do Better Institutions Mitigate Agency Problems? Evidence from Corporate
      Finance Choices.” Journal of Financial Economics 38(1): 185–212.
Giovannini, A., Mayer, C., Micossi, S., di Noia, C., Onando, M., Pagano, M., Polo, A., 2015.
      “Restarting European Long-term Investment Finance: A Green Paper Discussion Document.”
      Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Godlewski, C., Weill, L., 2008. “Syndicated Loans in Emerging Markets.” Emerging Markets Review 9(3):
      206–19.
Gozzi, J.C., Levine, R., Martinez Pería, M.S., Schmukler, S., 2015. “How Firms Use Domestic and
      International Corporate Bond Markets.” Journal of Banking and Finance 58: 532–551.
Guedes, J., Opler, T., 1996. “The Determinants of the Maturity of Corporate Debt Issues.” Journal of
      Finance 51(5): 1809–1833.
Highfield, M.J., 2008. “On the Maturity of Incremental Corporate Debt Issues.” Quarterly Journal of
      Finance and Accounting 47(2): 45–67.
Hsieh, C.T., Klenow P. J., 2014. “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico.” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 129(3): 1035–1084.
Huang, R., 2010. “How Committed Are Bank Lines of Credit? Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage
      Crisis.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 10–25.
IMF (International Monetary Fund), 2015. “Corporate Leverage in Emerging Markets, A Concern?”
      Chapter 3 in the Global Financial Stability Report.
Ivashina, V., Scharfstein, D., 2010. “Bank Lending during the Financial Crisis of 2008.” Journal of
      Financial Economics 97(1): 319–38.
Jeanne, O., 2009. “Debt Maturity and the International Financial Architecture.” American Economic
      Review 99(5): 2135–48.
Mayer, C., 1990. “Financial Systems, Corporate Finance and Economic Development.” In Asymmetric
      Information, Corporate Finance, and Investment, G. Hubbard (ed.), University Chicago Press, Chicago,
      IL.
McCauley, R., McGuire, P., Sushko, V., 2015. “Global Dollar Credit: Links to U.S. Monetary Policy
      and Leverage.” Economic Policy 30(82): 187–229.
Myers, S., 1977. “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing.” Journal of Financial Economics 5(1): 147–76.
Opazo, L., Raddatz, C., Schmukler, S., 2015. “Institutional Investors and Long-term Investment:
      Evidence from Chile,” World Bank Economic Review 29(3): 479–522.
Poschke, M., 2014. “The Firm Size Distribution across Countries and Skill-biased Change in
      Entrepreneurial Technology.” IZA Discussion Papers 7991.


                                                    26
Raddatz, C., 2010. “When the Rivers Run Dry: Liquidity and the Use of Wholesale Funds in the
      Transmission of the U.S. Subprime Crisis.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5203.
Rey, P., Stiglitz, J., 1993. “Short-term Contracts as a Monitoring Device.” NBER Working Paper 4514.
Rodrik, D., Velasco, A., 2000. “Short-term Capital Flows.” In Annual World Bank Conference on
      Development Economics 1999: 59-90, B. Pleskovic and J. Stiglitz (eds.), World Bank, Washington,
      DC.
Schmukler, S., Vesperoni, E., 2006. “Financial Globalization and Debt Maturity in Emerging
      Economies.” Journal of Development Economics 79(1): 183–207.
Shin, H.S., 2013. “The Second Phase of Global Liquidity and its Impact on Emerging Economies.”
      Keynote Address at Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Asia Economic Policy Conference.
Sobrun, J., Turner, P., 2015. “Bond Markets and Monetary Policy Dilemmas for the Emerging
      Markets.” BIS Working Paper 508.
The Economist, 2015. “The World Economy: Pulled Back In.” November 14.
The Economist, 2016. “Emerging Market Debt: The Well Runs Dry.” March 5.
Tirole, J., 2003. “Inefficient Foreign Borrowing: A Dual- and Common-Agency Perspective.” American
      Economic Review 93(5): 1678–1702.
World Bank, 2016. “The Use of Markets for Long-term Finance.” Global Financial Development Report.
Zervos, S., 2004. “The Transactions Costs of Primary Market Issuance: The Case of Brazil, Chile, and Mexico.”
     World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3424.”




                                                     27
                                                                     Figure 1. Debt Maturity over Time
This figure shows the evolution of the (value) weighted average maturity of issuances of corporate bonds and syndicated loans by developing and developed countries. The size of the bubbles
represents the share of the total amount raised by each set of countries over their GDP.
             12




             10




              8
  Maturity




              6




              4




              2




              0



                                                                          Developing Countries   Developed Countries
                                                              Figure 2. Debt Maturity and Financial Development
This figure shows for every country in the sample, the (value) weighted average maturity of total debt, bonds, and syndicated loans issued during the 1991-2014 period plotted against the
average level of GDP per capita (left side panels) and private credit over GDP (right side panels).
                                                                                          A. Total Debt
            16                                                                                                      16


            14                                                                                                      14


            12                                                                                                      12


            10                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                         Maturity
Maturity




             8                                                                                                        8


             6                                                                                                        6


             4                                                                                                        4
                                                                            y = -0.4496x + 11.816                                                                                             y = -0.014x + 8.5697
             2                                                                                                        2


             0                                                                                                        0
                 6   7            8                  9            10         11                   12                          0       20    40   60   80        100        120    140   160         180         200

                                      Log of GDP per Capita                                                                                           Private Credit over GDP

                                                                                     B. Corporate Bonds
            20                                                                                                        20

            18                                                                                                        18

            16                                                                                                        16

            14                                                                                                        14

            12                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                           Maturity
 Maturity




            10                                                                                                        10

             8                                                                                                            8

             6                                                                                                            6

             4                                                                                                            4
                                                                            y = 0.4233x + 4.1624                                                                                          y = 0.0017x + 8.1862
             2                                                                                                            2

             0                                                                                                            0
                 6   7            8               9               10        11                   12                               0    20   40   60   80         100        120   140   160          180        200
                                                                                                                                                      Private Credit over GDP
                                      Log of GDP per Capita

                                                                                     C. Syndicated Loans
            16                                                                                                      16

            14                                                                                                      14

            12                                                                                                      12

            10                                                                                                      10
Maturity




                                                                                                       Maturity




             8                                                                                                        8

             6                                                                                                        6

             4                                                                                                        4

             2                                                                                                        2
                                                                         y = -0.7152x + 13.882                                                                                            y = -0.0169x + 8.2937
             0                                                                                                        0
                 6   7           8               9               10        11                12                               0       20    40   60   80        100        120    140   160          180        200
                                      Log of GDP per Capita                                                                                           Private Credit over GDP
                                                    Figure 3. Share and Maturity of Debt by Sector and Use of Proceeds
Panels A and B show the share of the total amount raised and the (value) weighted average maturity of all debt issued by firms from each (non-financial) sector in
corporate bond markets and syndicated loan markets, respectively. Panel C shows the share of the total amount raised and the weighted average maturity for each
category of the primary use of the proceeds raised. The statistics are shown separately for developing and developed countries. The sample period is 1991-2014.


                                                               A. Sectorial Composition and Maturity, Corporate Bond Markets
                            100%                                                                                                                                                      12
                            90%
                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                            80%
Share of the Total Raised




                            70%
                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                            60%




                                                                                                                                                                                       Maturity
                            50%                                                                                                                                                       6
                            40%
                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                            30%
                            20%
                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                            10%
                             0%                                                                                                                                                       0
                                     Agriculture,    Construction      Manufacturing        Mining            Retail Trade       Services        Transportation Wholesale Trade
                                    Forestry, and                                                                                                     and
                                      Fishing                                                                                                   Communications


                                                               B. Sectorial Composition and Maturity, Syndicated Loan Markets
                            100%                                                                                                                                                  14
                            90%
                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                            80%
Share of the Total Raised




                            70%                                                                                                                                                   10

                            60%
                                                                                                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                                                                  Maturity
                            50%
                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                            40%
                            30%                                                                                                                                                   4
                            20%
                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                            10%
                             0%                                                                                                                                                   0
                                    Agriculture,     Construction     Manufacturing        Mining         Retail Trade          Services     Transportation Wholesale Trade
                                   Forestry, and                                                                                                  and
                                     Fishing                                                                                                Communications

                                                                    C. Use of Proceeds and Maturity, Syndicated Loan Markets
                       100%                                                                                                                                                       14
                            90%
                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                            80%
Share of the Total Raised




                            70%                                                                                                                                                   10

                            60%
                                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                                      Maturity




                            50%
                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                            40%
                            30%                                                                                                                                                   4
                            20%
                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                            10%
                             0%                                                                                                                                                   0
                                   Acquisition Financing and General Corporate Purposes              Others                   Project Finance                Refinancing
                                             LBO                and Working Capital

                                                                    Developing Countries, Share                    Developed Countries, Share
                                                                    Developing Countries, Maturity                 Developed Countries, Maturity
                                                                          Share Raised Abroad




                                                        10%
                                                                            40%
                                                                                                            90%




                                                              20%
                                                                    30%
                                                                                  50%
                                                                                        60%
                                                                                                70%
                                                                                                      80%




                                                   0%
                                                                                                                  100%
                                         China
                                  Korea, Rep.
                                     Thailand
                                         Japan
                                      Pakistan
                                 United States
                                     Malaysia
                                    Singapore
                                Taiwan, China
                                         Brazil
                                          India
                                  Switzerland
                             United Kingdom
                           Russian Federation
                                         Chile
                                     Ecuador
                                           Peru
                                    Indonesia
                                   Philippines
                                     Portugal
                                 Luxembourg
                            Egypt, Arab Rep.
                                       Austria
                       Hong Kong SAR, China
                                 New Zealand
                                       Mexico
                                    Colombia
                                        France
                                       Ireland
                                    Argentina
                                    Denmark
                                       Finland
                                   Costa Rica
                                         Spain
                                     Australia




Developing countries
                                 Saudi Arabia
                                        Oman
                                      Panama
                                   Bangladesh
                                     Uruguay
                                    Lithuania
                                  El Salvador
                                           Italy
Developed countries

                                      Norway
                                    Germany
                                       Canada
                                      Belgium
                                 South Africa
                                      Sweden
                                         Israel
                        United Arab Emirates
                                                                                                                         This figure shows the fraction of the bond proceeds raised in international markets for each country in the sample. The shares are calculated over the entire sample period, 1991-2014.




                                  Netherlands
                               Venezuela, RB
                                     Romania
                                     Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 4. Share of the Amount Raised in International Bond Markets by Country




                              Czech Republic
                                       Turkey
                                       Poland
                                       Greece
                                        Ghana
                                       Cyprus
                                      Bahrain
                                       Nigeria
                                       Kuwait
                                      Ukraine
                                       Iceland
                              Slovak Republic
                                        Jordan
                                     Lebanon
                                     Morocco
                                      Bulgaria
                                    Sri Lanka
                                         Qatar
                                  Kazakhstan
                                   Azerbaijan
                                      Jamaica
                          Figure 5. Cumulative Distribution Functions of Debt Maturities in Bond Markets
This figure shows the cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of the maturity of newly issued bonds during the 1991-2014 period. For developing countries, the figure shows
separately the CDFs for domestic and international issuances.

               100%

               90%

               80%

               70%

               60%
       Share




               50%

               40%

               30%

               20%                                                                                               Developing Countries, Domestic Markets
                                                                                                                 Developing Countries, International Markets
               10%
                                                                                                                 Developed Countries, All Markets
                0%
                      1   2   3    4    5   6    7    8    9   10   11   12   13   14 15 16 17         18   19    20   21   22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29   30
                                                                                   Maturity in Years
                         Figure 6. Size Distribution of Issuing Firms
This figure shows the firm size distribution of debt issuers from developing and developed countries. The size is
reported in logs of millions of 2011 U.S. dollars. Densities are estimated using the Epanechnikov kernel function.
                                                                               Figure 7. Size-Maturity Distributions of Issuing Firms
 Panel A reports the average debt maturity, the share of the total amount raised, and the share of the total number of issuances for firms from each decile of the firm size distribution. Below each size decile, the figure reports
 the average size of the issuers in that decile. Panels B and C present the same statistics, distinguishing between corporate bonds and syndicated loans, respectively. Size is reported in millions of 2011 U.S. dollars.

                                                                                                          A. Size-Maturity Distribution, Total Debt
                                                     Developing Countries                                                                                                                                       Developed Countries
           12                                                                                                           100%                                    12                                                                                                               100%
                No. of Firms per Decile ≈955                                                                                                                    11   No. of Firms per Decile ≈ 4,797
           11                                                                                                           90%                                                                                                                                                      90%
           10                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                        80%                                                                                                                                                      80%
                                                                                                                  8.7                                            9
            9
                                                                                                                        70%                                                                                                                                                      70%
            8                                                                          7.2          7.5                                                          8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Share of the Total
                                                                                                                               Share of the Total
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6.8          6.9     6.7
                                                                    6.6       6.6                                       60%                                      7                                                                    6.4                                        60%
            7                                  6.1                                                                                                                                                     6.0       6.1        6.2




                                                                                                                                                     Maturity
Maturity




                                     5.8                  5.9                                                                                                                               5.8
            6             5.4                                                                                           50%                                      6             5.5                                                                                               50%
            5   4.5                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                        40%                                                                                                                                                      40%
                                                                                                                                                                     3.8
            4                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                        30%                                                                                                                                                      30%
            3                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                        20%                                                                                                                                                      20%
            2                                                                                                                                                    2
            1                                                                                                           10%                                      1                                                                                                               10%

            0                                                                                                           0%                                       0                                                                                                               0%
                1st       2nd        3rd       4th       5th        6th       7th      8th          9th          10th                                                1st       2nd          3rd        4th       5th        6th       7th      8th          9th          10th
                $6        $18        $32       $49       $70        $97       $135     $187        $286          $759                                                $3        $11          $21        $35       $54        $81      $120      $181        $292          $811
                                                       Firm Size Decile                                                                                                                                         Firm Size Decile
                                                                                                     B. Size-Maturity Distribution, Corporate Bonds
           12                                                                                                           100%                                    12                                                                                                               100%
           11                                                                                                           90%                                     11                                                                                                               90%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9.9
           10                                                                                                                                                   10                                                                                          9.5
                                                                                                                        80%                                                                                                                    9.1                               80%
            9                                                                                                                                                    9                                                          8.4       8.5
                                                                                                                        70%                                                                                      7.6                                                             70%
            8                                                                                                    7.3                                             8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Share of the Total
                                                                                                                                Share of the Total




                                                                                                   6.9                                                                                                 7.0
                                                                                       6.6                              60%                                                                                                                                                      60%
            7                                                                                                                                                    7                          6.2
                                                                                                                                                     Maturity
Maturity




                                                                    5.8       5.9
            6                                            5.1                                                            50%                                      6                                                                                                               50%
                          4.8        4.8       4.9                                                                                                                             4.9
            5   4.2                                                                                                     40%                                      5                                                                                                               40%
            4                                                                                                                                                    4   3.3
                                                                                                                        30%                                                                                                                                                      30%
            3                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                        20%                                                                                                                                                      20%
            2                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                        10%                                      1                                                                                                               10%
            1
            0                                                                                                           0%                                       0                                                                                                               0%
                1st       2nd        3rd       4th       5th        6th       7th      8th         9th        10th                                                   1st       2nd          3rd        4th       5th        6th       7th      8th          9th          10th
                                                       Firm Size Decile                                                                                                                                         Firm Size Decile

                                                                                                    C. Size-Maturity Distribution, Syndicated Loans
           12                                                                                                           100%                                    12                                                                                                               100%

           11                                                                                                                                                   11                                                                                                               90%
                                                                                                                        90%
           10                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                 9.0    80%                                                                                                                                                      80%
            9                                                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                    7.7                 70%                                                                                                                                                      70%
            8                                                                          7.2                                                                       8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Share of the Total
                                               7.0                  7.0       7.0
                                                                                                                               Share of the Total




                                     6.4                 6.6                                                            60%                                      7                                                                                                               60%
            7
                                                                                                                                                     Maturity
Maturity




                          5.9                                                                                                                                                  5.7          5.6        5.7       5.6                            5.6
                                                                                                                                                                 6                                                          5.5        5.5                   5.5     5.3         50%
            6   5.2                                                                                                     50%                                          5.1
            5                                                                                                           40%                                      5                                                                                                               40%
            4                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                        30%                                                                                                                                                      30%
            3                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                        20%                                                                                                                                                      20%
            2                                                                                                                                                    2
            1                                                                                                           10%                                      1                                                                                                               10%

            0                                                                                                           0%                                       0                                                                                                               0%
                1st       2nd        3rd       4th       5th        6th       7th      8th         9th           10th                                                1st       2nd          3rd        4th       5th        6th        7th      8th         9th           10th
                                                        Firm Size Decile                                                                                                                                        Firm Size Decile
                             Number of Issuances, Share         Amount Raised, Share          Average Maturity                                                                       Number of Issuances, Share         Amount Raised, Share          Average Maturity
                                                                Figure 8. Long-term Debt in Balance Sheet Data
Panel A shows the average ratio of long-term debt to total liabilities over the 2003-11 period. The median firm in the median country
is reported. Panel B shows the ratio of the number of debt issuers to all listed firms plotted against the average level of GDP per
capita for each country calculated over the sample period. Debt issuers are defined as firms issuing at least one bond or syndicated
loan during the 2003-11 period. Other debt issuers are those not issuing bonds or syndicated loans during the 2003-11 period.

                                                                           A. Long-term Debt over Total Liabilities
                                                35%
                                                                                                           31%
                                                                                              30%
                                                30%


                                                25%
  Long-term Debt Ratio




                                                20%                  19%

                                                          15%
                                                15%                                                                                        14%
                                                                                                                               12%

                                                10%


                                                5%


                                                0%
                                                            All Firms                             Debt Issuers               Other Debt Issuers

                                                                           Developing Countries        Developed Countries


                                                                        B. Share of Debt Issuers and GDP per Capita

                                                50%

                                                45%
    Ratio of Debt Issuers to All Listed Firms




                                                40%

                                                35%

                                                30%

                                                25%

                                                20%

                                                15%

                                                10%
                                                                                                                                     y = 0.0455x - 0.2745
                                                 5%

                                                 0%
                                                      6          7                 8                   9               10             11                12
                                                                                          Log of GDP per Capita
                                                                       Table 1. Summary Statistics
This table shows the total amount of capital raised over the sample period and the (value) weighted average maturity (in years) of all debt issued by firms from developing and developed
countries during 1991-2014. The data on the amount raised are in billions of 2011 U.S. dollars.

                                                                                     A. Total Debt
                                                                                                                                   Share of Total
                                                                                                     Amount Raised
Country Type                          No. of Firms                  No. of Issuances                                               Issuances with                 Average Maturity
                                                                                                       (Billions)
                                                                                                                                Maturity over 10 Years
                                           (a)                            (b)                             (c)                             (d)                             (f)
Developing Countries                      9,377                          28,558                          5,485                            22%                             7.3
Developed Countries                       48,136                         237,981                         62,658                           15%                             6.2
                                                                                   B. Corporate Bonds
                                           (a)                            (b)                             (c)                             (d)                             (f)
Developing Countries                      4,285                          15,176                          2,417                            20%                             7.9
Developed Countries                       14,915                         90,558                          19,592                           30%                             9.8
                                                                                  C. Syndicated Loans
                                           (a)                            (b)                             (c)                             (d)                             (f)
Developing Countries                      5,092                          13,382                          3,068                            25%                             7.1
Developed Countries                       33,221                         147,423                         43,066                           6%                              4.5
                                       Table 2. Debt Maturity in Developed and Developing Countries
This table shows regressions for the maturity of total debt, bond, and syndicated loan issuances on a dummy that equals one when the debt is issued by firms from developing
countries and zero otherwise (developed country issuances). The regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares, clustering the standard errors (reported in brackets) at
the firm level. The sample period is 1991-2014. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                Maturity of Total Debt                          Maturity of Corporate Bonds                 Maturity of Syndicated Loans
                                              (a)                   (b)                          (c)                   (d)                   (e)                 (f)
Developing Country Dummy                         0.41 ***                0.08                        -1.62 ***          -1.97 ***              1.80 ***            1.60 ***
                                               [0.07]                  [0.07]                       [0.14]             [0.15]                [0.08]              [0.07]

Industry-Year Dummies                              No                        Yes                       No                   Yes                  No                   Yes

Number of Observations                        266,539                   266,539                   105,734              105,734              160,805              160,805
Number of Firms                                57,513                    57,513                    24,386               24,386               42,146               42,146
R-squared                                       0.001                      0.08                     0.01                 0.10                 0.02                 0.09
                                Table 3. Use of Proceeds and Maturity in Syndicated Loan Markets
This table shows in column a regressions for the maturity of syndicated loan issuances (in years) on dummy variables capturing the different uses of the proceeds
raised (acquisition financing and leveraged buyout operations is the omitted category). Columns b-e show regressions for the maturity of syndicated loan issuances (in
years) on a dummy variable that equals one for developing country issuances and zero otherwise (developed country issuances). The regressions also include controls
for the use of proceeds, rate of the issued debt, and industry-year effects. The regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares, clustering the standard errors
(reported in brackets) at the firm level. The sample period is 1991-2014. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                                                    Maturity of Syndicated Loans
                                                                       All                  All                  All              Only Project          No Project
                                                                   Transactions         Transactions         Transactions          Finance               Finance
                                                                       (a)                 (b)                  (c)                  (d)                  (e)
Developing Country Dummy                                                                     0.46 ***             0.46 ***             0.47 ***             0.49 ***
                                                                                           [0.06]               [0.06]               [0.16]               [0.06]
Use 1: General Corporate Purposes                                       -1.37   ***
                                                                       [0.03]
Use 2: Project Finance                                                   4.77   ***
                                                                       [0.09]
Use 3: Refinancing and Capital Structure Management                     -0.90   ***
                                                                       [0.03]
Use 4: Others                                                           -0.68   ***
                                                                       [0.10]

Industry-Year Dummies                                                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Use of the Proceeds Dummies                                              No                   Yes                  Yes                  No                   No
Floating Rate Dummy                                                      No                   No                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Number of Observations                                              160,805              160,805              160,805                17,148             143,657
Number of Firms                                                      42,146               42,146               42,146                 8,178              35,586
R-squared                                                             0.26                 0.27                 0.27                  0.07                0.05
                                              Table 4. Debt Maturity in Domestic and International Markets
This table shows in the first two columns in each panel regressions of the maturity of debt issuances on a developing country dummy. The third column in each panel shows regressions
adding another dummy variable indicating whether the issuance takes place in international markets and an interaction term between the international and the developing country dummies.
The regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares, clustering the standard errors (reported in brackets) at the firm level. The sample period is 1991-2014. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                            Maturity of Corporate Bonds                                      Maturity of Syndicated Loans
                                                                                        Only                                                             Only
                                                               All Issuances        International    All Issuances              All Issuances        International     All Issuances
                                                                                      Issuances                                                        Issuances
                                                                     (a)                 (b)               (c)                    (d)                     (e)                (f)
Developing Country Dummy                                             -2.11 ***           -0.57 **          -2.57 ***                   0.35 ***           -0.05               1.62 ***
                                                                    [0.19]              [0.28]            [0.25]                     [0.07]              [0.07]             [0.12]
International Issuance Dummy                                                                               -0.36                                                              0.48 ***
                                                                                                          [0.21]                                                            [0.03]
(Developing Country D.)*(International Issuance D.)                                                         2.38 ***                                                         -1.75 ***
                                                                                                          [0.38]                                                            [0.13]

Industry-Year Dummies                                                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Use of the Proceeds Dummies                                          Yes                  Yes                  Yes                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Foreign Currency Dummy                                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Floating Rate Dummy                                                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes

Number of Observations                                            68,716               17,502               68,716                160,361               83,093              160,361
Number of Firms                                                   16,200                6,100               16,200                 42,063               42,063               23,357
R-squared                                                           0.14                 0.12                 0.14                   0.32                 0.33                 0.32
                                                                                                Table 5. Firm Size and Type of Issuer
This table shows in the first two columns in each panel regressions of the issuer size on a developing country dummy. In the third column in each panel, the regressions also include a dummy variable indicating whether the firms are international
issuers and an interaction term between the international issuer and the developing country dummies. International issuers are defined as firms issuing in international markets at least once during the sample period. Firm size (in logs) is the sample
average. The regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares. The standard errors are reported in brackets. The sample period is 1991-2014. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                                          Size of Debt Issuers                                              Size of Bond Issuers                                           Size of Syndicated Loan Issuers
                                                                                  Only                                                              Only                                                                Only
                                                            All Issuers       International           All Issuers             All Issuers       International            All Issuers             All Issuers        International       All Issuers
                                                                                 Issuers                                                           Issuers                                                             Issuers
                                                                (a)                (b)                    (c)                     (d)                (e)                     (f)                     (g)                 (h)                (i)
Developing Country Dummy                                         0.20 ***          -0.22 ***               0.58 ***                0.13 ***          -0.05                    0.33 ***                0.07 ***           -0.38 ***           0.59 ***
                                                               [0.02]             [0.02]                 [0.02]                  [0.03]             [0.04]                  [0.03]                  [0.02]              [0.02]             [0.04]
International Issuer Dummy                                                                                 1.43 ***                                                           1.33 ***                                                       1.21 ***
                                                                                                         [0.01]                                                             [0.03]                                                         [0.01]
(D. Developing Country)*(D. International Issuer)                                                         -0.79 ***                                                          -0.38 ***                                                      -0.98 ***
                                                                                                         [0.03]                                                             [0.05]                                                         [0.04]

Industry Dummies                                                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Number of Observations                                        57,513               28,456               57,513                  24,788                 8,659              24,788                   42,646               23,803               42,646
R-squared                                                       0.04                 0.02                 0.20                    0.04                  0.04                0.14                     0.04                 0.04                 0.21
                           Table 6. Debt Maturity across the Firm Size Distribution
This table shows firm-level regressions for the (value) weighted maturity of the total debt (Panel A), bonds (Panel B), and syndicated loans
(Panel C) issued on a developing country dummy. Firms are divided into five equal-sized groups based on their size. The regressions are
estimated separately for each of these quintiles of the firm size distribution. Firm size (in logs) is the sample average. The regressions are
estimated using ordinary least squares. The standard errors are reported in brackets. The sample period is 1991-2014. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                               A. All Issuers
                                                                                     Quintile
                                              1st                  2nd                 3th                   4th                   5th
Developing Country Dummy                       0.36 ***             0.05                0.12                  0.32 ***              1.25 ***
                                             [0.09]               [0.11]              [0.11]                [0.11]                [0.13]

Number of Observations                     11,511                11,504               11,502               11,492                11,511
                                                             B. Bond Issuers
                                                                                     Quintile
                                              1st                  2nd                 3th                   4th                   5th
Developing Country Dummy                       0.64 ***            -1.75 ***           -2.59 ***             -2.56 ***             -2.62 ***
                                             [0.10]               [0.16]              [0.17]                [0.14]                [0.15]

Number of Observations                       3,782                5,212                6,195                 3,106                3,782
                                                      C. Syndicated Loan Issuers
                                                                              Quintile
                                              1st               2nd              3th                         4th                   5th
Developing Country Dummy                       0.15              1.05 ***         1.33 ***                    1.53 ***              2.94 ***
                                             [0.15]            [0.14]           [0.14]                      [0.14]                [0.16]

Number of Observations                       9,292                9,050                5,477                 9,070                9,292
                                                                       Maturity




                                                                                  10
                                                                                       12
                                                                                            14




                                                                   4




                                                           0
                                                               2
                                                                       6
                                                                             8
                                        Pakistan (193)
                                         Ukraine (105)
                                            Ghana (78)
                                New Zealand (1,249)
                                  Switzerland (1,646)
                                        Japan (30,946)
                       Hong Kong SAR, China (2,308)
                                     Germany (5,291)
                                      Argentina (765)
                                 Korea, Rep. (19,218)
                                    Singapore (1,629)
                           Russian Federation (1,434)



                                                                                                 issuances over the same period for each country.
                                      Belgium (1,013)
                                      Australia (5,710)
                                         Finland (895)
                                   South Africa (454)
                                           Kuwait (88)
                                       Sweden (1,423)
                                        Sri Lanka (24)
                                       Denmark (396)
                                        France (7,757)
                                           Iceland (78)
                                          Bolivia (154)
                                         Nigeria (111)
                                         Spain (4,343)
                                  Netherlands (4,585)
                              United States (107,737)
                                        Romania (162)
                            United Kingdom (11,992)
                                      Canada (10,365)
                               Taiwan, China (9,080)
                                           Italy (2,880)
                                         Brazil (3,015)
                                            Cyprus (81)
                                          Poland (412)
                                       Azerbaijan (33)
                                Czech Republic (282)




Developing Countries
                               Slovak Republic (102)
                                   Luxembourg (803)
                                           Lebanon (6)
                                          Ireland (678)
                                       Norway (1,321)
                                           Jamaica (67)
                                      Thailand (2,091)
                                         China (4,542)
                               Iran, Islamic Rep. (61)
                                      Bangladesh (49)
                                    El Salvador (147)
Developed Countries


                                        Lithuania (19)
                                             Peru (673)
                          United Arab Emirates (515)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Appendix Figure 1. Debt Maturity by Country




                                              Latvia (7)
                                            Israel (170)
                                     Philippines (610)
                                       Mexico (1,943)
                                    Indonesia (1,529)
                                           Tunisia (37)
                                         Austria (422)
                                          Greece (480)
                                      Malaysia (2,372)
                              Egypt, Arab Rep. (182)
                                    Kazakhstan (110)
                                       Colombia (488)
                                      Portugal (1,164)
                                        Hungary (216)
                                          India (4,311)
                                          Turkey (512)
                                          Bulgaria (89)
                                   Saudi Arabia (349)
                                           Bahrain (65)
                                         Panama (237)
                                         Uruguay (32)
                                        Ecuador (132)
                                          Chile (1,004)
                                 Venezuela, RB (232)
                                        Vietnam (209)
                                      Costa Rica (218)
                                           Oman (138)
                                            Qatar (154)
                                         Morocco (54)
                                            Jordan (37)
                             Papua New Guinea (30)
                                                                                                 This table shows the (value) weighted average maturity of corporate bond and syndicated loan issuances for each country in the sample. The weighted averages are calculated over the entire sample period, 1991-2014. The figure also shows the total number of debt
                                                                           Share Raised Abroad




                                                         10%
                                                                             40%
                                                                                                             90%




                                                    0%
                                                               20%
                                                                     30%
                                                                                   50%
                                                                                         60%
                                                                                                 70%
                                                                                                       80%
                                                                                                                   100%
                                          Japan
                                           India
                                Taiwan, China
                                          China
                                        Canada
                                   Korea, Rep.
                                 United States
                                      Thailand
                                      Malaysia
                                      Australia
                                     Indonesia
                                      Morocco
                                         France
                                      Portugal
                                  Saudi Arabia
                                   Philippines
                                          Spain
                                         Jordan
                             United Kingdom
                                  South Africa
                                            Italy
                                      Germany
                                  Netherlands
                                       Norway
                                        Turkey
                                       Sweden
                        United Arab Emirates
                                          Brazil
                                          Israel
                              Czech Republic
                                        Iceland
                           Russian Federation
                            Egypt, Arab Rep.
                                     Colombia
                                        Kuwait
                                     Singapore
                                          Qatar




Developed Countries
                                        Austria
                       Hong Kong SAR, China
                            Iran, Islamic Rep.
                                     Sri Lanka
                                 New Zealand
                                      Vietnam
                                       Pakistan
                                        Greece
                                    Azerbaijan
                                        Bolivia
Developing Countries


                                      Uruguay
                                        Ireland
                               Venezuela, RB
                                      Hungary
                                     Lithuania
                                       Belgium
                                        Finland
                                   Switzerland
                                                                                                                          This figure shows the fraction of the loan proceeds raised in international markets for each country in the sample. The shares are calculated over the entire sample period, 1991-2014.




                          Papua New Guinea
                                        Mexico
                                        Poland
                                         Oman
                                       Bahrain
                                     Denmark
                                           Chile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Appendix Figure 2. Share of Debt Raised Abroad in Syndicated Loan Markets by Country




                                            Peru
                                 Luxembourg
                                        Tunisia
                              Slovak Republic
                                   Bangladesh
                                   Kazakhstan
                                     Argentina
                                       Bulgaria
                                      Romania
                                      Ecuador
                                      Lebanon
                                       Jamaica
                                    Costa Rica
                                        Nigeria
                                          Latvia
                                       Panama
                                         Ghana
                                       Ukraine
                                        Cyprus
                                   El Salvador
                                                             Appendix Table 1. Total Number of Issuances and Number of Firms by Country
This table shows the total number of issuances in corporate bond and syndicated loan markets and the number of issuing firms per country during 1991-2014 for each country in the sample.
                                              Developing Countries                                                                                                        Developed Countries
                                Number of Bond              Number of Syndicated                                                                            Number of Bond              Number of Syndicated
Country                           Issuances                   Loan Issuances                  Number of Firms               Country                           Issuances                   Loan Issuances       Number of Firms
Argentina                            474                            291                            245                      Australia                            1,976                        3,734                1,441
Azerbaijan                             3                             30                             14                      Austria                               229                          193                  141
Bangladesh                             4                             45                             22                      Bahrain                                3                            62                   20
Bolivia                              137                             17                             40                      Belgium                               402                          611                  219
Brazil                              2,228                           787                           1015                      Canada                               4,551                        5,814                2,452
Bulgaria                               3                             86                             30                      Cyprus                                 11                           70                   31
Chile                                623                            381                            231                      Czech Republic                         46                          236                  101
China                               2,664                          1,878                          2255                      Denmark                               171                          225                   94
Colombia                             364                            124                            167                      Finland                               395                          500                  206
Costa Rica                           197                             21                             30                      France                               2,241                        5,516                1,500
Ecuador                              118                             14                             74                      Germany                              1,062                        4,229                1,160
Egypt, Arab Rep.                       8                            174                             49                      Greece                                 93                          387                  155
El Salvador                          122                             25                             20                      Hong Kong SAR, China                  940                         1,368                 811
Ghana                                  2                             76                             23                      Hungary                                11                          205                   73
India                               1,826                          2,485                          1331                      Iceland                                7                            71                   23
Indonesia                            396                           1,133                           566                      Ireland                               220                          458                  181
Iran, Islamic Rep.                     0                             61                             15                      Israel                                 70                          100                   51
Jamaica                               22                             45                             15                      Italy                                 481                         2,399                 897
Jordan                                 3                             34                             20                      Japan                                9,825                        21,121               6,096
Kazakhstan                            28                             82                             57                      Korea, Rep.                         17,413                        1,805                3,222
Latvia                                 0                             7                              6                       Kuwait                                 2                            86                   32
Lebanon                                2                             4                              3                       Luxembourg                            456                          347                  191
Lithuania                              2                             17                             10                      Netherlands                          2,387                        2,198                 785
Malaysia                            1,731                           641                            480                      New Zealand                           296                          953                  203
Mexico                              1,141                           802                            499                      Norway                                419                          902                  368
Morocco                                4                             50                             17                      Oman                                   7                           131                   50
Nigeria                                3                            108                             46                      Poland                                 63                          349                  147
Pakistan                              29                            164                             78                      Portugal                              634                          530                  552
Panama                                78                            159                            132                      Qatar                                  6                           148                   49
Papua New Guinea                       0                             30                             11                      Saudi Arabia                           14                          335                  111
Peru                                 535                            138                            145                      Singapore                             729                          900                  512
Philippines                          263                            347                            151                      Slovak Republic                        10                           92                   35
Romania                                9                            153                             64                      Spain                                 457                         3,886                1,297
Russian Federation                   585                            849                            443                      Sweden                                550                          873                  257
South Africa                         140                            314                            162                      Switzerland                           782                          864                  382
Sri Lanka                              3                             21                             12                      Taiwan, China                        4,982                        4,098                1,242
Thailand                            1,174                           917                            456                      United Arab Emirates                   54                          461                  150
Tunisia                                0                             37                             11                      United Kingdom                       3,608                        8,384                2,565
Turkey                                37                            475                            183                      United States                       34,955                        72,782              20,339
Ukraine                               27                             78                             39                      Total                               90,558                       147,423              48,141
Uruguay                                9                             23                             21
Venezuela, RB                        155                             77                             87
Vietnam                               27                            182                             97
Total                               15,176                        13,382                          9,372
