                                                   WPS8190


Policy Research Working Paper                     8190




              Preferential Trade Agreements
                and Global Value Chains
              Theory, Evidence, and Open Questions

                                  Michele Ruta




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8190


  Abstract
 Preferential trade agreements today are more numerous                              chains? What is the outlook for trade agreements and global
 and deeper than they were a quarter century ago. Do                                value chains going forward? This paper reviews the small
 deep agreements promote countries’ integration into                                but growing literature on the role of deep agreements as
 global value chains? What are the economic mechanisms?                             the institutional underpinnings of global value chains.
 How do countries choose their trade agreement partners?                            It discusses the available evidence and theoretical argu-
 Would the undoing of deep agreements disrupt global value                          ments, providing directions for future research in this area.




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be contacted
  at mruta@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                       Preferential Trade Agreements and Global Value Chains:
                                 Theory, Evidence, and Open Questions1


                                                 Michele Ruta2
                                                  World Bank




Keywords: Global value chains; Deep and Shallow Trade Agreements
JEL codes: F13; F15


1
  This paper was prepared for the Global Value Chain Development Report which is a joint project by the World
Trade Organization, World Bank, Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, Institute of
Developing Economies – Japan External Trade Organization, and the Research Center of Global Value Chains,
University of International Business and Economics. I would like to thank my coauthors on the papers on which this
paper is in part based, Claudia Hofmann, Alen Mulabdic, Alberto Osnago, Nadia Rocha. I am also grateful to Zhi
Wang for sharing his data and to Andrew Crosby, Michael Ferrantino, Aaditya Mattoo, Alen Mulabdic, Zhiguo Xiao
and seminar participants at the two preparatory conferences in Beijing and Washington DC for comments.
Remaining errors are my responsibility only. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
are entirely those of the author. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors
of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
2
  Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank. Email: mruta@worldbank.org
    1. Introduction
Two phenomena have characterized the trade and trade policy landscape since the early 1990s.
On the trade side, the rise of Global Value Chains (GVCs), i.e., the de-nationalization of
production, has changed the nature of international trade. For instance, trade in parts and
components increased by close to six times between 1990 and 2015 (more than other forms of
trade, which increased by a factor of 4.5). On the policy side, Preferential Trade Agreements
(PTAs) are increasing in number and deepening in content.3 The number of PTAs surged from 50
in 1990 to close to 280 in 2015. New data collected by the World Bank document that these
agreements are also “deepening” in the sense that they cover an expanding set of policy areas
well beyond the traditional focus of PTAs, such as investment and competition policy.
The aim of this paper is to analyze the relationship between preferential trade agreements,
particularly “deep” PTAs, and global value chains. Specifically, the goal is to answer seven policy-
relevant questions:
    i)      How have PTAs evolved over time?
    ii)     Why do countries sign PTAs in a world with global value chains?
    iii)    Do PTAs increase GVC integration?
    iv)     Would the undoing of PTAs affect GVCs?
    v)      How does the content of PTAs impact GVC trade?
    vi)     How do GVCs affect the choice of PTA partners?
    vii)    What is the outlook of the GVC-PTA relationship going forward?
This paper contributes to the large literature on preferential trade agreements (e.g. Limao, 2016)
in different ways. First, based on new World Bank data, I document how PTAs have deepened
over time and how this evolution is associated to the rise of GVCs. Second, I review the theoretical
literature on the rationale for the GVC-PTA relationship and outline several avenues for future
research. Third, I discuss recent empirical research suggesting that deep agreements boost GVC
integration, and showing how this impact differs across country groups. Finally, I present a simple
framework to help us think about the GVC-PTA relationship going forward.
While more work in this area is needed, several findings emerge from this review. New data on
the content of trade agreements and on participation in global value chains point to a strong
positive correlation, with deeper agreements associated to more intense GVC relationships.
Economic theory identifies several reasons for this relationship, ranging from the need to
internalize cross-border policy spillovers to the benefits of stronger commitments in policies that
affect GVC participation. Econometric analysis confirms that deep PTAs boost participation in
global value chains, suggesting that trade agreements can be an effective tool for policy makers
to anchor national producers to global and regional production processes. Going forward, the

3
 In this paper, the term “preferential trade agreements” will be used rather than the term “regional trade
agreements (RTAs)” since some of these agreements are not necessarily between countries within the same region
or in regional proximity.

                                                      2
future of the GVC-PTA relationship will crucially depend on continuing trust in the willingness of
other partners to preserve an open trading system.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 documents the evolution of preferential
trade agreements. Section 3 focuses on GVCs and the rationale for (deep) PTAs. Section 4 studies
the impact of trade agreements on GVCs. Section 5 focuses on how the exit of the UK from the
EU (Brexit) may impact UK-EU GVCs. Section 6 investigates how the content of PTAs affects GVCs.
Section 7 addresses the question of the choice of PTA partners in a GVC context. Section 8
speculates on the future of PTAs and GVCs. Concluding remarks follow.


    2. Evolution of Preferential Trade Agreements4
The number of preferential trade agreements has increased dramatically in the last quarter
century. Fifty trade agreements were in force and notified to the WTO in 1990. The number was
279 at the end of 2015. This dramatic change has spurred a large debate among researchers and
policy makers on the rationale for preferential arrangements, their impact on trade flows, growth
and welfare of member and non-member countries, and their relationship with the broader
system of global trade governance. A large body of literature has been devoted to investigate
these and other issues.5 In this section, I present new evidence on the evolution of PTAs as a basis
for a discussion on the relationship between trade agreements and global value chains.
An often overlooked factor in the literature on trade agreements is that, alongside their
increasing number, the content of PTAs has changed over time. While before the 1990s trade
arrangements mostly involved tariff reductions, more recent PTAs include a set of provisions
covering policy areas that go well beyond that. Specifically, two recent studies (Horn, Mavroidis
and Sapir, 2010; WTO, 2011) document how several trade agreements cover regulatory issues
such as services, intellectual property rights protection, investment, competition policy and
others. Building on the methodology developed in these studies, Hofmann, Osnago and Ruta
(2017) collected information for all preferential trade agreements in force and notified to the
WTO in 2015. Their new database contains information on the inclusion and legal enforceability
of 52 policy areas in 279 PTAs among 189 countries.6
Some novel stylized facts emerge from an analysis of the new data on PTAs. First, the database
can inform on the changing content of PTAs. Figure 1 reports the evolution in the cumulative
number of preferential agreements over time (the solid line) and the number of policy areas that
are covered by newly signed agreements in each year (the shades of color in the histograms). As

4
  This section draws on Hofmann, Osnago and Ruta (2017).
5
  See Freund and Ornelas (2010), WTO (2011) and Limao (2016) for recent surveys of the literature on preferential
trade agreements.
6
  This database offers the most comprehensive and up-to-date data available in terms of the number of trade
agreements, countries, and policy areas covered. The database is freely available on the World Bank website at
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/deep-trade-agreements.

                                                        3
the figure shows, a growing number of trade agreements covers a large set of policy areas (more
than 20) the majority of newly signed PTAs covers between 10 and 20 policy areas; and it is only
a minority of PTAs that focus on few issues (less than 10 policy areas).


Figure 1: The number and content of PTAs

 35                                                                                            300

 30                                                                                            250

 25
                                                                                               200
 20
                                                                                               150
 15
                                                                                               100
 10

  5                                                                                            50


  0                                                                                            0
      1951
      1953
      1955
      1957
      1959
      1961
      1963
      1965
      1967
      1969
      1971
      1973
      1975
      1977
      1979
      1981
      1983
      1985
      1987
      1989
      1991
      1993
      1995
      1997
      1999
      2001
      2003
      2005
      2007
      2009
      2011
      2013
      2015
           More than 20     Between 10 and 20       Less than 10   Not in force   Cumulative




Second, the new database allows to look in detail at the content of trade agreements. In addition
to tariff reductions, more than half of the PTAs in the database include legally enforceable
regulations on some policy areas that fall under the current mandate of the WTO (Figure 2). These
provisions, referred to as “WTO plus” or “WTO+” in the literature, include areas such as customs
regulations, export taxes, anti-dumping, countervailing measures, technical barriers to trade
(TBT), sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards. Provisions outside the WTO mandate (usually
called “WTO extra” or “WTO-X”) include a wide-ranging set of policy areas from investment to
environmental laws, to nuclear safety. The extent to which these provisions are included in PTAs
and whether they are legally enforceable or not varies widely by policy area (Figure 3).
PTA provisions may also be disaggregated in different ways depending on the specific question
under investigation. Following Hofmann et al. (2016), I divide PTA provisions into “core” versus
“non-core”. Core provisions are the ones that the literature identifies as more meaningful from
an economic point of view (e.g. Baldwin, 2008; Damuri, 2012) and include the set of WTO+
provisions and four WTO-X (competition policy, investment, movement of capital and intellectual
property rights protection). As the figures show, along with WTO + provisions, the four core WTO-
X policy areas are the provisions that appear more frequently in PTAs. Almost 90 percent of


                                                4
agreements include at least one of the "core" WTO-X provisions and one-third of PTAs include all
"core" WTO-X provisions.


Figure 2: WTO “plus” policy areas in PTAs

                                           300
              Number of agreements




                                           250
                                           200
                                           150
                                           100
                                           50
                                            0




                                                 Included   Legally enforceable




Figure 3: WTO “extra” policy areas in PTAs

                                     200
 Number of agreements




                                     150

                                     100

                                     50

                                      0




                                                 Included   Legally enforceable




                                                            5
Third, the data can inform on the changing depth of preferential trade agreements. Hofmann et
al. (2017) construct synthetic indexes of “horizontal” depth, which measure the coverage of
policy areas in PTAs. The first index of depth, referred to as “total depth”, is the simple count of
(legally enforceable) provisions included in a PTA. Total depth increased from an average of
around 8 in the 1990s to more than 17 in the last 5 years. An index of “core depth” can be
constructed in a similar way by counting how many core provisions are included and legally
enforceable in a PTA. Core depth increased from around 7 in the 1990s to almost 14 in the period
2010-2015. Finally, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) can be used to obtain a third index of
depth, referred to as “PCA depth”, that accounts for most of the variability in the data. PCA depth
increased from around 1 in the 1990s to 2.8 in the 2010-2015 period.
Fourth, the wide country coverage of the new World Bank data set allows to analyze the
heterogeneity of deep PTAs across regions and income levels. Europe is the region with the
highest number of PTAs signed. Moreover, these PTAs are also the deepest mainly because of
the EC-Treaty and the following enlargements of the EU. The average total depth of EU
agreements is 25. Members of EFTA, Japan and the Republic of Korea also tend to sign deep PTAs
with an average of 23, 21 and 20 provisions respectively. PTAs signed between developed and
developing countries (i.e. North-South PTAs) included on average almost as many provisions as
North-North PTAs. The depth of North-North PTAs in force is around 22 while the depth of North-
South PTAs is 20. However, legal enforceability is generally weaker in North-South PTAs relative
to North-North agreements. Finally, South-South trade agreements tend to be shallower than
other PTAs with an average total depth of 13.


    3. GVCs and the Rationale for Trade Agreements
In this section, I look at the rationale for trade agreements, particularly “deep” agreements, in a
world with global value chains. There is a large literature that studies the motives for trade policy
cooperation and the design of trade agreements in a traditional setting where production is not
fragmented internationally.7 The focus of this literature is generally on cooperation on tariffs,
consistently with the idea that the main problem that trade agreements solve is to internalize
the terms-of-trade externality created by unilateral tariffs. But as Figure 4 shows, there is a
positive correlation between GVC trade (measured as trade in parts and components) and the
“depth” of trade agreements (measured by the number of policy areas covered by the
agreements). This relationship indicates that the rationale for trade agreements in the context of
global value chains may be more complex than in settings where production is not fragmented
internationally.


7
 See Maggi (2014), Bagwell, Bown and Staiger (2015), Bagwell and Staiger (2016) and Grossman (2016) for recent
reviews.

                                                       6
Figure 4: Depth of PTAs and GVC trade




Lawrence (1996) introduced the notion of “shallow” and “deep” trade agreements. Shallow
agreements are defined as those PTAs that focus on tariffs and other border measures that
directly affect market access. Economic theory and evidence suggests a relationship between
cross-border production and shallow PTAs. For instance, Blanchard and Matschke (2014)
estimate that a 10% increase in U.S. foreign affiliate exports to the U.S. is associated with a 4
percentage points increase in the rate of preferential duty-free access. Intuitively, firms that
produce offshore are more likely to lobby for lower tariffs on the products re-imported in the
U.S. market. Similarly, domestic firms may choose to locate production stages in another PTA
member under the expectation that tariffs on re-imported goods will be lower.
Deep agreements are those PTAs that go beyond traditional market access issues and include
disciplines such as investment, competition policy or the harmonization of product regulations.
The new empirical evidence on the relationship between PTA depth and GVC trade is the core of
the next sections. Here, I discuss this relationship from a theoretical point of view (Antras and
Staiger, 2012; Baldwin, 2008; WTO, 2011; Ederington and Ruta, 2016). A simple way to explain
the correlation in Figure 4 is that certain behind the border policies need to be disciplined in trade
agreements for GVCs to operate efficiently. First, the unbundling of stages of production across

                                                  7
borders creates new forms of cross-border policy spillovers beyond the traditional terms-of-trade
externality. Second, governments may face credibility problems with respect to behind the
border measures in the context of GVCs. Third, the costs created by coordination externalities
(e.g. the costs of heterogeneous regulations) may be higher in the presence of cross border
production. These spillovers and credibility concerns generate a demand for deeper forms of
integration.
Despite the rich set of arguments that are present in the literature, many aspects of the
relationship between deep PTAs and GVCs have not been incorporated in formal models. First
and foremost, the fundamental question of the role that deep agreements play in the presence
of GVCs has not been rigorously investigated. For instance, Antras and Staiger (2012) show that
behind the border policies create cross-border spillovers when production is internationally
fragmented. While they indicate that deep provisions in PTAs may allow governments to
internalize these externalities, the model does not provide a formal treatment of this point.
Similarly, the commitment rationale for deep agreements has only been formalized for specific
provisions (e.g. domestic subsidies in Brou and Ruta, 2013), and this has not been done in a GVC
context. Finally, papers that study the harmonization of standards and other forms of regulatory
cooperation (e.g. Costinot, 2008) generally rely on traditional trade models that assume that
production is purely national.
Several other interesting questions are open and would constitute important avenues for future
research. A first set of questions relates to the content of deep agreements. A large trade
literature has recently investigated the role of institutions in shaping the international
organization of production (Antras, 2015). Osnago et al. (2015) find evidence that the content of
deep PTAs affects FDI decisions, suggesting that the role of specific provisions in shaping GVCs
may be relevant. But more work is needed to understand the specific channels. A second area
relates to the role of preferential as opposed to multilateral deep integration. Why is deep
integration generally taking place in PTAs? How are PTA partners selected in a GVC context? I will
elaborate on these questions in Section 7.


      4. Do Deep Agreements Promote GVCs?8
The relationship between GVCs and PTAs runs in both directions. An important question from a
policy perspective is to which extent trade agreements, and particularly deep PTAs, can boost
GVC integration. Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016) use a gravity model to empirically investigate
this question. The analysis exploits the new World Bank data on the content of PTAs described in
Section 2. Bilateral GVC integration is measured in two ways: trade in parts and components and
value-added trade. Trade in parts and components has the advantage of being available for a
larger set of countries and years covered by the new data set on PTAs. Value-added trade is a


8
    This section is based on Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016).

                                                          8
more precise measure of GVC involvement, but it is limited to a small sample of countries (41)
and time coverage is limited to 1995-2011.9
The empirical approach is based on the standard augmented gravity, which has been widely used
to assess the impact of PTAs on trade flows (for a seminal paper, see Baier and Bergstrand, 2007).
Differently from the standard approach, which uses a “dummy” to identify the presence of a
trade agreement between a country pair, Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016) use the three measures
of the “depth” of PTAs discussed in Section 2 (“total depth”, “core depth” and “PCA depth”). As
standard in the modern gravity literature, the regressions include a set of fixed effects and
controls for various determinants of bilateral trade.
Signing deep agreements has a large and positive impact on GVC trade. Figure 5 offers a summary
of the regression results found in Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016). Specifically, the figure reports
the estimated coefficients of the impact of PTA depth on GVC trade. The first histogram reports
the coefficient estimated using the measure of trade in value added, while the second histogram
reports the estimated coefficients for trade in parts and components. For completeness, I report
the data for each of the three measures of depth. The analysis shows that adding a provision to
a PTA increases bilateral trade in parts and components by 1.5 percent and re-exported value
added by 0.4 percent. This means that signing the deepest PTA in the sample doubles trade in
parts and components and increases re-exported value added by about 22 percent.




9
 Data on trade in parts and components come from COMTRADE, while the data on trade in value added are based
on the decomposition by Wang et al. (2016) and come from WIOD.

                                                     9
Figure 5: The impact of deep PTAs on GVC trade
             .15
  Marginal trade impact
   .05       0     .1




                                  th




                                                                                                      th
                                                                     th
                                ep




                                                                                                     ep
                                                                   ep
                               D




                                                                                                    D
                                                               D




                                                                                                 A
                                l




                                                              e
                             ta




                                                              or




                                                                                               PC
                          To




                                                         C




                                       Trade in value added                    Trade in parts and components




The analysis of the impact of PTAs on GVC trade presents two difficult econometric challenges.
The first is that, as first noted in Johnson and Noguera (2014) and Noguera (2012), value added
trade depends not only on bilateral trade costs but also on trade costs with third countries. The
second challenge is the endogeneity of GVC trade and preferential trade agreements. The study
by Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016) attempts to address both problems.
First, in order to take into consideration the indirect effects that preferential trade agreements
by third countries may have on GVC trade of other countries, it is necessary to modify the gravity
equation and weigh the depth variable of interest with weights that take into account the
international input-output structure. Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016) follow the methodology
proposed by Noguera (2012) and find that accounting for the depth of third-country agreements
increases the impact of PTAs on global value chains.
The second empirical concern is of endogeneity. Deep PTAs may stimulate the creation of GVCs
by providing common disciplines that allow to internalize cross-border policy spillovers and
address credibility problems. But countries already involved in GVCs may be more likely to sign
deep PTAs because cross-border production creates a demand for deep provisions. The fixed-
effect approach partially controls for this reverse causality as it compares country-pairs before
and after a PTA is signed. However, there may be other time-varying country-pair characteristics

                                                                          10
that may not be controlled for. Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016) adopt an instrumental variable
(IV) approach to address this type of endogeneity using as an instrument for the depth of the PTA
between country i and country j the (weighted) average depth of all the agreements signed by i
and j with any other country excluding the agreement(s) they have in common. Results of the IV
analysis confirm the relevance of deep agreements in boosting GVC trade.
An alternative approach that allows to determine the importance of deep PTAs for GVCs is to
look at the effect of depth on different sectors. The effect of deep PTAs should be stronger in
sectors that are more integrated in GVCs. In order to test this, Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016)
exploit the decomposition of gross exports into value added components available for 13
manufacturing sectors in WIOD for the period 1995-2011. They augment a sector-level gravity
regression with an interaction term between depth and an index of vertical specialization. The
coefficient of the interaction term is consistently positive and significant across specifications and
using different variables of depth and provisions. The results suggest that deep PTAs have a larger
impact on GVC intensive sectors.


       5. Undoing Trade Agreements: Brexit and GVCs10
The previous section looked at the impact of PTAs in boosting GVCs trade. In this section, I ask
the opposite question -i.e. whether the undoing of a PTA would negatively affect global value
chains. As an application, I focus on recent work that attempts to assess the trade impact of
Brexit, the UK’s exit from the European Union. Specifically, Mulabdic, Osnago and Ruta (2017)
study the effect that EU membership had on trade of the UK, most notably with its European
partners, and then use this information to assess the future of UK-EU trade under different
scenarios.
The EU has been a precursor of deep integration. The World Bank data on the content of trade
agreements indicate that the EU is the deepest PTA among the 279 currently in force. The
relationship between the UK and the rest of the EU members before Brexit will actually happen
is regulated by the European Community (EC) Treaty and the following enlargement agreements
which cover 44 policy areas ranging from standards to movements of capital, to labor mobility.
The EU is also the region that has the largest share of intra-regional trade. The UK economy is
part of this intense network of trade relations. First, the EU is the most important trade partner
of the UK accounting for 52 percent of UK’s exports of goods and services. Second, the UK is
closely integrated in regional value chains. For instance, the share of intermediates value added
in total domestic value added in UK exports (the majority of which goes to the EU) is close to 70
percent.
Mulabdic, Osnago and Ruta (2017) investigate the extent to which the depth of the EU and its
trade agreements with third countries contributed to boost UK trade using a gravity equation

10
     This section is based on Mulabdic, Osnago and Ruta (2017).

                                                         11
augmented with a measure of depth as discussed in Section 4. By interacting the depth of PTAs
with dummies identifying the UK, they can quantify the effect of the depth of trade agreements
on UK imports and exports of goods, services and value added. Deep trade agreements are found
to increase goods and services trade by 42 percent on average. The depth of UK’s trade
agreements strongly increased trade in services: as a result of its EU membership and its
participation in deep PTAs signed by the EU with third countries, UK services trade more than
doubled. Deep PTAs also increased domestic value added in gross exports of the UK. This effect
is mainly driven by the UK’s stronger GVC relationship with its EU partners: UK’s intermediates
value added in gross exports (forward linkages) increased by 31 percent thanks to deep PTAs. In
addition, foreign value added in UK exports (backward linkages) was boosted by EU membership
by 37 percent. Figure 6 provides an overview of the trade effects of EU membership on UK trade.


Figure 6: The impact of EU membership on UK trade




Mulabdic, Osnago and Ruta (2017) then use the estimate from the gravity regressions to analyze
the impact that changes in the UK-EU trade agreement can have on UK-EU trade relations going
forward. This is a difficult task, as the only certainty on the future institutional setting is its


                                                12
uncertainty. They address this problem by considering three distinct scenarios, with decreasing
depth of the future agreement between the UK and the rest of the EU. The first scenario assumes
that the PTA between the UK and the EU will be as deep as the agreement the EU has with
Norway (called, “soft” Brexit). In the second scenario, the UK and the EU will sign a PTA as deep
as the average PTA the EU currently has with third countries (referred to as “hard” Brexit). Finally,
the third scenario (“very hard” Brexit) has no agreement.
This analysis indicates that UK-EU trade declines under all scenarios and that this drop is sharper
the lower the depth of the future arrangement relative to the depth of the EU agreement. In
terms of value added trade, the decline ranges from 6 percent of the “Norway” scenario to 28
percent of no agreement. In all scenarios, the largest declines are for UK services and GVC trade
with the rest of the EU. Summary results are reported in Table 1. These predictions should be
seen as average effects. As it takes time for trade flows to respond to changes in trade costs, the
expectation is that the impact in the short-run to be smaller than in the longer term. Another
caveat is that the analysis assumes that the processes of integration and disintegration are
symmetric. In practice, this may not be the case: once GVC linkages are formed, they may be
more resilient to changes in trade policy than the analysis predicts.


Table 1: Changes in UK’s bilateral trade with the EU under different scenarios

                                 "average
                  "Norway"                      "no-agreement"
                                 PTA"
                  scenario                      scenario
                                 scenario
 Goods           -12%           -38%      -50%
 Services        -16%           -48%      -62%
 Domestic
                 -6%            -20%      -28%
 Value Added
 GVC forward
                 -5%            -18%      -26%
 linkages
 GVC
 backward        -7%            -25%      -34%
 linkages
 Notes: Depth decreases from 44 to 36 in the “Norway”
 scenario, to 14 in the “average PTA”, and to 0 in the “no-
 agreement” scenario.
 Source: Mulabdic et al. (2017)




                                                 13
       6. GVCs and the Content of PTAs11
In this section, I dig deeper into the relationship between deep PTAs and GVCs and explore
empirically potential heterogeneity in the effects of deep PTAs. Specifically, following Osnago,
Rocha and Ruta (2016), I consider two dimensions of heterogeneity: i) splitting the provisions
into different categories (WTO plus and extra); and ii) dividing PTAs by the level of development
of country-pairs (North-North, North-South and South-South). These extensions allow to
investigate what type of provisions drive the relationship between deep agreements and GVCs
among different sets of countries.
The reason for signing trade agreements could be different depending on the countries involved
and on the level of liberalization already achieved. As discussed in Section 2, the World Bank data
show that North-North PTAs and North-South PTAs tend to have similar depth and South-South
PTAs are on average shallower. In addition, the prevalence of WTO plus and WTO extra provisions
varies according to the level of development of the signatories of the agreement. As Figure 7
shows, PTAs that are North-North and North-South tend to have more WTO extra provisions,
although in the case of the latter they are less likely to be legally enforceable. South-South
agreements tend to focus on WTO plus issues, which are the more traditional trade policy areas.


Figure 7: The content of PTAs across income groups




There is no formal theory to guide the analysis of differential effects of deep PTAs across
countries’ level of development, but a plausible argument is that deep PTAs matter for advanced
and developing economies for different reasons. As trade among developed countries is already
largely liberalized and domestic institutions are robust, North-North deep agreements mostly
aim at internalizing cross-border policy spillovers. Deep agreements have additional roles for
developing countries, as trade generally faces higher barriers and domestic institutions are


11
     This section is based on Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016).

                                                         14
weaker relative to advanced economies. North-South deep trade agreements offer an anchor to
boost GVC participation of developing countries by providing a commitment device to border
and behind the border policies. Since tariffs between developing countries are often still high,
South-South PTAs affect GVC participation mostly through traditional trade liberalization.
To investigate the effect of the content of PTAs depending on the level of development of the
countries involved, Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2016) run three regressions on different groups of
countries: North-North, North-South, South-South. To allow for a broader sample of countries,
data in trade and parts and components are used in these regressions to measure the extent of
GVC integration among country pairs. In each of these regressions the key explanatory variable
is no longer the depth (i.e. the number of provisions covered by the agreement) but the number
of WTO plus and WTO extra provisions in a PTA.
The regression analysis shows that the content of PTAs matters for GVC integration, and the
impact varies by income groups. Provisions outside the current WTO mandate (e.g. investment,
competition policy) drive the effects of North-South trade in parts and components. The impact
of an additional WTO extra provision in a North-South PTA increases GVC integration by 4.3
percent. Provisions under the current WTO mandate (tariff reduction, etc.) drive the effect of
deep PTAs on South-South trade in parts and components. Each additional WTO plus provision
boosts South-South GVC integration by 8.3 percent.


   7. GVCs and the Choice of PTA Partners
This section studies countries’ choice of PTA partners. We can look at this question from a
normative and from a positive perspective. From the first point of view the issue is whether the
international fragmentation of production changes the merits of regionalism relative to
multilateralism. From a positive perspective, instead the question is whether the presence of
GVCs (or the possibility to anchor a country to them) changes the way countries select their
trading partners. I briefly look at both issues from a theoretical perspective and then discuss an
application of this question to China.
The debate on the merits of regionalism versus multilateralism dates back at least to Viner (1950).
In traditional models, where production is entirely national and tariffs are the sole instrument of
trade policy, PTAs are sub-optimal to a multilateral agreement from a global welfare perspective.
Preferential arrangements may still be efficient from the perspective of an individual country
both for economic and non-economic reasons. First, countries may benefit from a PTA to the
expense of other countries not included in the agreement. This would be the case where exports
from members displace exports from non-members. Second, countries may have non-economic
reasons to sign trade agreements, as PTAs can strengthen security ties or work as a building block
for political integration. As these arguments are non-economic in nature or beggar-thy-neighbor,
PTAs are an inefficient substitute for multilateral trade liberalization from an economic point of
view.
                                                15
This logic is altered in the presence of global value chains. As discussed in Section 2, GVCs create
new rationales for PTAs, as the unbundling of stages of production across borders creates new
forms of international policy spillovers and time-consistency problems. This in turn generates a
demand for deeper forms of integration. Differently from traditional agreements that focus on
tariffs, for deep agreements involving behind-the-border policies a tradeoff arises between
economies of scale and heterogeneity of preferences.12 This tradeoff is well known from the
public economics literature that deals with fiscal federalism (Oates, 1999). While non-economic
arguments and new beggar-thy-neighbor gains (e.g. “rule of law” externality) may still drive the
decisions to form PTAs, smaller groups can be efficient from an economic point of view as they
efficiently trade off the costs and benefits of deep integration. As argued in WTO (2011), deep
PTAs may complement rather than substitute the multilateral trading system as they allow to
coordinate or harmonize policies that could not be coordinated or harmonized at the global level.
From a positive perspective, the literature on (shallow) PTAs struggled with the notion of the
ideal partner (Schiff and Winters, 2003). Two main sets of economic characteristics are found to
increase the benefits of forming a PTA with a certain partner. The first is trade intensity, which
suggests that the two countries are “natural” trade partners. Characteristics such as geographical
proximity that increase the trade intensity among partners make it more convenient to reduce
bilateral tariffs. The second set of characteristics has to do with comparative advantage.
Complementarities in production and/or consumption increase the benefit of forming a PTA.
Are these characteristics the relevant ones in the context of GVCs? The answer is not obvious and
the literature is not yet developed on this point. Some characteristics still matter. For instance,
proximity may be important to select PTA partners because face-to-face communication is
relevant to manage supply chains. Similarly, comparative advantage can be defined at the task
level: complementarities, say between different stages of production, may still guide the choice
of PTA partners. However, other characteristics would appear to matter. One example is cross-
country differences in policy preferences. If GVCs require deep agreements for their smooth
functioning, then ideal PTA partners should not have policy preferences that are too different as
this would increase the cost of coordinating and harmonizing policies.
I close this section with a focus on the experience of China in choosing PTA partners based on the
recent work by Cheng et al. (2016). In order to characterize the PTAs from the point of view of
GVCs, Cheng et al. (2016) borrow the concept of the “smiling curve”, with the horizontal axis
representing a continuum of tasks or stages of GVC from upstream to downstream covering
research & development (R&D), intermediates, assembling and processing, marketing and after-
sale services, and with the vertical axis depicting the value-added generated from various tasks
or stages. Based on this notion, Cheng et al. (2016) define “vertical” PTAs as the agreements

12
  A similar rationale is discussed in Maggi (2014). Specifically, bargaining frictions may be higher for negotiations
that involve many countries and complex issues. For this reason, deep provisions may be more efficiently
negotiated in a PTA or, alternatively, in an agreement involving a subset of members within the WTO, such as a
plurilateral or critical-mass agreements.

                                                          16
formed as the result of the vertical division of labor along the supply chain, with member
economies locating at different GVC positions. In other words, vertical PTAs are the agreements
that are driven by comparative advantage at the task level.
Currently, China has concluded and is implementing 13 PTAs involving 21 individual economies.13
There are other 11 bilateral and regional PTAs under negotiation or being proposed, and the
sixteen-member Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). With this framework in
mind, Cheng et al. (2016) ask the question if China’s PTAs exploit complementarities in
production along the supply chain. Based on the work of Wang et al. (2016), Cheng et al. (2016)
quantify China’s GVC linkage with its PTA and non-PTA partners. Their results indicate that GVC
complementarities play an important role in the choice of PTA partners for China.


     8. The Future of GVCs and Deep Agreements
In this section, I turn to the question of the future of GVCs and deep agreements. The past 25
years have been a period of deepening trade agreements and growing intensity of global value
chains. Should we expect this trend to continue in the next quarter century? In light on the
growing backlash to globalization in advanced economies, this is no longer a rhetoric question.
On the one hand, there are reasons for optimism, as GVCs and PTAs reinforce each other and
make it less likely to slip backwards. On the other hand, the future of this relationship should not
be taken for granted as cross-border production decisions depend on the expectations of trading
partners’ future trade policies. Negative expectations could result in a reversal of the current
trends towards GVC expansion and deeper integration. The rest of this section elaborates on
these points.
I look first at the reasons for optimism. Some observers have argued that the current
globalization backlash has similarities to the backlash of the early 20th century and that this may
lead to a Prisoner Dilemma situation where countries escalate protectionism as in the 1930s. This
pessimistic view of the future of trade relations does not acknowledge that the production
structure and trade policy landscape of today are very different from the one of the early 20th
century.
As the evidence discussed in this paper shows, trade agreements have stimulated the creation of
GVCs. The reason is that trade agreements allow to internalize cross-border policy externalities,
lower trade costs and provide deeper common disciplines that facilitate the operation of
economic activities that span multiple borders. In turn, GVCs have changed the political economy
of trade policy, discouraging protectionism and creating a demand for deep integration. Recent
evidence shows that governments set lower tariffs the higher the domestic content of foreign-

13
  The PTAs are with Australia; Chile; Costa Rica; Hong Kong SAR, China; Iceland; Macao SAR, China; New Zealand;
Pakistan; Peru; Singapore; the Republic of Korea; Switzerland; and the 10-member Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) (Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam).

                                                      17
produced final goods (Blanchard et al. 2016) and that countries sign deeper agreements the
higher the GVC trade with partners (Orefice and Rocha, 2014). This two-way relationship
between GVCs and PTAs supports the view that trade disintegration (protectionism, undoing of
trade agreements) is unlikely.
Despite these dramatic changes, however, the future of the GVC-PTA relationship should not be
taken for granted. GVCs are the result of firms’ investment / sourcing decisions that are
endogenous as they depend on expectations of future trade policies. If firms expect a change in
the course of future trade policy, they will take this into account in their decisions possibly leading
them to re-nationalize (part of) their production processes. In this context, expectations can lead
to multiple equilibria and give rise to coordination failures. More than the well-known Prisoner
Dilemma, the current situation may be described by a Trust Dilemma (or a coordination game)
where what is rational to choose depends on the beliefs of what others will do.
The simple game reproduced in Table 2 below provides an illustration of the Trust Dilemma that
may characterize the GVC-PTA relationship -I will refer to it as the Trust Dilemma of Deep
Integration. Consider two players: Home and Foreign. And assume that each one of them has two
strategies. They can opt for deep agreements and GVCs or choose national production and no
trade agreement. Each player chooses an action without knowing the choice of the other. If a
player chooses to maintain an international production process and a deep agreement, it needs
the cooperation of the partner to succeed. Choosing national production and no trade
agreement, on the other hand, requires no cooperation with the other player but also leads to
lower welfare. The payoffs in Table 2 capture this situation.


Table 2: The Trust Dilemma of Deep Integration

 Home, Foreign                    GVC /                           National production /
                                  Deep agreements                 No agreement

 GVC /                                        2, 2                            0, 1
 Deep agreements
 National production /                        1, 0                             1,1
 No agreement


The Trust Dilemma of deep integration has two pure strategy Nash equilibria. The first
equilibrium is the upper-left corner where Home and Foreign cooperate; the second equilibrium
is the lower-right corner where the two players defect and choose not to cooperate. As global
welfare is inferior in the latter, this equilibrium can be described as a coordination failure.
Importantly, this equilibrium can be the result of a self-fulfilling prophecy in the sense that it can
be triggered by the belief that the other player will not choose to cooperate.

                                                  18
While only an example, this game illustrates why continuing trust in the willingness of others to
cooperate is essential to the future of the GVC-PTA relationship. In the past 25 years,
governments signed deep agreements and firms fragmented production internationally. These
decisions reinforced each other and sustained a cooperative equilibrium (the upper-left corner).
In the next 25 years, changing expectations on the course of policy could lead to a reversal and
result in an inferior equilibrium where production processes are progressively renationalized and
trade agreements undone (the lower-right corner). This coordination failure can be avoided as
long as firms’ expectations of future trade policy will not induce them to opt for national
production to which policy makers would respond offering protection and undoing trade
agreements.


   9. Conclusions
New World Bank data on the content of trade agreements show that PTAs are becoming deeper.
This paper reviewed the recent literature on the relationship between the deepening of PTAs and
GVC integration. The key points that emerge from this analysis can be summarized as follows:
First, economic theory indicates that PTAs and GVC integration are related, as the smooth
functioning of cross border production activities calls for the regulation of a number of behind-
the-border policy areas. Importantly, the theory also points out that, in a GVC context, PTAs and
the multilateral trade system generally complement each other as some policy areas can be more
efficiently regulated within smaller groups of like-minded countries. There are, however, many
important questions on the relationship between PTAs and GVCs that remain open. One such
question is on the content (or, equivalently, the efficient design) of deep PTAs; yet another is on
the optimal choice of PTA partners. These are questions that the literature has investigated in
models of shallow agreements and national production, but not for deep agreements and GVCs.
Second, thanks to the new data on the content of PTAs and on measurement of GVC integration,
some progress has been made to illuminate the extent of the GVC-PTA relationship. First, recent
evidence shows that the depth of PTAs boosts GVC integration and that undoing this depth, as in
the case of Brexit, is likely to hurt GVCs. Second, the content of PTAs also matters: WTO extra
provisions are key drivers of GVCs for North-South PTAs, while WTO plus provisions are important
for South-South GVC integration. Third, an analysis of China’s trade agreements indicates that
the choice of the “right” PTA partners is affected by the GVC position of a country, stressing the
importance of comparative advantage at the task level among other factors.
In closing this paper, I turned to the question of the future of GVCs and deep agreements. I argued
that there are reasons for optimism and reasons for concern. In the past 25 years, governments
signed deep PTAs and firms fragmented production. These decisions reinforced each other and
sustained a cooperative equilibrium. In the next 25 years, changing expectations on the course
of policy could lead to a reversal and result in an inferior equilibrium where production is
progressively renationalized and trade agreements undone. Continuing trust in the willingness of
                                                19
others to cooperate to preserve an open system is essential to the future of the PTA-GVC
relationship.




                                          20
References
Antràs, Pol. 2015. Global Production: Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Antràs, Pol, and Robert Staiger. 2012. “Offshoring and the Role of Trade Agreements.” American
Economic Review 102 (7): 3140–83.
Bagwell, Kyle, Chad P. Bown, and Robert W. Staiger. 2015. “Is the WTO Passé?” National Bureau
of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper No. 21303, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2016. “The Design of Trade Agreements.” In Handbook of
Commercial Policy, Vol. 1A, edited by K. Bagwell and R. Staiger, 435¬–529. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Baier S. L., and J. H. Bergstrand. 2007. “Do Free Trade Agreements Actually Increase Members'
International Trade?” Journal of International Economics 71 (1): 72–95.
Baldwin, Richard. 2008. “Big-Think Regionalism: A Critical Survey.” NBER Working Paper No.
14056, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Blanchard, Emily, Chad Bown, and Robert Johnson. 2016. "Global Supply Chains and Trade
Policy." NBER Working Paper No. 21883, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Blanchard, Emily, and Xenia Matschke. 2015. “U.S. Multinationals and Preferential Market
Access.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (4): 839–54.
Brou, Daniel, and Michele Ruta. 2013. “A Commitment Theory of Subsidy Agreements.” The B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 13 (1): 239–70.
Cheng, D., X. Wang, Z. Xiao, and W. Yao. 2016. “How Does the Selection of FTA Partner(s) Matter
in the Context of GVCs? The Experience of China.” Working Paper, Fudan University, Shanghai.
Costinot, Arnaud. 2008. “A Comparative Institutional Analysis of Agreements on Product
Standards.” Journal of International Economics 75 (1): 197–213.
Damuri, Y. R. 2012. “21st Century Regionalism and Production Sharing Practice.” Center for Trade
and Economic Integration (CTEI) Working Paper No. 2012-4, CTEI, Geneva.
EC (European Commission). World Input-Output Database (WIOD). Brussels: EC. Available at:
http://www.wiod.org/home.
Ederington, Josh, and Michele Ruta. 2016. “Non-Tariff Measures and the World Trading System.”
In Handbook of Commercial Policy, Vol. 1B, edited by K. Bagwell and R. Staiger. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Freund, C., and E. Ornelas. 2010. "Regional Trade Agreements." Annual Review of Economics 2
(1): 139–66.

                                              21
Grossman, G. 2016. “The Purpose of Trade Agreements.” In Handbook of Commercial Policy, Vol.
1A, edited by K. Bagwell and R. Staiger, 379–434. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Hofmann, Claudia, Alberto Osnago, and Michele Ruta. 2017. “Horizontal Depth: A New Database
on the Content of Deep Agreements.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 7981, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Horn, H., P. C. Mavroidis, and A. Sapir. 2010. “Beyond the WTO? An Anatomy of EU and US
Preferential Trade Agreements.” The World Economy 33 (11): 1565–88.
Johnson, Robert, and Guillermo Noguera. 2014. “A Portrait of Trade in Value Added over Four
Decades.” Working Paper, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH.
Lawrence, Robert Z. 1996. Regionalism, Multilateralism, and Deeper Integration. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution.
Limao, N. 2016. “Preferential Trade Agreements.” In Handbook of Commercial Policy, Vol. 1B,
edited by K. Bagwell and R. Staiger, 279–367. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Maggi, Giovanni. 2014. “International Trade Agreements.” In Handbook of International
Economics, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, 317–90.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Mulabdic, A., A. Osnago, and M. Ruta. 2017. “Deep Integration and UK-EU Trade Relations.”
Policy Research Working Paper No. 7947, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Noguera, G. 2012. “Trade Costs and Gravity for Gross and Value Added Trade.” Working Paper,
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
Oates, Wallace E. 1999. "An Essay on Fiscal Federalism." Journal of Economic Literature 37 (3):
1120–49.
Orefice, G., and R. Rocha. 2014. "Deep Integration and Production Networks: An Empirical
Analysis." The World Economy 37 (1): 106–36.
Osnago, Alberto, Nadia Rocha, and Michele Ruta. 2015. “Deep Trade Agreements and Vertical
FDI: The Devil is in the Details.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 7464, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
———. 2016. “Deep Trade Agreements and Global Value Chains.” Working Paper, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Schiff, Maurice, and L. Alan Winters. 2003. Regional Integration and Development. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
UN (United Nations). UN Commodity Trade Statistics Database (Comtrade). New York: UN.
Available at: https://comtrade.un.org/.


                                              22
Viner, Jacob. 1950. The Customs Union Issue. New York: Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace.
Wang, Zhi, Shang Jin Wei, and Kunfu Zhu. 2016. “Quantifying International Production Sharing at
the Bilateral and Sector Levels.” Working Paper, Columbia University, New York.
WTO (World Trade Organization). 2011. World Trade Report 2011—The WTO and preferential
trade agreements: From co-existence to coherence. Geneva: WTO.




                                              23
