                                                   WPS8098


Policy Research Working Paper                     8098




             Do Individual Investors Ignore
                  Transaction Costs?
                                 Deniz Anginer
                                Snow Xue Han
                                Celim Yildizhan




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8098


  Abstract
 Using close to 800,000 (2,000,000) transactions by 66,000                          sophisticated households. Households whose holding peri-
 (303,000) households in the United States (in Finland), this                       ods are positively related to transaction costs also earn higher
 paper shows that individual investors with longer holding                          gross returns on their investments before accounting for
 periods choose to hold less liquid stocks in their portfolios,                     transaction costs, suggesting that attention to non-salient
 consistent with Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) theory of                            transaction costs is an indication of investing ability. The
 liquidity clienteles. The relationship between holding peri-                       main findings are confirmed by analyzing changes in investors’
 ods and transaction costs is stronger among more financially                       holding periods around exogenous shocks to stock liquidity.




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at danginer@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
        Do Individual Investors Ignore Transaction Costs?*



                          Deniz Anginer, Snow Xue Han, Celim Yildizhan




JEL Classifications: G11, G12, G14
Keywords: individual investors; liquidity; transaction costs; investor attention; behavioral bias


* Deniz Anginer, World Bank, danigner@worldbank.org. Snow Xue Han, Univesity of San Frnacisco,
hanx@sfsu.edu. Celim Yildizhan, University of Georgia, celim@uga.edu. The authors wish to thank Jussi Keppo,
Jeff Netter, Bradley Paye, Annette Poulsen Tyler Shumway, Nejat Seyhun, Noah Stoffman, Uday Rajan, Paolo
Pasquariello, seminar participants at the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Erasmus Liquidity
Conference, Tel Aviv University Finance Conference and the Western Finance Association meetings for comments
and suggestions. All errors are our own. This paper is based on an earlier draft titled “Liquidity Clienteles.”
1. Introduction

In a theoretical model, Amihud and Mendelson (1986) show that transaction costs cause a clientele

effect in equity markets. Investors with longer holding periods choose to hold stocks with higher

transaction costs in equilibrium. Amihud and Mendelson (1986) emphasize that this relationship

between transaction costs and holding periods of investors represents a rational response by an

efficient market. Counter to Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) conjecture that investors understand

and incorporate the impact of transaction costs, recent findings in the behavioral finance literature

suggest that individual investors have bounded rationality and tend to ignore non-salient costs

when making investment decisions. In this paper, we use the trading records of households in the

US and in Finland, to investigate whether individual investors are cognizant of transaction costs

when making trading decisions and hold illiquid securities longer as stipulated by Amihud and

Mendelson (1986), or whether they ignore transaction costs consistent with the findings in the

behavioral finance literature.

    There is evidence that investors ignore non-salient costs as they relate to mutual fund fees.

Barber, Odean and Zheng (2005) show that investors pay attention only to the salient costs of

mutual funds, but ignore hidden operating costs. Consistent with these findings Gil-Bazo and

Verdu (2008, 2009) document that there is a negative relation between mutual funds' before-fee

performance and the fees they charge to investors. Surveys also suggest that retail investors do

not understand all costs associated with investing in mutual funds (NASD Investor Literacy Survey

2003; Alexander, Jones, and Nigro, 1998).1



1
  For example, only 21% of the retail investors that responded to NASD Investor Literacy Survey (2003) knew the
meaning of a “no load” mutual fund.




                                                       2
    There is also evidence that investors do not pay attention to non-salient costs in other domains.

Hossain and Morgan (2006), using a field experiment, show that buyers in Ebay auctions ignore

shipping costs that are not as salient as the price of the item being auctioned. Chetty, Looney and

Kroft (2009), document that consumers underreact to taxes that are not salient. Similarly,

Finkelstein (2009) finds that drivers are less aware of tolls paid electronically and estimate that

tolls are 20 to 40 percent higher than they would have been without electronic toll collection. These

findings suggest that individual investors may not fully understand and incorporate non-salient

transaction costs such as bid-ask spreads and price impact when trading.

    Consistent with this notion of investors not paying attention to non-salient costs, a number of

studies have found that individual investors tend to overtrade and lose substantial amounts to

transaction costs without any gain in performance. Barber and Odean (2000), for instance, show

that while there is little difference in the gross performance of individual investors who trade

frequently and those who trade infrequently, the net returns of infrequent traders are higher by

about 7% per year, after accounting for transaction costs. Barber and Odean (2000) attribute their

findings to individual investors’ overconfidence.2

    However, losses incurred by individual investors after accounting for transaction costs do not

necessarily imply that these investors are not paying attention to transaction costs. First, investors

can trade for a variety of reasons other than information or behavioral biases. Investors may trade

when they experience income shocks (Lynch and Tan 2011) or when they experience exogenous




2
  Similarly, Barber et al. (2009), using a complete transaction history of all investors in Taiwan, China, find that
individual investor losses due to transaction costs equal 2.2 % of GDP, without any gain in performance. French
(2008) finds that, each year, investors spend about 0.67% of the aggregate value of the market on transaction costs,
again without any gain in performance. He estimates the capitalized cost of active investing to be at least 10% of the
total market capitalization.



                                                          3
liquidity shocks (Huang 2003). Second, even if most of the overtrading by individual investors

could be attributed to overconfidence, there is no reason for such investors to not be paying

attention to transaction costs. In this paper, we directly test whether investors pay attention to

transaction costs by examining the relationship between transaction costs and the holding periods

of individual investors. Rather than focusing on trading performance alone, we analyze if

individual investors understand the trade-offs between selling an illiquid asset more quickly than

a liquid one. This amounts to testing the first proposition in Amihud and Mendelson (1986) that

investors will hold stocks with higher transaction costs longer compared to stocks with lower

transaction costs.

   In order to test Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) first proposition, we model investors’ sell

versus hold decisions with survival analyses using 799,469 transactions made by 66,000 US

households. In particular, we model investors’ holding periods using Cox hazard regressions. Our

findings are three-fold. First, we find that transaction costs are an important determinant of

investors’ holding periods after controlling for various household and stock characteristics,

confirming Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) predictions. Specifically, we find that a stock in the

highest transaction cost decile is 40% less likely to be sold compared to a more liquid stock with

similar firm and investor characteristics conditional on the stock not having been sold up to that

point in time.

   We confirm our results by analyzing transactions data from Finland, which serves as an “out-

of-sample” verification of the US findings. Almost identical to the US results, we find that a stock

in the highest transaction cost decile in Finland is 40% less likely to be sold compared to a stock

that has lower transaction costs with similar firm and investor characteristics. Since the data set

from Finland includes the complete transactions of all Finnish households between 1995 and 2003,



                                                 4
the results suggest that our findings can be generalized to the full cross-section of households. Our

results are robust to various controls, different measures of transaction costs and to controlling for

firm and household specific effects.

   Second, we find that households differ in how much attention they pay to the transaction costs

of the securities they trade. Specifically, we find that investors who are more financially

sophisticated pay more attention to transaction costs. We follow the extant literature and assume

that financial sophistication is correlated with education, occupation and resources available to an

investor such as income and wealth. We also use information contained in investors’ trades to

identify sophisticated investors. In particular, we classify households who trade options, foreign

securities and hold short positions as financially more sophisticated. A number of papers have

shown significant variation in trading ability and performance in the cross-section of individual

traders (see for instance, Grinblatt and Keloharju 2001 and Coval, Hirshleifer, and Shumway

2005). Our findings suggest that investor sophistication plays a role in how much attention

investors pay to transaction costs as well.

   Third, we find that investors who pay closer attention to transaction costs make better

investment decisions overall. In particular, we find that households whose holding periods are

positively correlated with transaction costs have higher gross returns (before accounting for

transaction costs) compared to households whose holding periods are negatively correlated with

transaction costs. It would not be surprising to find that investors who do not pay attention to

transaction costs to have lower net returns (after accounting for transaction costs). The fact that we

find these investors to have lower gross returns suggests that paying closer attention to transaction




                                                  5
costs is a sign of investor ability. As expected, we find that investors who pay attention to

transaction costs realize lower spreads in trades.3

      There is likely to be endogeneity in the relationship between holding periods and measures

of transaction costs used in this paper. As trading interest in a stock increases the costs associated

with transacting the stock decreases. We should note however the baseline or the average costs of

transacting a given stock is likely to change slowly over time. There are also likely other

exogenous factors that determine the liquidity level of a given stock, such as the size of the

company in terms of revenues or assets. For instance, the liquidity level of a penny stock would

increase with increased trading interest, but it is not likely to achieve the same level of liquidity of

a large cap stock purely based on investor interest or attention. Nonetheless, in order to address

potential endogeneity concerns, we study investor behavior around periods of quasi-exogenous

liquidity shocks.

    Specifically, we examine how holding periods change around stock split events. A long line

of literature documents a significant reduction in transaction costs and increase in liquidity

subsequent to stock splits.4 It has also been documented that post-split performance of splitting

firms is statistically indistinguishable from non-splitting firms with similar characteristics when

appropriate firm controls are used (Byun and Rozeff 2003).5 In other words, splits do not appear


3
  Spreads are computed as in Barber and Odean (2000) as the percentage difference between the transaction price and
the CRSP closing price.
4
 The prior literature suggests that liquidity increases after stock splits. For example, Schultz (2000) shows that the
number of trades, especially small trades, increases significantly subsequent to stock splits. Desai, Nimalendran, and
Venkataraman (1998) find that both informed trades and noise trades increase after stock splits. Kryzanowski and
Zhang (1996) show that absolute trading volumes of Canadian stocks increase subsequent to stock splits. Conroy,
Harris, and Benet (1990) also show a significant reduction in the absolute bid-ask spread following stock splits.
5
  In particular, Byun and Rozeff (2003) document that post-split equity return performance of splitting firms is
statistically indistinguishable from non-splitting firms with similar characteristics.



                                                          6
to provide a signal to the market about the future prospects of the splitting firm, as some theoretical

papers suggest. Taken together, these two findings would imply that the transaction costs channel

is the main channel through which a stock split could affect the average holding period of

households.

    Consistent with the prior literature, we first verify that transaction costs decrease (stock

liquidity increases) subsequent to stock splits in our sample time-period. Then we show that

investors’ average holding period declines in response to the increase in liquidity following stock

splits. Our analysis suggests that the holding period for a stock decreases by about 37 trading days,

or nearly two trading months after a stock-split. This finding is economically significant as the

mean holding period, defined as the number of trading days from the first purchase of a stock to

the first sale, is 185 days.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the hypotheses tested

in the paper. Section 3 describes the individual transaction data sets and the construction of the

main liquidity variables used in this study. Section 4 reports our main findings using US trades

that show the relationship between transaction costs and holding periods. Section 5 studies the

implications of liquidity decisions of individual investors on their investment performance, and

empirically documents that households who pay closer attention to transaction costs earn higher

raw and characteristics-adjusted excess returns. Section 6 provides robustness tests to address

concerns that holding periods are determined endogenously and also uses individual transactions

from Finland as an out-of-sample test to verify US results. Section 7 concludes.

2. Hypotheses

    Amihud and Mendelson (1986) develop a model where risk neutral investors with different

exogenous holding periods and limited capital trade securities are subject to fixed transaction costs.



                                                  7
They show that transaction costs result in a clientele effect, with investors who have longer holding

periods selecting to hold illiquid stocks in equilibrium.

   Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) model assumes that the holding periods of investors are

exogenously determined. This static model has been extended to incorporate dynamic decisions of

investors to endogenize the holding period (Constantinides 1986, Vayanos 1998, Vayanos and

Vila 1999, Heaton and Lucas 1996, Huang 2003, Lynch and Tan 2011, Lo, Mamaysky and Wang

2004). These dynamic models differ in their assessment about the magnitude of transaction costs

on assets’ prices, but they are similar to Amihud and Mendelson (1986) in that they also expect

investors’ holding periods to positively correlate with transaction costs. Furthermore, while

Amihud and Mendelson (1986) model each investor with a fixed holding period, models with

endogenous trading horizons allow for investors to have different trading horizons for each asset.

To accommodate the possibility that an investor’s holding period could be different for each stock,

we conduct our analyses at the transaction level. We empirically test whether households’ holding

periods are positively related to transaction costs. Our first hypothesis is:

    H1: Holding periods of households are positively related to measures of transaction costs,

   after controlling for investor and stock characteristics.



   Previous studies have shown that, on average, households’ stock investments perform poorly.

Odean (1999), for instance, reports that individual investors’ purchases under-perform their sales

by a significant margin. However, other studies have concluded that there exists a subset of retail

investors who display greater financial sophistication and market understanding than the average

retail investor. For instance, Coval, Hirshleifer, and Shumway (2005) document strong persistence

in the performance of individual investors’ trades, suggesting that some skillful individual



                                                  8
investors might be able to earn positive abnormal profits. Feng and Seasholes (2005) find that

investor sophistication reduces a well-known behavioral bias, the disposition effect. Ivkovic, Sialm

and Weisbenner (2008) propose and empirically document that individual investors who hold more

concentrated portfolios are financially more sophisticated as they possess informational

advantages that allow them to outperform investors with diversified portfolios. Li, Geng,

Subrahmanyam, and Yu (2016) show that wealthy investors profitably trade around companies’

announcements of high stock dividends, particularly those registered in their localities.

   Given that previous studies have documented heterogeneity in the performance and investment

decisions of individual investors, we expect to find similar cross-sectional differences in the

correlation between holding periods and transaction costs across households. In particular, we

expect such differences to occur due to differences in financial sophistication. We follow the extant

literature and assume that financial sophistication is correlated with education, occupation and

resources available to an investor such as income and wealth. We also use information contained

in investors’ trades to identify sophisticated investors. The first part of our second hypothesis is:

   H2.a: The correlation between holding periods and transactions costs is higher for financially

   more sophisticated investors.

   The correlation between holding periods and transaction costs is likely to impact portfolio

performance on both a gross (before accounting for transaction costs) and a net (after accounting

for transaction costs) basis. Households who do not pay attention to transaction costs when they

trade are likely to have lower net returns due to transaction costs. As mentioned earlier, previous

studies have shown investor sophistication to be correlated with higher portfolio performance and

lower levels of behavioral biases. We conjecture that paying closer attention to the impact of

transaction costs could be a sign of financial sophistication and market knowledge leading to better



                                                  9
overall portfolio performance. We predict that households whose holding periods are positively

correlated with transaction costs should have higher trading ability and earn higher gross returns

in addition to earning higher net returns compared to households whose holding periods are

negatively correlated with transaction costs. Hence, the second part of our second hypothesis is:

   H2.b: Households who pay closer attention to transaction costs earn higher gross returns before

   accounting for transaction costs.



In testing the above hypothesis, we consider both raw portfolio returns as well as characteristics-

adjusted returns computed as in Daniel et al (1997).



3. Data

3.1 Household Transactions and Demographics

   This study uses two distinct data sets in order to explore the trading behaviors of households.

The first data set contains transactions for a subset of individual investors in the United States,

while the second data set contains transactions of all investors in Finland. The individual trade data

for the United States come from a major U.S. discount brokerage house. It records the daily trading

of 78,000 households from January 1991 to December 1996 and this is the same data set used in

Barber and Odean (2000). We focus only on the common stock transactions of households in this

study, which account for nearly two-thirds of the total value of household investments. We exclude

from the current analysis investments in mutual funds (both open-end and closed-end), American

Depositary Receipts (ADRs), warrants, and options. About 66,000 of the 78,000 households trade

common stocks, making about 800,000 transactions over the sample period. The transaction record

includes the number of shares traded, the price traded, each household’s month-end positions, and



                                                 10
value of their position at market close. The data set also includes demographic information for a

smaller subsample of households, such as income, age, gender, occupation and marital status.6 A

comparison of this data set with Survey of Consumer Finances, IRS and TAQ data has shown it to

be representative of U.S. individual investors (Ivkovic, Sialm, and Weisbenner 2008, Ivkovic,

Poterba, and Weisbenner 2005, and Barber, Odean, and Zhu 2006).

       To address concerns that our findings are specific to the data we employ, we repeat the analyses

using a similar data set from Finland which reports the complete trading records of all market

participants.7 This data set comes from the central register in the Finnish Central Securities

Depository (FCSD). The register officially records all the trades of all Finnish investors - both

individual and institutional- on a daily basis from January 1995 to December 2003. For the

purposes of the current study, we only utilize the trades of individual investors in Finland. Similar

to the U.S. data set, the Finnish data set reports for each transaction, the number of shares traded

and the daily closing price. Furthermore, we observe the initial holdings for each account at the

beginning of the data set, allowing us to keep track of the holdings of households on a daily basis.

The data set also reports individuals’ demographic information, such as age and gender. We do

not have information about income, occupation, and marital status. A more detailed description of

the Finnish data set can be found in Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000, 2001).



3.2 Measures of Transaction Costs




6
  For a more detailed description of this data set please refer to Barber and Odean (2000, 2001). We thank Terrence
Odean for providing us with this data set.
7
    We thank Jussi Keppo for providing us with this data set.



                                                           11
      Transaction costs are multifaceted and are usually defined in terms of the costs and risks

associated with transacting financial securities. These costs capture price impact, asymmetric

information and inventory risk. In this study, we use three different measures of transaction costs

previously utilized in the literature. In particular, we use the adjusted Amihud ratio (AdjIlliq),

Roll’s measure (Roll’s C), and zero return frequency (Zerofreq), which can be calculated using

data that are available for both the United States and Finland.

      The first measure is the Amihud illiquidity ratio from Amihud (2002), calculated as:



                                                                                               ,
                                                                                   1                      ,
																																																											      ,   =	                                              																																																																(1)
                                                                                   ,                             ,


  ,   	is the daily stock return for firm i in day d.                                                    ,       is the dollar volume in day d.                            ,   is the

number of trading days in month t.                                     ,       is Amihud’s illiquidity measure for firm i in month t.

The Amihud measure is similar to Kyle’s lambda and captures the price impact of a trade. We

adjust the Amihud measure as in Acharya and Pedersen (2005) to remove outliers and to make it

stationary:	                         ,        [0.25 + 30 ×
                                         = min	                                            ,       ×                 , 30].                 is the ratio of value-

weighted market portfolio at the end of the month t-1 to that of the market portfolio in July 1962.

The higher the adjusted Amihud ratio, the more illiquid the stock is.

      The second measure we use is the Bayesian version of Roll’s (1984) transaction cost measure:




																																												   ,   ={ −                    ,   ,       ,           											                  ,   ,   ,       < 0;																											(2)
                                                              0																																															 ℎ                                .




                                                                                           12
It is based on the model            ,   =       ,       ,   +   ,   where   ,   is a trade direction indicator,   ,   is the

transaction cost measure, and               ,       is an error term, all for stock i at time t. Roll’s measure (Roll’s

C) is derived under the assumption that buyer- and seller-initiated trades are equally likely. The

Bayesian estimation of this cost measure using the Gibbs sampler is described in detail in

Hasbrouck (2009). The higher the Roll’s C, the more illiquid the stock is.

       The third liquidity measure captures the proportion of trading days with zero returns. The

frequency of zero-return days as a liquidity proxy was introduced by Lesmond, Ogden, and

Trzcinka (1999). We compute the proportion of days with zero returns for each stock within each

year to estimate Zerofreq. The higher the Zerofreq, the more illiquid the stock is. To reduce

potential endogeneity arising from contemporaneous measurement and to smooth out idiosyncratic

changes, we use the 12-month moving average of each liquidity measure in our analyses.

       Table 1 reports summary statistics for stock and investor characteristics for the US.8 Only

stocks that are traded by households in the data set are considered. Summary statistics are

calculated by pooling annual observations over 1991-1996. The results show that our major

transaction costs measure – adjusted Amihud ratio (AdjIlliq) - is positively skewed with a mean

of 3.30, but a much smaller median of 0.46. The distributions of other transaction costs measures

are similarly positively skewed as Roll’s C has a mean of 1.73 and a median of 1.06 and Zerofreq

has a mean of 4.82% and a median of 2.70%. Size is also positively skewed, with the average

market capitalization almost 8 times as large as the median firm size.

       The mean (median) US individual investor’s portfolio value is $80,342 ($22,952) for the

transactions analyzed in this study. 10% of the primary US account holders for the transactions



8
    We report stock and investor characteristics for Finland in Table 7 and discuss the analyses for Finland in Section 6.



                                                                    13
analyzed in this study are female. US individual investors utilize short-trades frequently as 38%

of the accounts have held a short position at some time over the sample period analyzed. 14% of

US individual investors have traded options at least once over the sample period and 22% of them

have traded foreign securities. 66% of the US individual investors in our transactions data set hold

technical or managerial positions. The mean (median) US individual investor’s annual income

over the time period studied is $76,840 ($87,500). The mean (median) US individual investor’s

portfolio concentration is .52 (.48), which roughly corresponds to holding two stocks with equal

dollar weights of 50%.



4. Transaction Costs and Holding Periods in the US

4.1 Holding periods and Transaction Costs

     In this section, we provide empirical evidence in support of the first hypothesis (H1): Holding

periods are positively related to measures of transaction costs, after controlling for investor and

stock characteristics. We begin by computing a holding period for each transaction in the data

set.9 The holding period is defined as the number of trading days from the first purchase of a stock

to the first sale, following the approach of Seru, Shumway, and Stoffman (2010).10 This generates

799,469 holding period observations, with a mean (median) of 185 (86) trading days for retail

investors in the United States.


9
  We also estimate portfolio level holding periods and transaction costs for each investor in the data set. Our analysis
of investor portfolios yields results consistent with transaction-level analysis. As explained in the Introduction section,
transaction-level analysis allows for the same investor to have different holding periods for different assets and as
such is more in line with models that assume endogenous trading horizons.
10
  We obtain similar results by alternatively defining the holding period as the number of trading days from first
purchase till the day when all positive positions are closed as in Feng and Seasholes (2005).




                                                           14
     Figure 1 shows the median holding periods for transactions grouped by investors’ age, account

type, the amount of capital they have invested in the stock market, as well as transactions grouped

by the underlying stocks’ transaction costs.11 The median holding period is longer for stocks held

in retirement accounts. Investors who are older and who have less wealth invested in the market

have longer holding periods. There is also a strong negative relationship between holding periods

and liquidity of stocks traded by the investors in the data set.

     Next, we rank and assign the 799,469 holding period observations to ten groups based on the

length of the respective holding periods. For the stocks in each group, we then calculate averages

for the three transaction costs measures of interest as well as price, and market capitalization. The

transaction costs measures are calculated as of the purchase day, by averaging transaction costs

measures over the previous 12 months. The results are reported in Table 2, where we find a strong

positive univariate relationship between holding periods and the average transaction costs of the

stocks in each holding period decile. The relationship is monotonic and does not appear to be a

simple function of price or market capitalization. The adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure, for

instance, increases monotonically from 0.92 for the shortest holding period decile to 1.83 for the

longest holding period decile. The differences in the average liquidity of the stocks traded in the

top and the bottom deciles of holding period are always significant regardless of the liquidity

measure we utilize. Roll’s C measure increases monotonically from 0.66 to 0.82, while the

percentage of zero return days also increases monotonically from 2.52% to 3.83% from the shortest

holding period decile to the longest holding period decile.



11
   In the figure, a stock is defined as Illiquid if it belongs to the highest transaction cost decile of stocks ranked
according to the adjusted Amihud illiquidity ratio. Other category includes all other stocks not in the highest
transaction cost decile.



                                                         15
       Figure 2 shows this relationship graphically. We plot Kaplan-Meier survival probabilities for

stocks that are in the highest illiquidity decile using the adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure, and

for all other stocks in the data set. The x-axis shows the number of days that have passed since the

purchase of a stock, and the two lines plot the probability of an investor holding a stock conditional

upon no sale up to that point in time. The lighter gray line plots the survival probability for stocks

in the most illiquid decile, while the black line is for the rest of the sample. The graph shows that

stocks ranked in the highest illiquidity decile have significantly higher survival probabilities,

which suggests that investors tend to hold the most illiquid stocks for longer periods of time before

selling them. This analysis provides initial evidence that holding periods are strongly related to

measures of transaction costs.

       We next move on to perform more detailed analyses that controls for related stock and investor

characteristics. In particular, we use a hazard model to analyze the relationship between holding

periods and transaction costs.12 This framework allows us to control for the confounding effects

of stock and investor characteristics. With hazard models, an investor’s trade decision regarding a

specific asset can be explicitly modeled by considering the investor’s sell versus hold decision

each day. In this paper, we use a Cox proportional hazard model.13 The hazard model takes the

following form:



                                           ℎ( ) = ℎ ( )         (     +       )	                     (3)




12
  The hazard model framework has been used in the past by Seru, Shumway and Stoffman (2010) as well as Feng
and Seasholes (2005) to model holding periods of individual investors.
13
     Details about estimating the proportional hazard model can be found in Cox and Oakes (1984).




                                                          16
This proposed hazard model is a statistical framework that describes how long an investor in the

data set will hold a stock before selling it. The left-hand side variable, 	ℎ( ), is the hazard rate, the

probability of selling a stock on day t conditional upon holding that stock until that point in time.

X is a vector of explanatory variables which are static and do not change over time, and Zt are time-

varying covariates which can take on different values at each point in time. ℎ ( ) is called the

baseline hazard rate and describes the average hazard rate when the independent covariates are

equal to zero. Using the Cox (1972) estimator one can estimate coefficients on X and Zt without

specifying a baseline ℎ ( ) hazard rate. Positions that are not closed by the end of the sample

period are treated as censored observations within the hazard framework.

       The covariates used in the main analyses include a set of variables related to the demographics

of the investors, such as age, income, gender, marital status, employment status and occupation,

as well as another set of variables related to the characteristics of the stocks they trade, such as

liquidity, size, book-to-market ratio, and momentum. We control for size, book-to-market ratio,

and momentum in the model to account for investors’ preferences for certain stock characteristics

that are known to be associated with expected returns. As there is likely to be seasonality in

purchases and sales, year and calendar month dummies are also included in the hazard

regressions.14

       Following standard reporting conventions, we report hazard ratios instead of estimated

coefficients from the hazard regression in Panel A of Table 3. The hazard ratio is similar to the

odds ratio estimated from a binary choice model and is defined as the ratio of two hazard functions

when one explanatory variable is changed by one unit holding everything else equal. In the current


14
     Open stock positions, for instance, may be closed out in December for tax reasons.




                                                           17
context, the hazard ratio reports the marginal effect of higher exposure to an explanatory variable

on the probability of selling vs. holding the stock. A hazard ratio that is less than one would suggest

that a higher exposure to the explanatory variable will reduce the probability of selling the stock

versus holding it. In other words, a higher exposure to the explanatory variable would lead to a

higher likelihood of holding on to the stock. Similarly, a hazard ratio larger than one would suggest

that a higher exposure to the explanatory variable would increase the likelihood of selling the

stock.

    In column (1) of Table 3-Panel A, we report the hazard ratio for the adjusted Amihud illiquidity

ratio (AdjIlliq) without taking into account stock or investor characteristics. The estimated hazard

ratio for the adjusted Amihud illiquidity ratio is 0.981 and statistically significant, implying that

the higher the transaction cost of a stock is, the less likely it will be sold. We obtain similar results

using Roll’s C and the Zero-frequency measures which are reported in columns (2) and (3)

respectively. Overall, these results are consistent with the univariate sorts – investors’ holding

periods are higher for illiquid stocks.

    Households may not have the same preferences and could potentially have different baseline

holding periods. Specification in column (1) does not take into account this potential heterogeneity

across investors. One way to account for heterogeneity across households within the hazard

framework is to assume different baseline hazard rates for each household, but compute common

coefficients on the explanatory variables. Such a model is estimated by partial likelihood using the

method of stratification. By doing household level stratification, we allow for the possibility of

each household to a have a different baseline holding period. This is similar to using household

fixed effects in OLS regressions. Similarly, by using firm stratification, we allow for the

possibility of each stock having a different average holding period. In column (4) in Table 3-



                                                   18
Panel A, we report the results of a hazard analysis similar to the one in column (1) by additionally

accounting for household and firm specific effects using both firm and household level

stratification.15

     Results reported in column (4) show that the impact of transaction costs on the probability of

a sale increases once we control for household and firm specific effects. The estimated hazard

ratio for the adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure is reduced from 0.981 (column 1) to 0.973

(column 4). The result suggests that after we allow for the baseline hazard to be different for each

household and each stock, the relationship between holding periods and transaction costs gets

stronger.

     In terms of economic significance, the hazard ratio of 0.973, estimated in column 4, would

suggest that an increase in the adjusted Amihud ratio by one standard deviation would decrease

the probability of a stock sale by a given household by 30%, indicating that the impact of illiquidity

on the sale decision is economically highly significant. Results in columns (1) through (4) of Table

3-Panel A would support the notion that the average investor understands the impact of liquidity

on holding period and pays attention to transaction costs when making trading decisions.16

     In column (5) of Table 3-Panel A we control for stock characteristics such as size, book-to-

market and momentum, in addition to controlling for the adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure and

household specific effects. The basic finding is unchanged as the loading on the adjusted Amihud



15
  We obtain similar results using Roll’s C and the Zero-frequency measures, but for brevity we report results the
adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure.
16
   In unreported results, we conduct a similar analysis using dummy variables for the most illiquid and most liquid
stocks where the dummy variable takes on a value of one if the stock belongs to the most illiquid (liquid) decile among
all stocks in a given year. We find that a stock in the highest illiquidity (liquidity) group is 40% (20%) less (more)
likely to be sold compared to a stock not belonging to that group.




                                                         19
illiquidity measure is less than one (0.981) and statistically significant. The estimated hazard ratio

for momentum is statistically significant and larger than one (1.135), which indicates that investors

are more likely to sell the recent winners, while retaining recent losers, consistent with the

disposition effect. The estimated hazard ratios for size (0.649) and book-to-market ratio (0.681)

are both less than one and highly statistically significant, suggesting that US individual investors

tend to hold large and value stocks for longer periods.

     Next, we turn our attention to understanding how the relationship between transaction costs

and the decision to hold versus sell a stock is impacted by trader characteristics. For this purpose,

we extend the analysis in column (5) of Table 3-Panel A with additional controls for trader

characteristics in column (6).17 Demographic related controls include investor age, Age; log of

annual income in dollars, Log (Income); a dummy variable that is equal to one if the trader is

married, Married Dummy; a gender dummy that is equal to one if the trader is male, Male Dummy;

a dummy to capture if the trader holds a technical or managerial position, Professional Dummy; a

dummy that takes on the value of one if the trading account is a retirement account, Retirement

Acct Dummy; and a dummy that takes on the value of one if the trader is retired, Retired Dummy.

     In addition to basic demographic controls we also identify certain trader characteristics from

each household’s trading history. In particular, we document the type of assets a household trades,

as well as estimate the total dollar value and the concentration-level of each household’s portfolio.

More specifically, we assign a value of one to the dummy variable, Foreign securities Dummy, if

the household has ever traded foreign securities; one to the dummy variable, Option user Dummy,

if the household has ever traded options; and one to the dummy variable, Short user Dummy, if


17
   These trader characteristics convey demographics related information particular to each household, including the
financial sophistication level of a trader.



                                                        20
the household has ever held a short position. We control for the total value invested by each

household computed as the log of total equity investments, Log (Total Equity). Finally, we control

for the concentration of each household portfolio, Concentration, which is defined as in Ivkovic et

al. (2008), and is equal to the sum of the squared values of the dollar weight of each stock in a

household’s portfolio.

   Column (6) of Table 3-Panel A reports the coefficient on adjusted Amihud illiquidity ratio

(AdjIlliq) after controlling for stock characteristics, demographics and trade level information.

Unsurprisingly, the coefficient on (AdjIlliq) is less than one (0.983) and statistically highly

significant. Our analysis in column (6) suggests that the basic relationship between transaction

costs and holding periods is unchanged after controlling for additional household and trade

characteristics. In the next section, we investigate the interaction between transaction costs and

these characteristics on the decision to sell versus hold a security.



4.2 Impact of Investor Sophistication

   In this section, we investigate how household and trade characteristics introduce heterogeneity

in the relationship between transaction costs and holding periods of investors. In particular, we

provide empirical evidence in support of the first part of our second hypothesis (H2.a): The

correlation between holding periods and transactions costs is higher for sophisticated investors.

   Following Goetzmann and Kumar (2008), we assume that financial sophistication is correlated

with education and resources available to each investor. In particular, we assume that investors

who have more income (higher Log (Income)), who work in technical and managerial positions

(one for Professional Dummy), who invest larger amounts of capital in the stock market (larger

Log (Total Equity)), and investors with experience trading options (one for Option user Dummy),



                                                  21
foreign securities (one for Foreign securities Dummy), as well as those who have held a short

equity position (one for Short user Dummy) are likely to be financially more sophisticated.

Ivkovic, Sialm and Weisbenner (2008) propose and empirically document that investors who hold

more concentrated portfolios are financially more sophisticated as they possess informational

advantages that allow them to outperform investors with diversified portfolios. We also assume

that households with more concentrated portfolios (Concentration) are more likely to be financially

sophisticated.      We examine the impact of sophistication by first creating a composite

Sophistication measure and then interacting Sophistication with the AdjIlliq variable.                            The

computed sophistication measure ranges from a minimum value of 0 for the least sophisticated

investor to a maximum value of 7 for the most sophisticated investor.18

     In column (6) of Panel A the coefficients on Foreign securities Dummy, Option user Dummy,

Short user Dummy, Log (Total Equity) and Concentration are greater than one and statistically

significant suggesting that most of the characteristics we associate with investor sophistication,

except for Log (Income), are correlated with shorter holding periods. Similar to results in Panel

A we show in columns (1) and (2) of Panel B in Table 3 that investors with higher Sophistication

scores on average have shorter holding periods as the hazard ratio coefficient on Sophistication is

greater than one and highly statistically significant. While these results document that more

sophisticated investors trade more frequently we turn our attention to the interaction of




18
  In the US transactions data set the most financially sophisticated investor would have an income greater than
$75,000 per year, would be in the top quartile in terms of total equity holdings, would trade options and foreign
securities, would have held at least one short position over the sample period, would have a portfolio concentration
greater than 0.35 and would work either in a technical or managerial role. The least financially sophisticated investor
would have a score of zero in all seven attributes.




                                                         22
Sophistication with AdjIlliq to better understand if more sophisticated investors pay closer

attention to transaction costs.

     We show in columns (1) and (2) in Panel B of Table 3 that those who are sophisticated tend to

pay closer attention to the transaction costs as the coefficient on the interaction of the composite

Sophistication score with AdjIlliq is statistically significant and less than one.19 More specifically

the hazard ratio on AdjIlliq × Sophistication is 0.995 before controlling for household specific

effects in column (1) and it becomes 0.994 in column (2) after using stratification to control for

household specific factors. These results indicate that individuals who are more sophisticated have

holding periods that are positively correlated with transaction costs, suggesting that sophisticated

investors pay more attention to transaction costs than unsophisticated investors.20

     Figure 3 plots the hazard ratios of the variable AdjIlliq computed by running separate

regressions for different groups of investors based on their level of sophistication indicated in the

x-axis. The regression model used is the same as model (1) in Panel A of Table 3. The dotted

lines show the 95th percentile confidence intervals of the estimated hazard ratios. Group 0

corresponds to investors with a Sophistication score of zero, while group 7 includes investors with

a perfect Sophistication score of seven. The figure illustrates that as investor sophistication



19
   The coefficients on the interactions of individual terms that constitute the Sophistication measure with AdjIlliq are
not reported for brevity. The only interaction term that is marginally greater than one is AdjIlliq × Log (Income) which
is statistically insignificant. All other interaction terms (AdjIlliq × Foreign securities Dummy, AdjIlliq × Option user
Dummy, AdjIlliq × Short user Dummy, AdjIlliq × Professional Dummy, AdjIlliq × Log (Total Equity) and AdjIlliq ×
Concentration) are statistically significant and less than one.
20
   In unreported results, we repeat a similar analysis using two dummy variables: First, a dummy variable
(Sophistication > 3 Dummy) that takes on the value of one if the Sophistication value for a given household is greater
than three. Second, a dummy variable (AdjIlliq Dummy) that takes on the value of one if a stock is in the highest
quintile ranked by the adjusted Amihud illiquidity ratio over the previous 12 months prior to a transaction. Using these
two dummy variables allows us to compare the trading behavior of the most financially sophisticated households with
the rest of households. We find that an investor with a Sophistication score greater than three is 30% less likely to sell
a highly illiquid equity at a given point in time, compared to an investor whose Sophistication score is three or less.



                                                           23
increases the hazard ratio on the adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure (AdjIlliq) monotonically

decreases verifying that financially more sophisticated investors pay closer attention to transaction

costs.

     Results in section 4 empirically verify our first (H1) and second (H2.a) hypotheses and hence

confirm Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) predictions. In particular, we show that households

choose to hold stocks with higher transaction costs for longer durations and that financially more

sophisticated investors pay closer attention to the impact of transaction costs when deciding to

hold versus sell a stock.21



5. Attention to Transaction Costs and Trading Ability

     In this section, we study the implications of liquidity decisions of individual investors on their

investment performance. We showed in section 4 that there are cross-sectional differences in the

correlation between holding periods and transaction costs across households. As hypothesized in

section 2, this correlation may also impact the portfolio performance of households. In particular,

a negative correlation between holding periods and transaction costs could indicate low levels of

financial sophistication and market knowledge, resulting in lower returns.

     To identify households who pay more attention to transaction costs, we use the same hazard

model as before, but now instead of pooling across all households, we estimate the coefficient on

the transaction costs variable (AdjIlliq) for each household individually. We then use the



21
  These findings are also in line with the predictions of dynamic models that endogenize the holding period decision
(Constantinides (1986), Vayanos (1998), Vayanos and Vila (1999), Heaton and Lucas (1996), Huang (2003), Lynch
and Tan (2011), Lo, Mamaysky and Wang (2004)).




                                                        24
correlation between holding periods and transaction costs as a proxy for how much attention each

investor pays to transaction costs. In order to obtain robust estimates, we require that households

make at least 50 round-trip trades over the sample period.22 This leaves us with a sample of 2,192

households. For the majority of households in the data set (over 60%), holding periods are

positively correlated with transaction costs, as the corresponding hazard ratio for the transaction

costs variable, AdjIlliq, is less than one for these observations. This finding suggests that most

individual investors in our data set pay attention to transaction costs, as they hold illiquid securities

in their portfolio for longer periods than they hold liquid securities.

        We categorize households into two groups based on the magnitude of the hazard ratio on the

transaction costs variable (AdjIlliq). In particular, we classify investors as paying attention to

transaction costs if the hazard ratio is less than one (Group 1 in Table 4) and not paying attention

to transaction costs if the hazard ratio is greater than one (Group 2 in Table 4). We then compute

1, 6 and 12 month returns for each stock from the date of purchase.23 We also compute, 1, 6 and

12 month characteristics-adjusted returns as in Daniel et al. (1997) in order to make sure that the

differences in the returns between these two investor groups are not driven by differences in stock

characteristics. These returns are reported in Table 4. We report two sets of results. In Panel A,

we report returns only for households for whom we are able to compute the hazard ratio on the

Amihud illiquidity measure -AdjIlliq -with a minimum significance level of 10%. In Panel B, we

report results for all households regardless of the significance level of the hazard ratio.




22
     We obtain similar results using 20 or 30 trades instead of 50 trades.
23
  This is following Seru, Shumway and Stoffman (2010) and others. Using realized returns based on closed trades is
problematic and can introduce biases. For instance, if the disposition effect is strong, only profitable trades would be
closed.



                                                             25
   We calculate 1, 6 and 12 month raw and characteristics-adjusted returns from the day of

purchase for all transactions executed by these investors in order to assess their investment ability.

There is a stark difference in the investment performance of these two groups. Households who

pay attention to transaction costs earn 0.1%, 1.3%, and 2.9% more in raw returns and 0.1%, 1.0%,

and 2.5% more in characteristics-adjusted excess returns over 1-month, 6-month and 12-month

holding periods respectively. The returns reported for all households in Panel B are similar in

magnitude.

   Table 4 also reports the average holding period and the realized spread for the two groups of

investors. Spread is the ex-post realized bid-ask spread paid by the investors for each transaction

in the data set. The calculation is the same as in Barber and Odean (2000), and is calculated as the

transaction price divided by the CRSP closing price minus one. This value is multiplied by minus

one for purchases. The round trip spread that is reported is computed as the sum of sale and

purchase spreads. The difference in spreads between the two groups of households is 2.8%, which

is economically and statistically significant. This result indicates that investors who do not pay

attention to transaction costs pay significantly higher transaction costs as a result. This in turn

suggests that the differences between the two groups’ net returns after adjusting for transaction

costs would be even higher.

   Overall, the findings in this section provide evidence in favor of our hypothesis H2.b. Investors

who pay attention to transaction costs have on average better performance even before accounting

for transaction costs, consistent with these investors being more sophisticated.




                                                 26
6. Robustness Tests

   In this section, we conduct two robustness tests around our main findings. The first robustness

test aims to address a potential omitted-variables problem. It is possible that stock liquidity is

related to a certain unobserved variable that in turn affects investors’ decision to sell versus hold.

In order to address this potential endogeneity problem, we study investor behavior around periods

of quasi-exogenous liquidity shocks that are unlikely to affect holding periods directly.

Specifically, in section 6.1 we examine how stock liquidity and holding periods change around

stock split events.

   The second robustness test is meant to address potential selection issues with the US sample.

Transaction-level data set used in the US captures only a fraction of the US households’ trades

during certain years and hence may be insufficient to test our main predictions. In order to address

this criticism, we repeat our main analyses in section 6.2 utilizing another data set which covers

all Finnish individual investors’ complete trading records. Using an additional data set from

another country also provides us with an “out-of-sample” test of our main findings.



6.1 Quasi-exogenous shocks to liquidity

   As we have mentioned earlier, a long line of literature documents a significant reduction in

transaction costs and improved liquidity subsequent to stock splits (Schultz 2000, Desai,

Nimalendran, and Venkataraman 1998, Kryzanowski and Zhang 1996, Conroy, Harris, and Benet

1990). These studies also show that post-split performance of splitting firms is statistically

indistinguishable from that of non-splitting firms with similar characteristics (see for instance,

Byun and Rozeff 2003), implying that stock splits do not credibly signal improved performance.

This suggests that one plausible motivation for why investors decide to trade splitting stocks more



                                                 27
is the reduction in transaction costs subsequent to split events. Thus, we use stock split events as

quasi-exogenous shocks to liquidity and investigate investors’ trading decisions around stock splits

to address the potential omitted-variables problem.

   We first empirically establish that stock splits indeed lead to an increase in liquidity and a

reduction in transaction costs. For this purpose, we utilize close to 2,000 stock split events that

took place in the US between 1991 and 1996, and document that transaction costs decrease by

about 10 percent for the median stock following stock splits. If investors hold illiquid securities

for longer periods as predicted by Amihud and Mendelson (1986), then the reduction in transaction

costs subsequent to stock splits should lead to shorter average holding periods, increasing the

likelihood of selling the splitting stock. We empirically test this prediction, and show that the

average splitting stock is 18% more likely to be sold subsequent to a stock-split.

   We identify a total of 3,586 stock splits between 1991 and 1996 in our sample. We exclude

1,067 observations that have a cash-dividend distribution within a [-30, +30] days window around

the stock split event to make sure that our results are not contaminated by the influence of other

types of shareholder distributions. Following the prior literature on stock splits, we further remove

reverse splits and forward splits, and splits that have a split factor of less than 0.25. Our final

sample includes 1,850 pure forward split events with available data.

   First, we verify that our measures of transaction costs decline subsequent to a split. We regress

the adjusted Amihud illiquidity ratio (AdjIlliq) on a time period indicator, After Split dummy,

which equals one for time periods of six-months, nine-months and twelve-months subsequent to




                                                 28
the split event, and zero otherwise.24 Table 5 presents the results. We find that transaction costs,

proxied by the adjusted Amihud Illiquidity ratio, decrease subsequent to stock splits. The

coefficient on the After Split dummy is negative and statistically significant. For example, in

column (2), we observe that the coefficient on the After Split dummy is -0.186, controlling for

stock characteristics. Considering that the median US stock has an adjusted Amihud illiquidity

ratio of 1.66, the estimated -0.186 coefficient on the After Split dummy suggests transaction costs

decrease by about 10% for the median stock after a split. Thus, we conclude that for the firms in

our data set the impact of stock splits on transaction costs is economically significant over the

sample period.

     Having established that stock splits lead to lower transaction costs, we next investigate if

households reduce their holding periods subsequent to stock splits. In particular, we investigate

the marginal impact of a split event on the likelihood of a stock being sold. In doing so, we study

individuals’ trading behavior over 6, 9 and 12-month periods subsequent to the ex-split dates using

a dynamic hazard regression framework. In the dynamic hazard regression framework, the

dependent variable is the duration until a transaction is closed, i.e. until a share bought earlier is

sold. Following Christakis and Allison (2006), we create a time-varying dummy variable set to

one during the time period 6, 9, 12 months after a split and zero otherwise. As before, if a sale is

not observed, i.e. in case the investors hold their positions until the end of the sample period

without selling it, we treat these observations as censored.




24
  We also analyze two-month and three-month windows, and do not observe significant changes in stock liquidity.
According to Lakonishok and Lev (1987), trading volume starts to increase from 7 months prior to the time a stock
split and then declines within 2 months subsequent to the split event. The pattern observed by Lakonishok and Lev
(1987) might explain the insignificant results when we use two- or three-month windows.



                                                       29
     To construct the appropriate data set for the dynamic hazard framework, we split the duration

period of the transaction into multiple parts. The first part covers the time period from the purchase

of the share until the split event. In this first period, we assign a value of zero to the After Split

dummy. The second part is for the time period from the split until the end of the window of interest.

This window varies from 6-months to 12-months for the different models we study. For the second

period, After Split dummy takes on a value of one. The third part corresponds to the period

subsequent to the after split window. For this time period the After Split dummy takes on a value

of zero.25 Since it’s possible for transactions to be open even after 6, 9, 12 months after a split,

this setup ensures that After Split dummy will only equal one when a sale event falls within the

event window, and as time elapses to the post-event window period, the After Split dummy will

switch back to 0. The After Split dummy switches back to zero subsequent to the window of

interest as the impact of splits on transaction costs and holding period decisions is not expected to

be permanent. In this analysis, the After Split dummy captures the marginal impact of stock splits

on sale decisions over a distinct event horizon. Given the reduction in transaction costs subsequent

to stock splits, we would expect to find a hazard ratio greater than one on the After Split dummy

as households would be more likely to reduce their holding periods subsequent to the split event.

     Table 6 reports the estimated results of the dynamic hazard regression. In all models in Table

6 we control for calendar year and month specific effects, and in models (2), (4), and (6) we further

control for stock characteristics - size, book-to-market and momentum. As before, we calculate




25
  In the rare instances where there are multiple splits before a transaction is closed, we split the transaction duration
into more parts setting the After Split dummy equal to one during the 6, 9, 12-month time period after the second split.




                                                          30
all stock characteristics when the transaction is closed.26 In all specifications, we find that the

estimated hazard ratio for the After Split dummy is larger than one and statistically significant at

the 1 percent level. For example, results in column (2) show that with stock and calendar time

controls, the estimated hazard ratio is 1.183 for the After Split dummy, indicating that investors

are 18% more likely to sell a stock in the initial six months subsequent to its split. The reduction

in average holding period subsequent to a stock split is equivalent to 37 trading days, or nearly two

months. We should note that the baseline hazard rate captures the increasing probability of a sale

as time passes. After Split dummy, therefore, captures the marginal impact of being in post-split

time period on the probability of a sale, and does not simply capture a mechanical relationship due

to the fact that probability of a sale increases as time passes on. Our results document that

individual investors reduce their average holding periods significantly subsequent to stock splits.

Considering that the median holding period for our sample is 185 days, the reduction in average

household holding period is economically significant.

     Our results are also robust to controlling for different event horizons. In particular, we find that

the After Split dummy coefficient takes on a statistically significant value of 1.192 for the nine-

month window analysis, and 1.198 for the 12-month window analysis after controlling for stock

characteristics. Overall, our results confirm that subsequent to stock splits transaction costs decline

and individual investors respond by selling their holdings in splitting stocks.




26
   The methodology used for the dynamic hazard regression naturally increases the number of observations. If there
is a single split event for a stock this event will lead to the creation of two additional lines for each account affected
by the split, tripling the data. As a result of this there are 943,137 observations in Table 6, which is significantly
larger than the number of observations in Table 3.



                                                            31
6.2 Out of Sample Test: Transaction Level Analyses in Finland

   In this section, we provide further robustness analysis in support of our main findings, using

transaction-level data from Finland. The transaction-level data set from Finland covers individual

investors’ complete trading records. There are approximately two million transactions attributable

to 303,235 households over the 1995 to 2003 for which we have complete information for our

regression analyses. Similar to the U.S. data set, the Finnish data set reports for each transaction,

the number of shares traded and the daily closing price. Furthermore, we observe the initial

holdings for each account at the beginning of the data set, allowing us to keep track of the total

holdings of all households on a daily basis. There is also additional information regarding

individuals’ demographic information, such as age and gender. Unlike in the US, we do not have

information about income, occupation, and marital status. We obtain stock and firm characteristics

from Datastream.

   Table 7 reports summary statistics for stock and investor characteristics for Finland. Only

stocks that are traded by households in the data set are considered. Summary statistics are

calculated by pooling observations over the 1995-2003 time period. All liquidity measures are

annual averages as defined earlier in the text. The results show that our major illiquidity measure

– adjusted Amihud ratio (AdjIlliq) - is positively skewed with a mean of 10.61, but a much smaller

median of 6.21. The distributions of other illiquidity measures are similarly positively skewed.

Roll’s C has a mean (median) of 2.96 (2.30) and Zerofreq has a mean (median) of 21.90%

(20.64%). Size is also positively skewed, with the average market capitalization approximately 11

times as large as the median firm size.

   The mean (median) household portfolio value is 10,823 (2,079) Euros in Finland. 4% of

households trade options, while 33% of the primary account holders are female. Less than one



                                                 32
percent of the households in Finland have ever held a short position during the 1995-2003 time

period.27 Mean portfolio concentration is 0.20, roughly corresponding to holding five stocks with

equal value weights of 20%.

     We use a framework similar to the one we utilize in the US, in order to test the validity of

hypotheses (1) and (2.a) for Finnish investors. We run a hazard model estimating the conditional

probability that a stock is sold controlling for stock illiquidity, firm characteristics, investors’

demographic information as well as investor sophistication. Consistent with our US analysis and

following standard reporting convention, we report hazard ratios instead of estimated coefficients.

     Panel A of Table 8 reports results for the hazard model run on the transaction-level Finnish

data set. Results are remarkably similar to the US. Hazard ratio coefficient on the adjusted Amihud

illiquidity measure (AdjIlliq) in column (1) is less than one (0.984) and statistically significant.

Using either Roll’s C (in column 2) or Zerofreq (in column 3) instead of AdjIIliq yields similar

results. Our basic analysis suggests that the average investor in Finland holds stocks with higher

transaction costs for a longer period of time, consistent with our findings in the United States and

as predicted by Amihud and Mendelson (1986). When we control for household and firm specific

effects using stratification in column (4) we find that the hazard ratio coefficient on the adjusted

Amihud illiquidity measure (AdjIlliq) is still less than one (0.976) and statistically significant.

     Similarly, further controlling for stock characteristics in addition to household specific effects

in column (5) also yields a hazard ratio coefficient on the adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure

(AdjIlliq) that is less than one (0.982) and statistically significant. In column (6) we control for

household and stock characteristics together and once again find a hazard ratio of 0.982 on the


27
  This is not entirely surprising since Bris, Goetzman, and Zhu (2007) suggest that short selling became legal in
Finland in 1998 but that tax laws inhibit would-be short sellers.



                                                       33
adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure. This hazard ratio would suggest that the average investor is

20% less likely to sell a stock she or he holds when the stock’s illiquidity measure increases by

one standard deviation, suggesting that households in Finland are cognizant of transaction costs

and pay attention to liquidity when trading. The economic significance of the estimated hazard

ratio of AdjIIliq for Finnish stocks is similar to that for the US stocks.

   We further investigate how household characteristics introduce heterogeneity in the

relationship between transaction costs and holding periods. In particular, we examine if financially

more sophisticated investors pay more attention to transaction costs. In doing so, we control for

the effects of demographic characteristics available in the Finnish data set such as age and gender.

As in the US analysis, we assume that financial sophistication is correlated with education and

resources available to each investor. Investors who invest larger amounts of capital in the stock

market – higher Log (Equity Holding)-, households with experience trading options – one for

Option user Dummy- or that have higher portfolio concentration (Concentration) are assumed to

be financially more sophisticated. Since a very small percentage of Finnish households have ever

held short positions, we do not include this criteria in the construction of our Sophistication

measure. Since the Finland transaction data doesn’t provide information regarding investors’

income and professions, or information about whether the investor has ever traded any foreign

securities, we exclude these criteria in the construction of the Finnish sophistication measure.

   Our sophistication measure for Finland ranges from a minimum of zero (0) for the least

sophisticated investors to a maximum of three (3) for the most sophisticated investors. Column (1)

of Panel B in Table 8 reports that the hazard ratio of the Amihud illiquidity measure interacted

with the overall sophistication measure, AdjIlliq×Sophistication, is statistically significant and less

than one (0.996). This result suggests that Finnish investors who are more financially sophisticated



                                                  34
on average pay greater attention to transaction costs, and as such hold illiquid stocks for a longer

period of time than less sophisticated investors do. In Column (2), we control for household

specific effects using stratification and find consistent results.

    In order to better interpret the economic significance of the results shown in Table 8, we assign

each stock into liquidity deciles based on the adjusted Amihud ratio. We construct a dummy

variable and assign a value of one to the decile with the most illiquid securities. In unreported

results, we repeat the analyses in Panel A of Table 8 using decile values of the adjusted Amihud

ratio and find that a stock in the highest illiquidity group in Finland is 40% less likely to be sold

compared to a more liquid stock with similar firm and investor characteristics, which is comparable

to the findings in the US.

    These results serve as an out-of-sample test for our main findings in the US, verifying that our

findings are not confined to one market and are not unique to one specific time period. More

importantly, since the data set from Finland includes the complete transactions of all Finnish

households between 1995 and 2003, our findings are generalizable to the full cross-section of

households in Finland.




7. Conclusions

    This paper investigates how the trading decisions of 66,000 (303,000) households in the US

(Finland) are influenced by transaction costs. It provides a direct link between investors’ holding

periods and transaction costs and empirically verifies Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) theory of

liquidity clienteles. Three main conclusions follow from our analysis. First, we show that



                                                  35
transaction costs are an important determinant of investment decisions of individual investors.

Consistent with theoretical models of investor behavior, households rationally reduce the

frequency with which they trade illiquid securities subject to high transaction costs. This finding

is robust to controlling for household and stock characteristics.

   Second, we show that there is cross-sectional variation in the relationship between holding

periods and transaction costs across households. Particularly, we find that the relationship between

transaction costs and holding periods is stronger among more sophisticated investors. Third, we

show that paying attention to transaction costs has important implications for investment

performance. Households whose holding periods are negatively related to transaction costs earn

lower gross returns even before adjusting for transaction costs when compared to households

whose holding periods are positively related to transaction costs, suggesting that those investors

who pay closer attention to transaction costs have better trading ability.

    Finally, to address endogeneity and selection concerns, we study how investors’ holding

periods change around quasi-exogenous changes in transaction costs, and we extend our analyses

to a sample of investors from Finland. We show that our main findings are robust to potential

endogeneity and selection concerns.




References

Acharya, V. V. and L. H. Pedersen, 2005, “Asset pricing with liquidity risk,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 77, 375–410

Alexander, G., J. Jones and P. J. Nigro, 1998, “Mutual fund shareholders: characteristics, investor
knowledge, and sources of information,” Financial Services Review 7, 301–316




                                                 36
Amihud, Y., 2002, “Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time series effects,” Journal of
Financial Markets, 5, 31–56

Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986, “Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 17, 223–249

Barber, B. M., Y. Lee, Y. Liu and T. Odean, 2009, “Just How Much Do Individual Investors Lose
by Trading?” Review of Financial Studies, 22 (2): 609-632

Barber, B. M., and T. Odean, 2000, “Trading is hazardous to your wealth: the common stock
investment performance of individual investors,” Journal of Finance, 55, 773–806

Barber, B. M., and T. Odean. 2001, "Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
stock investment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (1): 261-292

Barber, B. M., T. Odean, and L. Zheng, 2005, “Out of sight, out of mind: The effects of expenses
on mutual fund flows,” Journal of Business, 78, 2095–2119

Barber, B. M., T. Odean, and N. Zhu, 2006, “Do noise traders move markets?” Working Paper,
UC Davis

Bris, A., W. Goetzmann, and N. Zhu, 2007, “Efficiency and the Bear: Short Sales and Markets
Around the World,” Journal of Finance, 62: 1029–1079

Byun, J. and M. S. Rozeff, 2003, “Long-run performance after stock splits: 1927 to 1996,” Journal
of Finance 58, 1063-1085

Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft, 2009, "Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,"
American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145-77.

Choi, N., M. Fedenia, H. Skiba, and T. Sokolyk, 2017, “Portfolio concentration and performance
of institutional investors worldwide,” Journal of Financial Economics, 123, 189-208

Christakis, N.A. and P. D. Allison, 2006, “Mortality after the Hospitalization of a Spouse,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 354, 719-730

Conroy, Robert M., Robert S. Harris, and Bruce A. Benet, 1990, “The effects of stock splits on
bid-ask spreads,” Journal of Finance 45, 1285-95

Constantinides, G. M., 1986, “Capital market equilibrium with transaction costs,” Journal of
Political Economy, 94, 842–862

Coval, J. D., D. A. Hirshleifer, and T. Shumway, 2005, “Can individual investors beat the market?”
Working Paper, University of Michigan




                                                37
Cox, D., 1972, “Regression Models and Life-Tables,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
Series B (Methodological), 34 (2): 187-220

Cox, D., and D. Oakes, 1984, Analysis of survival data, Chapman and Hall, London; New York

Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1997, “Measuring mutual fund performance
with characteristic-based benchmarks,” Journal of Finance, 52, 1035–1058

Desai, Anand S, M Nimalendran, and S Venkataraman, 1998, “Changes in Trading Activity
Following Stock Splits and Their Effect on Volatility and the Adverse- Information Component
of the Bid-Ask Spread,” Journal of Financial Research 21,159-83

Feng, L., and M. S. Seasholes, 2005, “Do investor sophistication and trading experience eliminate
Behavioral biases in financial markets?” Review of Finance, 9, 305–351

Finkelstein, A., 2009, “E-ztax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124
(3): 969-1010

French, Kenneth R., 2008, “Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing,” Journal of
Finance, 63(4), 1537-1573

Gil-Bazo, J. and P. Ruiz-Verdu, 2008, “When cheaper is better: Fee determination in the market
for equity mutual funds,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 67 (3), 871-885

Gil-Bazo, J. and P. Ruiz-Verdu, 2009, “The relation between price and performance in the mutual
fund industry,” Journal of Finance 64 (5), 2153-2183

Goetzmann, W. N., A. Kumar, 2008, “Equity portfolio diversification,” Review of Finance 12(3):
433-463

Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2000, “The investment behavior and performance of various
investor types: a study of Finland's unique data set,” Journal of Financial Economics 55(1): 43–67

Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001, “What makes investors trade?” Journal of Finance, 56,
589–616

Hasbrouck, J., 2009, “Trading Costs and Returns for U.S. Equities: Estimating Effective Costs
from Daily Data,” Journal of Finance 64(3): 1445–1477

Hossain, T. and J. Morgan. 2006, “Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non) Equivalence in
Field Experiments on eBay,” B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis and Policy: Advances in
Economic Analysis and Policy, 6(2): 1–27.

Huang, M., 2003, “Liquidity shocks and equilibrium liquidity premia,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 109, 104–129



                                               38
Ivkovic, Z., C. Sialm, and S. J. Weisbenner, 2008, “Portfolio concentration and the performance
of individual investors,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43(3): 613-655

Ivkovic, Z., J. Poterba and S. J. Weisbenner, 2005, “Tax-Motivated Trading by Individual
Investors,” The American Economic Review, 95(5): 1605-1630

Lakonishok, Josef, and Baruch Lev, 1987, “Stock Splits and stock dividends: Why, who and
when,” Journal of Finance 42, 913-932

Lesmond, D. A., J. P. Ogden and C. A. Trzcinka, 1999, “A New Estimate of Transaction Costs,”
Review of Financial Studies 12 (5): 1113-1141

Li X., Z. Geng, A. Subrahmanyam, and H. Yu, 2016, “Portfolio concentration and performance of
institutional investors worldwide,” Working Paper, UCLA

Lin, D.Y. and L.J. Wei, 1989, “The robust inference for the cox proportional hazards model,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 84, 1074–1078

Lo, A. W., H. Mamaysky, and J.Wang, 2004, “Asset prices and trading volume under fixed
transaction costs,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1054–1090

Lynch, A. W. and S. Tan, 2011, “Explaining the magnitude of liquidity premia: The roles of return
predictability, wealth shocks and state dependent transaction costs,” Journal of Finance 66(4):
1329–1368

Odean, T., 1999, “Do investors trade too much?,” American Economic Review, 89, 1279–1298.

Roll, R., 1984, “A simple implicit measure of the effective bid-ask spread in an efficient market,”
Journal of Finance, 39, 1127–1139

Schultz, Paul, 2000, “Stock Splits, Tick Size, and Sponsorship,” Journal of Finance 55,429-50

Seru, A., T. Shumway, and N. Stoffman, 2010, “Learning by trading”, Review of Financial Studies
23 (2): 705-73

Simutin, M., 2013, “Cash Holdings and Mutual Fund Performance,” Review of Finance, 18 (4):
1425-1464

Stoffman, N., 2014, “Who trades with whom? Individuals, institutions, and returns,” Journal of
Financial Markets 21: 51-75

Vayanos, D., 1998, “Transactions costs and asset prices: A dynamic equilibrium model,” Review
of Financial Studies, 11, 1-58




                                                39
Vayanos, D., and J.C. Vila, 1999, “Equilibrium interest rate and liquidity premium with transaction
costs,” Economic Theory, 13, 509-539




                                                40
Table 1: Summary Statistics of Stock and Investor Characteristics in the US
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for stock and investor characteristics in the US, where only stocks that have observed
individual investor transactions in the data set are considered. Summary statistics are calculated by pooling annual
observations over the 1991-1996 time period. We report the mean, standard deviations (Std.Dev), as well as median, the
25th (P25) and 75th (P75) percentile values for all variables used in the study. All liquidity measures are annual averages
as defined in the text. Price is the annual average of daily closing prices. Mkt Cap is the average market capitalization in
millions of US dollars. B/M is the book-to-market ratio. Past Returns (-12, -2) is a proxy for momentum and measures
cumulative returns during the past 10 month starting at month -12 and ending two months prior. AdjIlliq is the adjusted
Amihud illiquidity ratio. Roll’s C is the Bayesian estimate of Roll’s (1984) transactions cost measure. Zerofreq is zero-
return frequency which reports the percentage of zero-return days. Age in 1996 is the biological age of the investor in
1996. Married is a dummy variable that equals one for married traders. Gender is a dummy variable that equals one if head
of the household is a female. Professional occupation is a dummy variable and is equal to one for traders that hold either
technical or managerial positions. Retired is a dummy variable that is equal to one for traders who already retired. Retired
Account is a dummy variable that equals one if the transaction takes place in a retirement account such as a 401(k).
Portfolio concentration is defined as in Ivkovic, Sialm and Weisbenner (2008) and is calculated as the sum of squared
value weights of each stock in a household’s portfolio. Equity Portfolio Value reports the total dollar value of a household’s
equity portfolio. Income is annual self-reported income in thousands of dollars. Trades Option is a dummy variable that
equals one if a trader has traded options at least once over the entire sample period. Trades Foreign Securities is a dummy
variable that equals one if a trader has traded non-US securities at least once over the entire sample period. Short Position
is a dummy variable that equals one if an investor has shorted any security at least once over the entire sample period.

                                                                Mean        P25     Median       P75            Std. Dev
                                                                        Stock Characteristics
       Price ($)                                               22.56       7.25      15.75      28.25            139.95
       Mkt Cap ($mil)                                         1,804.96    70.83     241.32 1058.16                6000
       B/M                                                      0.69       0.20       0.41       0.77             1.40
       Past Returns (-12, -2)                                   0.34       -0.12      0.16       0.52             0.92
       AdjIlliq                                                 3.30       0.28       0.46       2.04            6.570
       Roll's C                                                 1.73       0.45       1.06       2.26             2.05
       Zerofreq                                                4.82%      0.00%      2.70%      8.33%            7.85%
                                                                       Investor Characteristics
       Age in 1996                                               49.58          40        48         58            12.40
       Married (1=married)                                        0.76           1         1          1             0.43
       Gender (1=female)                                          0.10           0         0          0             0.30
       Professional occupation                                    0.66           0         1          1             0.47
       Retired                                                    0.15           0         0          0             0.36
       Retired Account                                            0.39           0         0          1             0.49
       Portfolio Concentration                                    0.52        0.28      0.48       0.73             0.28
       Equity Portfolio Value, USD                              80,342      8,900    22,952     62,087           313,568
       Income, USD                                              76,840     45,000    87,500 112,500               33,190
       Trades Option                                              0.14           0         0          0             0.34
       Trades Foreign Securities                                  0.22           0         0          0             0.42
       Short Position                                             0.38           0         0          1             0.49




                                                               41
Table 2: Impact of Transaction Costs on Households’ Holding Periods in the US, univariate analysis
Table 2 presents univariate analysis of the relationship between stock illiquidity and the holding period for each transaction in the
US between 1991 and 1996. Holding Period is the number of trading days elapsed between the purchase and the first sale of that
asset by a specific investor. Holding period for censored transactions, i.e. when sales of the assets are not observed, are estimated
assuming the asset is sold on the last available date in the data set. All transactions are ranked into ten portfolios based on their
holding periods accordingly. Averages for the various liquidity measures for the underlying securities are then calculated for each
group. All illiquidity measures are annual averages and are defined in the text. Price is the annual average of daily closing prices.
Mkt Cap is the average market capitalization in millions of dollars. AdjIlliq is the adjusted Amihud illiquidity ratio. Roll’s C is the
Bayesian estimate of the Roll’s (1984) transaction cost measure. Zerofreq is zero return frequency which measures the proportion
of zero-return days per year. By definition, as the values of AdjIlliq, Roll’s C and Zerofreq increase, liquidity decreases. High minus
Low reports the differences for each variable between transactions groups with the longest and shortest holding-periods. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.




                                     Holding        Price       Mkt Cap                                      Zerofreq
                                     Period           $        (Millions)       AdjIlliq       Roll's C         (%)
                   Low                   6          33.46         7,283         0.9172         0.6608          2.52
                   2                    20          31.36         6,880         0.9865         0.6834          2.72
                   3                    44          30.25         7,153         1.0592         0.7054          2.84
                   4                    79          30.16         8,410         1.0828         0.7072          2.85
                   5                   127          33.46         8,601         1.2310         0.7337          3.06
                   6                   194          30.29         9,547         1.2279         0.7312          3.03
                   7                   294          30.51         9,814         1.3938         0.7382          3.09
                   8                   470          28.50         9,712         1.5231         0.7312          3.14
                   9                   771          30.49        11,508         1.6347         0.7425          3.40
                   High               1225          34.37         9,686         1.8397         0.8182          3.83
                   High-Low          1219***        0.91        2,403***       0.9224***      0.1575***       1.32***




                                                                    42
Table 3: Impact of Transaction Costs on Households’ Holding Periods in the US, hazard analysis
Table 3 examines the impact of transaction costs on individual investors’ holding periods in the US using a hazard model
framework. Panel A reports the estimated hazard ratios from the hazard regressions for US households between 1991 and 1996,
where the conditional probability of sale is the dependent variable. Independent variables include the adjusted Amihud illiquidity
ratio; firm characteristics; a set of demographic controls; trade variables; as well as the interactions of transactions costs measures
with investor characteristics. Proxies for transactions costs (AdjIlliq, as well as Roll’s C and Zerofreq) are calculated averages
over the previous 12 months before each sale transaction. Size is the market value of equity. B/M or book-to-market ratio is
computed as the ratio of previous year-end book value to the most recent market capitalization. Momentum is the cumulative
returns over the ten-month period between month -12 to month -2. Stock characteristics are calculated at the beginning of the
month when a sale takes place. Age refers to the age of the head of the household. Income is the total self-reported annual
income. Married Dummy is a dummy variable that equals one if the investor is married. Male Dummy is equal to one if the head
of the household is a male. Professional Dummy is one for investors who hold technical or managerial positions, and Retired
Dummy is equal to one for investors who already retired. Retirement Acct Dummy equals one if the underlying account is a
retirement (IRA or Keogh) account. Trade variables for each individual investor are derived from all the transactions he/she
executes during the sample period. Short User Dummy equals one if an investor executed at least one short sale during the
sample period. Option User Dummy is one if an investor ever traded options. Foreign Securities Dummy is set to one if an
investor traded at least once any foreign assets, including ADRs, foreign stocks or foreign mutual funds during the sample
period. Portfolio concentration is defined as in Ivkovic, Sialm and Weisbenner (2008) and is equal to the sum of squared value
weights of each stock in a household’s portfolio. Panel B investigates if investor sophistication affects investors’ attention to
transaction costs. Investor sophistication is presumed to cumulatively increase with each of the following criteria met: if the
investor has an income higher than $75K; if the investor is ranked among the top 25% of all investors based on equity holdings
at any point in time during the sample period; if the investor holds either technical or managerial positions and as such is
considered a professional; if the investor traded options at least once during the entire sample period; if the investor has ever
held any short positions during the sample period; if the investor has ever traded foreign securities, including ADRs, foreign
stocks or mutual funds; and if the investor’s portfolio is more concentrated than the median investor’s, i.e. if the investor’s
portfolio concentration is greater than 0.48. The most sophisticated investors in the US have a Sophistication score of seven (7),
while the least sophisticated have a Sophistication score of zero (0). Calendar month dummies (not reported) are twelve dummy
variables that equals one if the sale transaction happens during the specific month. Year dummies (not reported) equal one for
the year during which a transaction happens. Clustered robust standard errors are calculated at the household level. Ties are
handled using the Efron procedure. Wald test is used for each additional set of regressors. P-values are reported below each
coefficient. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.




                                                                 43
Panel A: Hazard Regressions, Impact of Transaction Costs on Individual Traders’ Holding Period Decisions in US
                            (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                            AdjIlliq     Roll's C     Zerofreq      AdjIlliq     AdjIlliq     AdjIlliq
Illiquidity measure         0.981***     0.982***     0.322***      0.973***     0.981***     0.983***
                            <.0001       <.0001       <.0001        <.0001       <.0001       <.0001
                                             Stock characteristics
Size                                                                             0.649***     0.724***
                                                                                 <.0001       <.0001
B/M                                                                              0.681***     0.889***
                                                                                 <.0001       <.0001
                                                                                       ***
Momentum                                                                         1.135        1.113***
                                                                                 <.0001       <.0001
                                            Demographic variables
Age                                                                                           0.997***
                                                                                              <.0001
Log (Income)                                                                                  0.927***
                                                                                              <.0001
Married Dummy                                                                                 0.959***
                                                                                              <.0001
Male Dummy                                                                                    1.103***
                                                                                              <.0001
Professional Dummy                                                                            1.001
                                                                                              0.891
Retirement Acct Dummy                                                                         0.912***
                                                                                              <.0001
Retired Dummy                                                                                 1.076***
                                                                                              <.0001

                                               Trade variables
Foreign securities Dummy                                                                     1.245***
                                                                                             <.0001
Option User Dummy                                                                            1.395***
                                                                                             <.0001
Short User Dummy                                                                             1.877***
                                                                                             <.0001
Log (Total Equity)                                                                           1.079***
                                                                                             <.0001
Concentration                                                                                3.228***
                                                                                             <.0001
Firm stratification         No           No           No           Yes          No           No
Household stratification    No           No           No           Yes          Yes          No
Calendar month dummies      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Calendar year dummies       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Number of Observations      799,469      799,469      766,168      799,469      589,794      156,350
Wald test                   <.0001       <.0001       <.0001       <.0001       <.0001       <.0001




                                                    44
 Panel B: Hazard Regressions, Impact of Sophistication on Attention to Transaction Costs in US
                                                 (1)            (2)
 AdjIlliq                                        0.988**        0.984**
                                                 0.020          0.011
 Age                                             0.993***      0.994***
                                                 <.0001        <.0001
 Married Dummy                                   0.879***      0.873***
                                                 <.0001        <.0001
 Male Dummy                                      1.046***      1.045***
                                                 0.001         0.005
 Retirement Acct Dummy                           0.840***      0.862***
                                                 <.0001        <.0001
 Retired Dummy                                   1.379***      1.401***
                                                 <.0001        <.0001
 AdjIlliq × Age                                  1.000***      1.000***
                                                 <.0001        <.0001
 AdjIlliq × Married Dummy                        1.003*        1.006***
                                                 0.053         0.010
 AdjIlliq × Male Dummy                           0.993**       0.992**
                                                 0.021         0.043
 AdjIlliq × Retirement Acct Dummy                0.999         0.997
                                                 0.441         0.251
 AdjIlliq × Retired Dummy                        0.990***      0.988***
                                                 <.0001        <.0001
 Sophistication                                  1.265***      1.272***
                                                 <.0001        <.0001
 AdjIlliq × Sophistication                       0.995***      0.994***
                                                 <.0001        <.0001
 Stock Controls                                  Yes           Yes
 Household stratification                        No            Yes
 Calendar month dummies                          Yes           Yes
 Calendar year dummies                           Yes           Yes
 Number of Observations                          156,350       156,350
 Wald test                                       <.0001        <.0001




Table 4: Attention to Transaction Costs and Trading Ability


                                                      45
Table 4 reports returns for two groups of households. The two groups are formed based on the magnitude of their hazard ratios
for the transaction cost variables, which are estimated from US household level hazard regressions described in Section 5. Hazard
ratio on adjusted Amihud’s illiquidity ratio, AdjIlliq, is used as a proxy for how much attention the individual pays to transaction
costs. To get robust estimates, households are required to have made at least 50 trades during the sample period to be included
in the analysis. 1-, 6-, and 12-month returns are calculated starting from the date of purchase. Characteristics adjusted returns
are calculated as returns net of characteristics matched portfolios, as in Daniel et al. (1997). Spread is estimated as in Barber and
Odean (2000) and is equal to trading price divided by the CRSP closing price minus one for sales. The ratio is multiplied by
minus one for purchases. Round trip spread is the sum of sale and purchase spreads and is reported below. Transactions with a
purchase or sale price less than $2, and holding periods less than 2 days, are excluded from the sample. Panel A reports returns
for the two groups where the hazard ratio of the transaction cost variable, AdjIlliq, is estimated with a minimum significance
level of 10%. Panel B reports returns for the full sample. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels is denoted by *,
**, and ***, respectively.

  Panel A: Observations with AdjIlliq Hazard Ratio at >10% Significance
                                    Group 1                       Group 2                                       Group 1 - Group 2
                                    Pays Attention to             Doesn't Pay Attention
                                    Transaction Costs             to Transaction Costs
  1 Month return                     0.018                         0.018                                          0.001
  1 Month return Char. adj.         -0.001                        -0.001                                          0.001
  6 Month return                     0.079                         0.066                                          0.013***
  6 Month return Char. adj.         -0.001                        -0.002                                          0.010***
  12 Month return                    0.161                         0.132                                          0.029***
  12 Month return Char. adj.        -0.010                        -0.035                                          0.025***
  Spread (%)                         0.675                         3.457                                         -2.782***
  Holding Period (days)              100.0                         156.9                                         -56.9***



  Panel B: All Observations
                                          Group 1                             Group 2                            Group 1 - Group 2
                                          Pays Attention to                   Doesn't Pay Attention
                                          Transaction Costs                   to Transaction Costs
  1 Month return                           0.018                               0.017                              0.001**
  1 Month return Char. adj.               -0.001                              -0.002                              0.002**
  6 Month return                           0.079                               0.070                              0.009***
  6 Month return Char. adj.               -0.010                              -0.019                              0.009***
  12 Month return                          0.162                               0.146                              0.016***
  12 Month return Char. adj.              -0.009                              -0.027                              0.018***
  Spread (%)                               1.093                               3.321                             -2.228***
  Holding Period (days)                    115.6                               147.4                             -31.8***




Table 5: Change in Illiquidity around Stock Splits


                                                                46
Table 5 reports the changes in illiquidity for stocks that split in the US around their ex-split dates. There are 1,850 forward stock
splits during our sample period with a split factor larger than or equal to 0.25. An OLS regression of stock illiquidity on a time
period indicator – After Split-dummy is estimated, controlling for size, book-to-market and momentum. The dependent variable
is the monthly adjusted Amihud illiquidity ratio. The comparison of illiquidity involves different event windows, namely 6
months, 9 months and 12 months after stock splits. The time period indicator – After Split-dummy equals to one for observations
of splitting stocks within the specified event window subsequent to their splits, otherwise it is zero. Each coefficient reported
below for the –After Split-dummy comes from a single OLS regression. Size, book-to-market and momentum are also calculated
monthly. For brevity, the coefficients for size, book-to-market and momentum are not reported. For each event window, we first
report OLS results without firm controls and followed by results with firm controls in the adjacent columns. Standard errors are
below each estimated coefficients. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***,
respectively.



       Window                6-months                         9-months                         12-months
                             (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)
      After Split            -0.193***        -0.186***       -0.250***         -0.248***      -0.293***       -0.289***
      dummy                  (0.016)          (0.017)         (0.013)           (0.014)        (0.011)         (0.012)

      Stock Controls         No               Yes             No                Yes            No              Yes
      Observations           31,652           27,703          47,271            40,488         62,744          52,484
      Adj. R                 0.005            0.044           0.008             0.046          0.011           0.048




                                                                47
Table 6: Impact of US Stock Splits on Holding Period Decisions
Table 6 examines the impact of stock splits on individual investors’ holding period decisions. It reports the estimated hazard ratios from
dynamic hazard regressions in the US where the conditional probability of sale is the dependent variable. Holding period is calculated
as previously defined. For each stock-holding position, there is one observation for each day t the position is open, up to and including
the day the stock is sold, or in cases where sales of stocks are not observed, until the last day of the data set. The dependent variable,
which is sale conditional on holding until day t is 1 if the stock is sold on this particular day, otherwise it is zero. We define three
different event windows, which range from 6 months to 12 months. The After Split dummy is equal to1 if the stock experienced a split
within 6 months (or other time horizon, i.e. 9 months, or 12 months) prior to day t, otherwise it is equal to0. The table reports the
estimated hazard ratios on the – After Split- dummy. In all specifications, we control for time specific effects with calendar year and
month dummies. We also control for size, book-to-market and momentum in models (2), (4) and (6). Firm characteristics are measured
at the beginning of the month during which the sales are observed while year and month dummies equal to one when a sale takes place.
For brevity, estimated hazard ratios for firm characteristics and calendar year and month dummies are not reported. P-values are included
below each coefficient. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.




 Impact of Stock Splits on Holding Period Decisions

         Window                            6-months                     9-months                     12-months
                                   (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)              (5)         (6)
                                         ***
         After Split dummy         1.344        1.183**         1.328 ***
                                                                             1.192***         1.310 ***
                                                                                                          1.198***
                                   <.0001       <.0001          <.0001       <.0001           <.0001      0.0001
 Stock controls                    No           Yes             No           Yes              No          Yes
 Calendar month dummies            Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes
 Calendar year dummies             Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes
 Observations                      943,137      702,494         943,727      704,085          947,485     706,846
 Wald test                         <.0001       <.0001          <.0001       <.0001           <.0001      <.0001




                                                                   48
Table 7: Summary Statistics of Stock and Investor Characteristics in Finland
Table 7 reports descriptive statistics for stock and investor characteristics in Finland. Summary statistics are calculated by pooling annual
observations over the 1996-2003 time period. We report the mean, standard deviation, as well as median, the 25th and 75th percentile
values for all variables used in the study. All liquidity measures are annual averages and are defined in the text. Price is the annual
average of the daily closing prices. Mkt Cap is the average market capitalization in millions of Euros. AdjIlliq is the adjusted Amihud
illiquidity ratio. Roll’s C is the Bayesian estimate of Roll’s (1984) transactions cost measure. Zerofreq is zero-return frequency which
reports the percentage of zero-return days. Age in 1995 is the biological age of the investor in 1995. Gender (1=female) is a dummy
variable that equals one for female traders. Portfolio concentration is defined as in Ivkovic, Sialm and Weisbenner (2008) and is
calculated as the sum of squared value weights of each stock in a household’s portfolio. Average portfolio value is the average mark-
to-market value of an investor’s portfolio in Euros using daily closing prices, calculated on an annual basis. Trades Option is a dummy
variable that takes on a value of one for traders that have traded options at least once over the entire sample period.



 Summary Statistics for Finland
                                                         Mean     P25     Median      P75                  Std. Dev
                                                               Stock Characteristics
 Price (€)                                               12.61    2.69      7.67      16.4                  11.20
 Mkt Cap (€mil)                                          1132      33       125       498                  8414.34
 AdjIlliq                                                10.61    1.07      6.21     20.12                  10.25
 Roll's C                                                 2.96    0.66      2.30      3.88                   3.51
 Zerofreq                                               21.90% 13.50% 20.64% 27.75%                        13.42%

                                                                  Investor Characteristics
 Age in 1995                                             39.5          27        40         52              18.48
 Gender (1=female)                                       0.33           0         0          1               0.47
 Portfolio Concentration                                 0.20         0.09      0.17       0.27              0.18
 Average Portfolio Value, EUR                           10,823       1,341      2,079      5,292            80,125
 Trades Option                                           0.04           0         0          0               0.18




                                                                    49
Table 8: Impact of Liquidity on Households’ Holding Periods in Finland, hazard analysis
Table 8 examines the impact of stock liquidity on individual investors’ holding periods in Finland using a hazard model
framework. Panel A reports estimated hazard ratios from the hazard regressions where the conditional probability of sale is the
dependent variable. Independent variables include measures of liquidity: the adjusted Amihud illiquidity ratio (alternative proxies
for transactions costs including Roll’s C and Zerofreq); firm characteristics; a set of demographic controls; trade variables; as
well as the interaction of our proxy for transactions costs with investor characteristics. Proxies for transactions costs (AdjIlliq,
Roll’s C and Zerofreq) are calculated over the previous 12 months prior to a sale transaction. Size is the market value of equity.
B/M , the book-to-market ratio, is computed as the ratio of previous year-end book value to the most recent market capitalization.
Momentum is the cumulative return over the period between month -12 to month -2. All stock characteristics are calculated at
the beginning of the month that a sale takes place. Demographic variables include age and gender. Age is the biological age of
the head of the household. Male Dummy is one if the head of the household is male. Trade variables for each investor are derived
from all the transactions carried out by the each specific investor in the data set. Option User Dummy equals one if an investor
has ever traded options over the course of the sample period. Log (Equity Holding) captures the logarithmic value of the
household’s total equity holdings. Concentration is defined as in Ivkovic, Sialm and Weisbenner (2008) and is equal to the sum
of squared value weights of each stock in a household’s portfolio. Year Dummies are dummy variables that equal one if the sale
transaction takes place during that particular year. Calendar month dummy is equal one if a sale takes place during that particular
month. For brevity, estimated hazard ratios on the year and month dummy variables are not reported. Panel B investigates if
sophistication affects an investor’s attention to transaction costs. A Finnish investor’s sophistication is presumed to cumulatively
increase with each of the following criteria met: if the household is ranked among the top 25% of all investors based on equity
holdings at any point in time during the sample period; if the investor’s portfolio is more concentrated than the median investor’s;
if the investor has ever traded options at least once during the entire sample period. The most sophisticated investors in Finland
have a Sophistication score of three (3), while the least sophisticated have a Sophistication score of zero (0). We also control for
size, B/M, momentum, as well as calendar year and month specific effects. Robust standard errors are calculated as in Lin and
Wei (1989). Ties are handled using the Efron procedure. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels is denoted by *,
**, and ***, respectively.




                                                                50
Panel A: Hazard Regressions, Impact of Transaction Costs on Individual Traders’ Holding Period Decisions in Finland
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                    AdjIlliq     Roll's C    Zerofreq    AdjIlliq    AdjIlliq    AdjIlliq
                                          ***          ***         ***         ***         ***
    Illiquidity measure             0.984        0.975       0.105       0.976       0.982          0.982***
                                    <.0001       <.0001      <.0001      <.0001      <.0001      <.0001
                                                             Stock characteristics
    Size                                                                             1.003***    1.001 ***
                                                                                     <.0001      <.0001
                                                                                           ***
    BM                                                                               0.993       0.996***
                                                                                     <.0001      <.0001
                                                                                           ***
    Momentum                                                                         1.014       1.008***
                                                                                     <.0001      <.0001
                                                            Demographic Controls
    Age                                                                                          0.994***
                                                                                                 <.0001
    Male Dummy                                                                                   1.290***
                                                                                                 <.0001
                                                                Trade Variables
    Option User Dummy                                                                            1.713***
                                                                                                 <.0001
    Log (Equity Holding)                                                                         1.157***
                                                                                                 <.0001
    Concentration                                                                                5.456***
                                                                                                 <.0001

    Firm stratification                No           No           No          Yes         No          No
    Household stratification           No           No           No          Yes         Yes         No
    Calendar month dummies             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
    Calendar year dummies              Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
    Observations                    2,304,232    2,304,232    2,304,232   2,304,232   2,131,366   1,522,716
    Wald test                        <.0001       <.0001       <.0001      <.0001      <.0001      <.0001




                                                             51
Panel B: Hazard Regressions, Impact of Sophistication on Attention to Transaction Costs in Finland

                                   (1)         (2)
    Illiquidity measure            1.005***    1.013***
                                   <.0001      <.0001
    Age                            0.995***    0.995***
                                   <.0001      <.0001
    Male Dummy                     1.371***    1.339***
                                   <.0001      <.0001
    Sophistication                 1.588***    1.552***
                                   <.0001      <.0001
    AdjIlliq × Age                 1.000***    1.000
                                   <.0001      0.236
    AdjIlliq × Male Dummy          0.990***    0.992***
                                   <.0001      <.0001
    AdjIlliq × Sophistication      0.996***    0.997***
                                   <.0001      <.0001
    Stock Controls                 Yes         Yes
    Household stratification       No          Yes
    Calendar month dummies         Yes         Yes
    Calendar year dummies          Yes         Yes
    Observations                   1,522,716   1,522,716
    Wald test                      <.0001      <.0001




                                                          52
Figure 1: Holding Periods of Households


                                         160



                                         140
  Median Holding Period (Trading Days)




                                         120



                                         100



                                         80



                                         60


                                         40



                                         20



                                          0
                                               < 45   45 - 65   >65    Other Retirement   < 10K   10K-45K       >45K   Other        Illiquid
                                                      Age             Account Type           Investment Value           Liquidity




This figure shows the median holding period for various investor and stock groups. Age is the age of the investor. Account type
denotes whether the account is a retirement account. Investment value is the average amount invested by the household in the
stock market. A stock is defined as illiquid if it belongs to the lowest liquidity decile of stocks ranked according to the adjusted
Amihud illiquidity ratio. The holding period is calculated only for positions that are closed-out by the end of the sample period.




                                                                                                       53
Figure 2: Survival Probabilities for Stocks in the United States




Figure 2 plots Kaplan-Meier survival probabilities for two groups of stocks held by households in the United States over the
1991-1996 time period. Illiquid stocks in the figure are stocks that are in the highest illiquidity decile of stocks ranked according
to the adjusted Amihud illiquidity measure. The gray line stands for the probability of holding onto illiquid stocks, and the black
line stands for the probability of holding all the rest stocks.




                                                                54
Figure 3: Investor Sophistication and Hazard Ratios


                  1.02

                  1.01

                  1.00

                  0.99
   Hazard ratio




                  0.98

                  0.97

                  0.96

                  0.95

                  0.94
                         0   1   2        3       4       5        6       7

                                     Sophistication

Figure 3 plots the hazard ratios of the variable AdjIlliq computed by running separate regressions for different groups of investors
based on their level of sophistication indicated in the x-axis. Sophistication ranges from a low of zero (0) to a high of seven (7).
The regression model used is the same as in column (1) of Panel B in Table 3. The dotted lines show the 95th percentile confidence
intervals of the estimated hazard ratios.




                                                                55
