                                                     WPS8094


Policy Research Working Paper                       8094




       Cities, Slums, and Early Child Growth
                Empirical Evidence from Bangladesh

                                 Dhushyanth Raju
                                 Kyoung Yang Kim
                                Quynh Thu Nguyen
                                Ramesh Govindaraj




South Asia Region
Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8094


  Abstract
 This study uses novel household survey data that are rep-                          education attainment and household wealth largely explain
 resentative of Bangladesh’s large cities, and of slum and                          the cross-sectional difference and intertemporal change
 nonslum areas within the cities, to investigate the effects                        in child growth. Although positive in some cases, the
 of demographic and socioeconomic factors on early child                            effects of maternal and child health services, and poten-
 growth in 2013. The study also decomposes the differ-                              tial health-protective household amenities, differ by the
 ence in mean child growth between slum and nonslum                                 type of health facility, household amenity, and urban area.
 areas in 2013, and the increase in mean child growth in                            The results suggest that a focus on nutrition-sensitive pro-
 slum and nonslum areas from 2006 to 2013. Mother’s                                 grams for slum residents and the urban poor is appropriate.




  This paper is a product of the South Asia Region and the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The corresponding author may be contacted at draju2@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                      Cities, Slums, and Early Child Growth:
                       Empirical Evidence from Bangladesh
                                             Dhushyanth Raju
                                            Kyoung Yang Kim
                                            Quynh Thu Nguyen
                                            Ramesh Govindaraj




        JEL codes:        I12, I14, I15, O15
        Keywords:         Bangladesh, urban, slum, undernutrition, stunting, height, linear
                          growth, children





  Raju: draju2@worldbank.org; Kim: kkim7@worldbank.org; Nguyen: qnguyen4@worldbank.org; Govindaraj:
rgovindaraj@worldbank.org. We thank Alayne Adams, Karar Zunaid Ahsan, Bushra Binte Alam, Judy Baker, Tekabe
Belay, Sadia Chowdhury, Timothy Evans, Jean-Jacques Frere, Nedim Jaganjac, Zahed H. Khan, Iffat Mahmud,
Nkosinathi Mbuya, Patrick Mullen, Hossain Zillur Rahman, E. Gail Richardson, Federica Secci, Diana Silimperi, and
Owen Smith for helpful suggestions and feedback during various phases of the research. We also thank Naihan Yang
for research assistance. Funding from the World Bank’s Bangladesh Health Sector Development Program Multi Donor
Trust Fund (TF011554) is gratefully acknowledged.
    1. Introduction
        Urbanization is one of the most important demographic currents historically.1 It offers a
major opportunity for countries to broaden and boost gains in the socioeconomic status of urban
residents and, indirectly, of rural residents. On the other hand, rapid urbanization poses
significant development risks. Inadequate or low-quality physical and economic infrastructure
and a failure to provide basic services for growing urban populations can arrest gains, or even
produce losses, in socioeconomic welfare.
        The tension between the potential opportunities and perils of urbanization is arguably
stronger for developing countries, for at least two reasons. First, these countries are expected to
experience large expansions in their already substantial urban populations in the coming decades.
The total urban population in the least-developed countries was estimated to be 2.9 billion in
2014, and the figure is projected to reach 5.2 billion by 2050 (UN 2015a).2 Second, governments
in developing countries generally have had a poor record in designing, financing, and
implementing policies, rules and regulations, and in providing services in both urban and rural
areas, resulting in conditions and outcomes that may be socially inefficient and inequitable (UN-
Habitat 2016).
        The global imperative to successfully leverage the potential socioeconomic benefits of
urbanization, and mitigate potential risks, is reflected in for example the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (Goal 11) and the New Urban Agenda (Quito Declaration on
Sustainable Cities and Human Settlements for All) adopted by the UN in 2015 and 2016,
respectively (UN 2015a; UN 2017). Protecting and promoting the health of urban residents—
including slum and poor residents who face a greater risk to their health from higher exposure to
adverse environmental factors—is a key element in the UN agenda on urbanization.
        In this study, we investigate patterns, trends, and determinants of child growth in the
major cities in Bangladesh, with a focus on differences between slum and nonslum children. The
country is especially suitable for such a study. Classified as a lower middle-income country,
Bangladesh is the eighth most populous country in the world, with an estimated population of
159 million in 2014 (World Bank 2016). Its urban population increased from 13 million (15.5%


1
  The UN estimates that 54% of the world’s population were urban residents in 2014, an increase from 30% in 1950,
and projects that the percentage will reach 66% by 2050 (UN 2015a).
2
  These figures represent 48% of the total population in least-developed countries in 2014, and 63% in 2050,
respectively.

                                                       2
of the national population) in 1981 to 42 million (28%) in 2011. Over the decade from 2001 to
2011, Bangladesh’s urban population expanded by 35%, at an annualized growth rate of 3%. By
2050, its urban population is projected to account for 56% of the country’s total population (UN
2015a).
         According to UN-Habitat, a settlement is defined to be slum if it lacks access to clean
water, access to improved sanitation, sufficient living space, durable housing, or secure tenure
(UN-Habitat 2016). Defined as such, slum settlements are a prevalent, persistent feature of the
urban landscape in developing countries, arising from poor public planning, regulation,
investment, and basic services. UN-Habitat (2016) estimates that 0.9 billion individuals resided
in urban slum settlements in developing countries in 2014 (a 28% increase from 1990),
representing an estimated 30% of the total urban population in these countries. In Bangladesh, a
government census in 2014 counted about 14,000 slum settlements across all urban areas (GOB
2015).
         The health and nutrition of slum residents are of interest for several reasons. First, theory
and evidence suggest that the study of slum health and nutrition should be treated as distinct
from the study of urban health, or the study of poverty and health (Ezeh et al. 2017). One
argument for the separate treatment is that the physical and social environments of slum
settlements may act to amplify health risks for residents, and produce negative health
externalities that extend across a slum settlement, or even more widely. The exposure to
concentrated health risks in slum settlements may be particularly harmful to young children,
given that they are more immunologically susceptible than older children and adults. Marx et al.
(2013) argue that the potential adverse health effects of slum settlements may create a low
human-capital equilibrium which, in turn, contributes to making slum settlements into poverty
traps. Second, the literature on slum health and nutrition is scant (see Ezeh et al. 2017 for a
recent review). The little available evidence points to patterns that would benefit from deeper
investigation. For example, the evidence indicates that mean health and nutrition outcomes are
worse for slum residents than for nonslum residents, and are often worse than for rural residents
(Ezeh et al. 2017; Mberu et al. 2016). Third, research is needed on the health risks and effects of
residing in a slum settlement to guide the design and implementation of policies and
interventions related to slum development in general and slum health in particular (Lilford et al.
2017).

                                                   3
         Past research on urban (slum) health in developing countries has been limited by the lack
of data that are representative across and within urban areas.3 The data situation is changing, and
Bangladesh, along with Kenya (Ezeh et al. 2017), is a relative forerunner. In 2006, the National
Institute of Population Research and Training (NIPORT) and others conducted the Bangladesh
Urban Health Survey (BUHS), providing for the first time extensive data on adult and child
health and nutrition outcomes, and potentially relevant factors that are representative for slum
and nonslum areas in city corporations (the country’s large cities), and for district municipalities
and large towns (paurashavas). In 2013, the survey was repeated on a new cross-section which is
representative for the same domains. The two rounds of the BUHS serve as the source of data for
this study.4,5
         We measure child growth by height-for-age z-scores (HAZ scores). Height is widely
regarded as the most relevant measure of overall child nutrition, and child stunting (an HAZ
score that is more than two standard deviations [SD] below the international reference median) is
seen as the key indicator for tracking progress in addressing child undernutrition.6 Child stunting
reflects the cumulative effects of poor diet and recurrent infection. Globally in 2004, 15% of
deaths and another 15% of the burden of disease for children below five years of age are
attributed to stunting (Black et al. 2008). International evidence indicates that child stunting is
associated with lower motor, cognitive, emotional, and social development, and higher rates of
illness, disability, and premature death, as well as poorer socioeconomic outcomes in
adolescence and adulthood, measured by, for example, education attainment, student academic
achievement, employment, and labor earnings (Currie and Vogl 2013; Black et al. 2013; Cesar et
al. 2008).


3
  In the case of Bangladesh, past research has used data from national household surveys to examine urban-rural
differences in health and nutrition outcomes (for example, see Srinivasan et al. 2013), or urban health and nutrition
outcomes while treating urban areas as an undifferentiated whole (for example, see Headey et al. 2015). Khan and
Kramer (2014) examined the health and socioeconomic characteristics of urban slum and nonslum residents using
national household surveys based on self-reported information by the household on the slum status of the residence.
Other past research has used data from small-scale convenience or purposive samples of individuals, households, or
health facilities to examine health and nutrition issues in specific cities and towns (for example, in Dhaka and
Chittagong), or in specific subpopulations within cities and towns, such as slum residents (for example, see Choudhury
et al. 2012).
4
  The 2006 and 2013 BUHS data were publicly released in 2013 and 2016, respectively.
5
  The 2006 BUHS was funded by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). The 2013 BUHS
was funded by USAID and the United Kingdom Department for International Development.
6
  The child stunting rate is one of two indicators selected to measure progress against Target 2.2 on “ending all forms
of malnutrition” in the 2030 UN Sustainable Development Goal 2 (UN 2015b).

                                                          4
        While rural and urban stunting rates in Bangladesh have declined markedly over the last
two decades (Headey et al. 2015), the stunting rate stood at 36% for the country, and at 31% for
urban areas, based on the 2014 Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) (NIPORT et
al. 2016). The country’s national stunting rate ranks 107 out of 132 countries (IFPRI 2016).
Based on the 2013 BUHS, the stunting rate stood at 50% for slum areas and 33% for nonslum
areas in city corporations, and 37% for municipal cities and large towns (NIPORT et al. 2015).
        Bangladesh lacks rigorous empirical research based on representative data on the
determinants of child growth across, and within, urban areas. A recent, notable exception is
Ahsan et al. (2017), who examine the effects of various factors on stunting and underweight
status for slum and nonslum children using 2013 BUHS data.7,8 They find that the child’s age,
mother’s education attainment, and household wealth are significant factors for slum and
nonslum children, and that mother’s membership in an NGO and the child’s birth order are
additional significant factors for nonslum children.
        We begin by investigating the effects of child, maternal, household, and neighborhood-
area factors on growth for slum and nonslum children in reduced-form estimations, using the
2013 BUHS. The examined factors proxy for many of the structural and intermediate
determinants in the World Health Organization (WHO) Commission on Social Determinants of
Health (CSDH) conceptual framework (WHO 2010), and for the immediate, underlying, and
basic factors in the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) conceptual framework on the
causes of malnutrition (UNICEF 1998). We estimate regressions with administrative-division
fixed effects, as well as regressions with neighborhood-area fixed effects, thus respectively
accounting for unobserved heterogeneity at the division and neighborhood-area levels.
        We then advance on the Ahsan et al. study in five potentially policy-relevant directions.
The first four of the five directions use the 2013 BUHS, whereas the fifth direction uses both the
2006 and 2013 BUHS. First, we examine the effects of the local availability of maternal and
child health services, and of the use of these services. Second, we examine the effects of access
to, or use of, potential health-protective household amenities related to cooking fuel, dwelling

7
  For each outcome and sample, they examine the effects of child and maternal factors, household factors, and
neighborhood-area factors through separate regression specifications, and consolidate significant factors from these
partially-specified regressions into a single regression.
8
  Other available studies examine the determinants of undernutrition in small samples of children in selected urban
slum settlements (for example, see Fakir and Khan 2015; Zaman et al. 2015; Alam et al. 2011).


                                                         5
floor, drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene. Third, we examine the effect of rural-to-urban
migration. Sixty-six percent of mothers in our sample reported that they had moved to their
current city corporation from elsewhere. We deepen the analysis on the effects of such a move
by examining where the mother was born (the current city corporation, another urban area, or a
village), the reason reported by her for moving to the current city corporation, and how long ago
she had moved. We perform these three analyses for all city-corporation children, as well as
separately for slum and nonslum children. Fourth, we examine the extent and nature of the
contributions of various factors to the slum-nonslum gap in mean child growth, based on an
extension of the Oaxaca-Blinder counterfactual decomposition method. In 2013, mean HAZ
scores were 0.58 SD lower for slum than nonslum children. Fifth, we examine the extent and
nature of the contribution of various factors to the change in mean HAZ scores for slum and
nonslum children, based on the same decomposition method. Between 2006 and 2013, mean
HAZ scores improved by 0.23 SD for slum children and by 0.20 SD for nonslum children. (The
slum-nonslum gap in mean child growth narrowed marginally over the period.)
       We find that mean growth is poorer for slum than nonslum children in city corporations.
In addition, mean growth for slum children is poorer than for rural children. However, mean
growth for nonslum children is the same as for children in all urban areas, which indicates a
cause for concern for city-corporation children in general and slum children in particular. Child’s
age, mother’s age at child’s birth, mother’s education attainment, and household wealth have
significant effects on child growth, which are robust to the inclusion of neighborhood-area fixed
effects in the regressions. The positive effect on child growth from residing in a nonslum
neighborhood area remains significant even after controlling for a range of factors.
       The rates of use of health facilities for antenatal care, delivery, and newborn exam are
lower for slum than nonslum children. Relative to their nonslum counterparts, slum households
are more likely to use NGO facilities and less likely to use public and private facilities for
maternal and child health services. The use of public health facilities for antenatal care, delivery,
or newborn exam has a positive effect on child growth; likewise, for the use of NGO or private
health facilities for antenatal care. Access to or availability of potential health-protective
household amenities are poorer for slum than nonslum children. Access to improved toilets that
are shared with a large number of other households has a negative effect on slum child growth,
whereas a handwashing site with soap and water at the dwelling has a positive effect on nonslum

                                                   6
child growth. Mother’s move to the current city corporation, measured by different dimensions
of the move decision, does not appear to have a negative effect on child growth.
        The difference in mean growth between slum and nonslum children in 2013 is driven by
differences in the mean levels of factors for slum and nonslum children, in particular, mother’s
education attainment and household wealth. Similarly, the increase in mean growth between
2006 and 2013 for both slum and nonslum children is driven by increases in the mean levels of
factors, in particular, mother’s education attainment and household wealth. These findings are
consistent with those from studies for Bangladesh that empirically examine the factors associated
with the increase in child growth (Nguyen et al. 2017; Headey, Hoddinott, and Park 2016;
Headey et al. 2015), or the factors associated with the rural-urban difference in child growth
(Srinivasan, Zanello, and Shankar 2013).
        While we do not report the results, we repeat the full analysis by setting the outcome to
be whether the child is stunted. The main results hold. Presumably, this is because the sample
around mean HAZ scores is not that far apart from the sample around the threshold HAZ score
for stunting.
        Taken together, the results imply a need for sound policies, programs, and partnerships
that aim to produce large, sustained gains in household economic status, gender equality, and
formal education attainment. They also point to a need to enhance the health and nutrition
payoffs of the use of maternal and child health services and community and home environmental
health infrastructure for the urban poor in general and slum residents in particular. While
nutrition-specific programs should not be neglected, the results suggest that a focus on the
development and improvement of an array of nutrition-sensitive programs is appropriate.9
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background
information on Bangladesh’s urban areas, slum settlements, urban stunting in international and
national perspectives, and urban primary health service. Section 3 presents the data, sample, and
empirical strategies, and Section 4 presents the results. Section 5 summarizes the main results
and discusses their implications for policy.




9
  Nutrition-specific programs are those that target the immediate causes of undernutrition as identified in UNICEF’s
(1998) conceptual framework, namely inadequate nutrient intake and poor health. Nutrition-sensitive programs are
those that target the underlying and basic causes of undernutrition.

                                                         7
     2. Background


     A. Urbanization
         While Bangladesh’s population is predominantly rural, it has a sizeable urban population.
According to the 2011 Bangladesh population and housing census (GOB 2014), 23% of the
country’s population is urban. Based on official measures, Bangladesh’s urban population share
ranks it in the middle among South Asian countries. In turn, South Asia, with an urban
population share of 28%, ranks lowest among all regions in the world (Ellis and Roberts 2016).
         Bangladesh’s urban population is spatially concentrated. The country is organized into
eight administrative divisions and, under them, 64 administrative districts.10 According to the
2011 census (GOB 2014), at the division level (in 2011, there were seven divisions), Dhaka
division had an urban population of 16 million (accounting for 46% of the country’s urban
population); Chittagong division, seven million (21%); and the remaining divisions, one to three
million each. Based on the same data, at the district level, Dhaka district had an urban population
of 9.3 million (accounting for 28% of the country’s urban population); Chittagong district, 3.2
million (9%); and the other districts, 100,000 to one million each.
         Establishing the rate at which Bangladesh is urbanizing is complicated by a recent
adjustment in the definition of an urban area. The 2011 population census (GOB 2014)
introduced a stricter administrative-based definition of an urban area compared to preceding
censuses.11 If the older census definition of an urban area was retained, the country’s urban
population would have increased from 13.5 million (15.5% of the total population) in 1981 to 42
million (28% of the total population) in 2011, an annualized urban population growth rate of
3.8%.12 Over the 2001–11 period, the annualized urban population growth rate was lower, at 3%.




10
   Mymensingh division was formed in 2015, divided from Dhaka division; Ranjpur division was formed in 2010,
divided from Rajshahi division.
11
   In the 1981, 1991, and 2001 censuses, the definition of an urban area included urban developments next to large
cities. The 2011 redefinition reduced the total area classified as urban from 10,711 square kilometers in 2001 to 8,867
square kilometers in 2011 (a 17% reduction). The reductions affected some districts more than others. In particular,
Dhaka, Chittagong, Gazipur, and Khulna districts experienced reductions in their urban areas of more than 50%. With
the adjustment in urban areas, Bangladesh’s urban population in 2011 totaled 35.1 million, or 23.4% of the total
population.
12
   The 2010–11 Bangladesh Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) data was drawn using the 2001 census
as the sampling frame, and used the pre-2011 definition of an urban area. An estimated 27% of the country’s
population was urban based on these data.

                                                          8
These urbanization rates are roughly in line with the overall rate for least-developed countries
over the last 40 years (UN 2015a).
        Urban centers: Urban centers in Bangladesh are essentially organized into three levels:
city corporations, municipal cities and towns (paurashavas), and upazilla headquarters.
According to the 2011 census (GOB 2014), Bangladesh had 506 urban centers: six city
corporations (Barisal, Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna, Rajshahi, and Sylhet), 311 municipal cities
and towns, and 189 upazilla headquarters. The six city corporations accounted for 34% of the
country’s total urban population in 2011.
        Since 2011, the number of urban centers has grown, and some urban centers have moved
up in level. The number of city corporations has grown from six to 11, with four newly
incorporated city corporations: Comila (in 2011), Gazipur (in 2013), Narayanganj (in 2011), and
Rangpur (in 2012). Dhaka city corporation was bifurcated into Dhaka North and Dhaka South
city corporations in 2011. Based on published census statistics (GOB 2014), we estimate that
these 11 city corporations that exist today accounted for 41% of the country’s total urban
population in 2011.


     B. Slum settlements
        Slum settlements are an important phenomenon in urban Bangladesh. According to a
2014 government census of slum settlements, the country had approximately 14,000 of them in
all urban areas, with a total slum population of 2.2 million (GOB 2015).13 Sixty-five percent of
slum settlements were located in city corporations, 24% in municipal cities and towns, and 11%
in upazilla headquarters or other urban areas. Slum settlements varied substantially in size: on
the low end, 27% of slum settlements had fewer than 10 households, whereas on the high end,
7% of slum settlements had at least 100 households. In 2005, an independent census and
mapping of slum settlements counted about 9,000 slum settlements in the six city corporations




13
  A settlement was defined to be slum if it had at least five households and poor housing construction, water supply
and sanitation, street lighting, and roads; high population density or crowded housing; and low mean household
income status.

                                                         9
that existed at the time, with a total slum population of 5.4 million, or 35% of the overall
population in these city corporations (Angeles et al. 2009).14,15
         The 2005 independent census had several interesting findings on the characteristics of
slum settlements. We note four of these findings. First, there were large differences in the
population sizes, and housing and public environmental conditions, of slum settlements within
and across cities. Large slum settlements were a feature of the larger cities. Second, waste
management (garbage disposal and collection, and sanitation) tended to be poorer than other
public environmental facilities in slum settlements. Third, the vast majority of slum settlements
were situated on private lands, and slum residents tended to have secure tenure. In addition,
housing construction tended to be of better quality in slum settlements on private lands, which
we presume is a result of residents having secure tenure. Fourth, a large share of slum residents
were rural migrants, mostly from rural communities near to the city corporation.
         The 2006 and 2013 BUHS reports (NIPORT et al. 2008; NIPORT et al. 2015) and case
studies using other data find that slum residents generally have poor mean socioeconomic
circumstances and outcomes (for example, see Islam, Farukuzzaman, and Islam 2014; Nahar and
Rahman 2013; Hossain, Moniruzzaman, and Islam 2010). The findings are consistent with
evidence for slum residents globally (for example, see UN-Habitat 2016). These results,
however, directly follow from the definition of a slum settlement.


     C. Urban child growth in international and national perspectives
         Urban Bangladesh versus urban areas in other developing countries: Using statistics
compiled by WHO, we compare the urban child stunting rate for Bangladesh to those of other
developing countries. Statistics for all 40 countries in the comparison are for the period 2005–09.
Bangladesh ranks poorly, at no. 34 (Figure 1, Panel A). The country’s rank depends on the urban
subpopulation in terms of household wealth quintile (poorest quintile versus richest quintile).
Bangladesh’s urban stunting rate ranks worse with respect to the poorest than the richest (no. 34




14
   A settlement was defined to be slum if it had at least 10 households and met four of the following five conditions:
poor housing quality, high population density or overcrowded housing, poor water supply and sanitation facilities,
insecure tenure, and a majority of households who are poor.
15
   While the statistics from the 2005 and 2014 censuses may not reconcile easily, the basic message is identical: slum
settlements and their populations are a major feature of urban areas in the country.

                                                         10
versus no. 20) (Figure 1, Panel B). Compared to other South Asian countries, the country’s urban
stunting rate ranks in the middle (Figure 2).
       Urban versus rural areas within Bangladesh: Based on DHS data, we compare urban-
rural trends in child stunting rates over the period 1997–2014 for Bangladesh as a whole (Figure
3, Panel A), as well as by division (Figure 3, Panel B). Stunting rates are lower for urban than
rural children in Bangladesh, consistent with the pattern documented for developing countries in
general (IFPRI 2016; Van de Poel, O’Donnell, and Van Doorslaer 2007). Bangladesh’s urban-
rural stunting rate gap is on the lower end among South Asian countries (Figure 2). In addition,
compared to a large set of developing countries, Bangladesh’s urban-rural stunting rate gap is
smaller than those of most other countries (IFPRI 2016).
       Bangladesh’s urban and rural child stunting rates are declining over time. In addition, the
gap in rural and urban stunting rates has narrowed from 16 percentage points (pp.) in 1997 to 7
pp. in 2014. The trends in urban and rural stunting rates are not uniform across divisions, and are
also more erratic within all divisions. Comparing the first year to the last year in our time series,
the gap in rural and urban child stunting rates has narrowed markedly in several divisions.


   D. Urban primary healthcare
       While nutrition sensitive in nature, primary health services in Bangladesh, in particular
reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health (RMNCH) services serve as a main delivery
mode for nutrition-specific interventions. Given this, we perform an extended review of the
empirical and qualitative research on the supply and demand for, and quality of, such services in
the country’s urban areas.
       Supply: Nongovernment organizations have played a pivotal role in Bangladesh’s health
development. Chowdhury et al. (2013) state that the contribution of NGOs to national health
development was mainly due to strong NGO leadership, international donor support, and
government permission and partnership. Urban governments, which are mainly responsible for
public primary health service in their areas, have contracted out the operation of a majority of
public primary health facilities to NGOs. Nongovernmental organizations also operate their own
facilities. Urban governments and NGOs deploy community health workers to engage in health




                                                 11
promotion and preventive care outreach in poor neighborhoods.16 The government and
international donor agencies have supported NGO provision of RMNCH services through a
number of initiatives, such as the Bangladesh Smiling Sun Franchise Program (BSSFP), started
in 2007, and the Bangladesh Urban Primary Health Care Project (BUPHCP), started in 1998.
The NGO BRAC also provides RMNCH services through its Manoshi initiative, started in 2007.
         Private providers also offer RMNCH services. They are fee-based and operate for profit,
and include hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, diagnostic centers, and pharmacies, as well as
private practices by medical doctors and nonformal or traditional healthcare practitioners. Private
health facilities tend to have wider service coverage and longer, more convenient service hours
than public or NGO health facilities. A large share of private providers charge low fees, making
them affordable to poor households (Adams, Islam, and Ahmed 2015; Afsana and Wahid 2013).
However, private providers tend to operate without required licenses, and their staff often lack
required academic and professional qualifications (ICDDRB 2015).17 Compared to staff at public
or NGO health facilities, private providers are less likely to be familiar with government
guidelines for healthcare practice management (ICDDRB 2015).
         A census of health service providers located in, or near, a sample of slum settlements in
Dhaka city found that more than 80% were private, 12% were public (but contracted out to
NGOs to operate), and 6% were NGO. Thirty-eight percent of private providers were
pharmacies, while 35% were nonformal or traditional healthcare practitioners. (Pharmacies not
only sell drugs but also provide diagnostic and treatment advice.) More than 60% of private
healthcare staff were unqualified, compared to 2% of public healthcare staff. Fifty percent of
NGO healthcare staff were community health workers (Adams, Islam, and Ahmed 2015).
         A few studies have examined the effects of RMNCH service provision on use,
interpreting the results as causal. While the effects are not well identified, the studies tend to find
that provision promotes use. For example, comparing slum settlements in Dhaka metropolitan
area covered by the Manoshi program to those in the outskirts of Dhaka city corporation, and
before and four years after the program was initiated, Alam et al. (2011) find that the program


16
   Community health workers in villages have been credited for the notable declines in fertility and maternal and child
mortality, and gains in child vaccination rates and uptake of oral rehydration therapy in Bangladesh (El Arifeen et al.
2013).
17
   Private healthcare staff report that they often obtain their health knowledge through training courses offered by
NGOs, or through learning on the job under the guidance of other staff (Adams, Islam, and Ahmed 2015).

                                                         12
increased both the use of maternal and child health services and favorable newborn practices,
and, to a lesser extent, mother’s knowledge about maternity care and newborn health problems.
Comparing urban areas covered by the Bangladesh Smiling Sun Franchise Program to adjacent
areas, and one and four years after the program was initiated, Lance, Angeles, and Kamal (2012)
find that the program did not have positive effects on the rates of use of modern contraceptives,
use of antenatal care services, or vaccination. The authors indicate that the results are due to a
growing intensity of other government and NGO maternal and child health service activity in the
comparison areas.18
         Demand: Kamal et al. (2016) find a large increase in the use of maternal and child health
services over the first decade of the 2000s in both urban and rural areas in Bangladesh, and that
the difference by household economic status in the use of such services has narrowed,
particularly in urban areas. They also find that the use of private maternal and child health
services dominates, although the use of such services is lower among poorer households.
         Slum residents in Dhaka city report that they prefer seeking health care from pharmacies
and nonformal or traditional healthcare practitioners, and prefer home deliveries by traditional
birth attendants (Adams, Islam, and Ahmed 2015). These findings are consistent with other
evidence for urban slum and poor households in Bangladesh (for example, see Nahar and
Rahman 2010 for Chittagong city). The findings are also consistent with evidence for many other
developing countries that the poor tend to obtain care from informal private health practitioners,
who often lack required academic and professional qualifications or are unlicensed to practice
(Sudhinaraset et al. 2013).
         Gazi et al. (2015) examine the reasons reported by nonusers of maternal and child health
services provided by NGO health facilities in Sylhet city under the Bangladesh Urban Primary
Health Care Project and the Bangladesh Smiling Sun Franchise Program. They find that the main
reasons include the lack of awareness of services, the limited range of offered services, and the
availability of free services at public health facilities. Using 2006 BUHS data, Islam and Gagnon


18
   Among other studies, Uddin et al. (2010) use data gathered just before the intervention was initiated and just before
it was completed, and find that the Expanded Program of Immunization administered by the Dhaka city-corporation
government and NGOs increased the child immunization rate in slum settlements, and that a key factor presumably
was longer immunization service hours. Comparing slum settlements in Narayanganj city corporation covered by the
Manoshi program to those in another nearby municipal town, Jolly et al. (2016) find higher rates of use of antenatal
and postnatal care services in settlements covered by the Manoshi program, although the difference in use rates was
smallest among the poorest women.

                                                          13
(2016) find that women who moved to the city are less likely to use maternal and child health
services. Adams, Nababan, and Hanifi (2015) find that mothers who have community health
workers as part of their social networks are more likely to use maternal and child health services
in selected slum settlements under the Manoshi program in Dhaka city.
         Distance may not be an important determinant of household demand for RMNCH
services, as suggested by responses from users and nonusers of such services (Gazi et al. 2015).
Using 2006 BUHS data, Heller (2013) finds that distance of an area to the nearest primary health
facility and the density of primary health facilities in an area do not appear to be associated with
the use of antenatal or postnatal care services, whether or not the author accounts for the
potential endogeneity of where the household resides.
         Quality: The quality of care may influence whether households use maternal and child
health services, and which provider type they choose. Rigorous, representative evidence is
lacking for urban Bangladesh on provider quality of care (measured either directly or indirectly),
and on its determinants.19 Among the available evidence, Gazi et al. (2015) find that the main
reported reasons for user satisfaction with BUPHCP- and BSSFP-supported NGO primary health
facilities in Sylhet city were staff professionalism and courtesy, and low-cost or free services.
Banu and Nasreen (2011) find that the performance of Manoshi delivery facilities in some slum
settlements in Dhaka varied markedly across facilities; that the retention and effort of community
health workers were key factors associated with facility performance; and that facility hygiene,
free services, staff courtesy, and lack of space at home were key factors associated with use.20
Examining the causes of neonatal and maternal deaths in selected slum settlements in Dhaka
under the Manoshi program, Khatun et al. (2012) find performance issues existed with




19
   Audit-study evidence by Das et al. (2012) and Das et al. (2016) for rural and urban India suggests that the quality
of care was low in both public and private primary health facilities, as measured by such indicators as completion of
checklists for essential and recommended care, correct diagnosis, and correct treatment. At the same time, indicators
such as medical equipment, doctor qualifications, and patient caseloads were either not associated, or only weakly
associated, with quality of care. While private doctors tended to be unqualified, they were likely to exert greater effort,
and did not perform any worse on diagnosis and treatment than qualified public doctors. Qualified public doctors
exerted greater effort and were more likely to provide correct treatment in their private practices than in their public
practices. We suspect that these issues are similarly prevalent in Bangladesh.
20
   Intermediate indicators of worker retention and job effort were found to be associated with financial rewards, and,
to a lesser degree, social recognition and positive community feedback, among a sample of NGO female volunteer
community health workers in Dhaka city (Alam, Tasneem, and Oliveras 2012a, 2012b).

                                                           14
community health workers in terms of the coverage and timing of household visits, and the
detection and management of, and referral for, risks.21


     3. Data, sample, and empirical strategy


        A. Data and sample
        The 2006 and 2013 BUHS were designed to provide data that are representative of three
overall domains: (1) slum neighborhoods in city corporations, (2) nonslum neighborhoods in city
corporations, and (3) municipal cities and towns. The 2006 round covered the six city
corporations existing at that time, and the 2013 round covered 10 of the 11 city corporations
existing in that year (Gazipur became a city corporation in the year of the survey, and thus was
not included in the appropriate sample domain).22
        The sample frame for the survey was a complete list of mahallas (which we refer to as
neighborhoods) in the city corporations and sampled municipal cities and towns. A mahalla is an
Islamic parish, and an optional, non-elective administrative unit below the ward in cities and
towns in Bangladesh. Focusing on city corporations, neighborhoods were randomly selected in
the first stage of sampling. In each sampled neighborhood, all slum and nonslum areas were
mapped through visits. An area was defined to be a slum settlement if it had at least 10
households and met four of the following five conditions: poor housing conditions, insecure
housing tenure, high population density, poor sanitation and inadequate water access, and at least
75% of the households appeared to be poor.23 The second stage of sampling differed slightly
between the 2006 and 2013 rounds, but essentially, slum and nonslum areas of sampled
neighborhoods, the primary sampling units (PSUs), were randomly drawn, stratified by slum
status. See NIPORT et al. (2008) and NIPORT et al. (2015) for sample design details. We refer
to the PSU as “neighborhood area”.
        We use data from the neighborhood-area, household, and female questionnaires. The
neighborhood area questionnaire was administered to knowledgeable leaders and key informants

21
   In terms of other evidence, Andaleeb (2000) finds for Dhaka city that sample users rated private hospitals higher
than public hospitals in terms of responsiveness, communication, and discipline.
22
   In the 2006 BUHS, Barisal, Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna, Rajshahi, and Sylhet were included in the city-corporation
statistical domain. In the 2013 BUHS, Barisal, Chittagong, Comilla, Dhaka North, Dhaka South, Khulna,
Narayanganj, Rajshahi, Rangpur, and Sylhet were included in the city-corporation statistical domain.
23
   These conditions are consistent with UN-Habitat guidelines for defining slums (UN-Habitat 2003).

                                                        15
in the neighborhood area. The household questionnaire was usually answered by the female
spouse of the household head. The female questionnaire was administered to women ages 18–59
(and those ever-married ages 10–17) in 2006, and it was administered to ever-married women
ages 15–49 in 2013. The female questionnaire included a module for children under age five, and
an additional module for the youngest child born in the three years before the survey, with
information provided by the child’s mother or guardian. Survey response rates ranged from 93%
to 97% depending on the survey round, questionnaire type (household, female) and city-
corporation subdomain (slum, nonslum).
         The full sample for our analysis is 2,264 children in 1,956 households in 254
neighborhood areas (slum: 128; nonslum: 126) in 2006, and it is 7,619 children in 6,848
households in 1,278 neighborhood areas (slum: 449; nonslum: 829) in 2013.


         B. Empirical strategy
         Multiple regression: To examine the factors associated with HAZ scores in 2013, we
estimate various multiple regression specifications. The base regression relationship is modeled
linearly as

                       Yimha    XimhaI +XmhaM  XhaH +XaA   imha ,                        (1)

where    Yimha denotes the HAZ score for child i from mother i in household h in neighborhood area

a;   Ximha is a vector of child factors; Xmha , a vector of maternal factors; Xha , a vector of

household factors;    Xn , a vector of neighborhood-area factors; , administrative-division fixed

effects; and    ihn , the error term. We are interested in the parameter vectors I ,  M ,  H , and
A . The regressions are estimated based on ordinary least squares.
         We also estimate regressions with neighborhood-area fixed effects, thus accounting for
unobserved heterogeneity at the level of the neighborhood area or higher. While this approach
can reduce bias in our estimated parameters, it may come at the cost of reduced precision in our
estimated standard errors if variation is limited among children within a neighborhood area. In
all regressions, standard errors are estimated correcting for heteroskedasticity of arbitrary form
and clustering at the neighborhood-area level. All regression specifications are estimated for



                                                    16
three neighborhood-area samples: all areas (referred to as pooled), slum areas, and nonslum
areas.
         Aggregate decomposition: To examine the extent and nature of the contributions of
regression factors to the difference in mean HAZ scores between slum and nonslum children in
2013, or the changes in mean HAZ scores between 2006 and 2013 for slum and nonslum
children, we apply the extension proposed by Daymont and Andrisani (1984) to the classical
Oaxaca-Blinder counterfactual regression-based decomposition method (Oaxaca 1973, Blinder
1973). The Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition method and its extensions have been applied in the
health economics literature to investigate differences in health outcomes or health service
utilization among social, economic, and spatial groups, and between time periods (for example,
see Kumar and Singh 2013; Haddad et al. 2012; Wagstaff, van Doorslaer, and Watanabe 2003).
The method has also been applied to nutrition in Bangladesh, for example, to investigate the
rural-urban gap in mean HAZ scores (Srinivasan, Zanello, and Shankar 2013) and the
intertemporal change in mean HAZ scores in selected rural areas (Nguyen et al. 2017).
         Adapting the notation by Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo (2011), and taking the case of
decomposing the slum-nonslum difference in mean HAZ scores in 2013, let S denote a slum
neighborhood area, and NS, a nonslum neighborhood area. The linear regression relationship for
HAZ scores is given by
                                                Yg  X g   g ,                                   (2)

where E  g | X   0 group g   S , NS  . Let    DS  1 be an indicator of residing in a slum
neighborhood area; zero otherwise. The slum-nonslum difference in mean HAZ scores,  , can
be decomposed as follows:
                            E YS | DS  1  E YNS | DS  0
                              E  X | DS  1   S   NS 

                                
                                E  X | DS  1  E  X | DS  0  NS                          (3)
                                E  X | DS                                        
                                                 1  E  X | DS  0   S   NS 
                                
                                    
                                     X  I

                                      
The first term in braces, denoted by  , is the component due to slum-nonslum differences in the
                                                                                         
regression parameters of the factors, the second term in braces, denoted by  X , is the

                                                       17
component due to slum-nonslum differences in the expected levels of the factors, and the third
                                                                                                                
term in braces, denoted by I , is the component due to the interaction between  and  X .
                                                                                 



Equation (3) can be computed by using sample means for the factors X g , and parameter

          ˆ .
estimates  g


         Detailed decomposition: We are also interested in analyzing the contributions of (groups
of) individual factors to the aggregate decomposition components. The aggregate decomposition
components are essentially sums of the corresponding decomposition components of the
                                                                                                    
individual factors.24 We recognize that the detailed decompositions of  and I are not
                                                                        


independent of the choice of the omitted categories for categorical factors in the regressions.
That is, if the omitted category for a given categorical factor changes, the detailed decomposition
results can change (Oaxaca and Ransom 1999; Jones 1983). While methods are available, we
elect not to address this problem, in order to allow for the interpretability and comparability of
our results.25
         We also estimate all regressions and decompositions for stunting (a dichotomous
variable) linearly based on ordinary least squares (limited probability model) and nonlinearly
based on a binomial logit model.26 Our results generally remain unchanged. The robustness of
the results to the choice of outcome indicator is likely because the sample around mean HAZ
scores is not that far apart from the sample around the threshold HAZ score for stunting. The
results for stunting are available upon request.
         While we refer to the regression results as “effects” and the decomposition results as
“contributions”, the results represent associations, and we do not intend to imply causality.


24
   Standard errors for the aggregate and detailed decomposition results are approximated by first estimating the
variance-covariance matrix accounting for clustering at the neighborhood-area level and then applying the delta
method (Greene 2008; Jann 2008).
25
   Proposed solutions to the problem essentially perform some normalization of the estimated parameters across all
categories of the categorical factor (for example, see Yun 2008; Gardeazabal and Ugidos 2004). The drawback is that
these normalizations can obviate both the meaningful interpretation of the decomposition results and the comparability
of results across studies (Fortin et al. 2011). For example, the omitted categories we choose for our categorical factors,
such as Dhaka division for administrative divisions, or “mother born in the current city” for location of mother’s birth,
are likely to be the same choices made in other studies for Bangladesh.
26
   We estimate conditional fixed-effects binomial logit regressions for the specification with neighborhood area
indicators in order to avoid incidental parameters which can bias our estimations. Aggregate and detailed
decompositions are based on binomial logit regressions, and the detailed decomposition results are obtained using the
nonlinear decomposition approach proposed by Yun (2004).

                                                           18
     4. Results


     A. Mean child HAZ scores and mean levels of factors
         Mean outcomes: Table 1 reports mean HAZ scores and stunting rates. In the pooled
sample, the mean HAZ score was –1.69 SD below the international reference median, the
moderate-to-severe stunting rate was 42%, and the severe stunting rate was 20%.27 Slum children
have significantly worse growth outcomes than nonslum children. Relative to nonslum children,
slum children have a mean HAZ score that is lower by 0.58 SD, a moderate-to-stunting rate that
is lower by 16 pp., and a severe stunting rate that is lower by 10 pp.28 Figure 4 shows the
cumulative distributions of HAZ scores separately for slum and nonslum children. The two
distributions significantly differ, based on a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.
         Comparing our statistics for city corporations to published statistics from the 2014 DHS
for rural and urban areas, we note three main findings. First, city corporations have poorer mean
child growth outcomes than those for all urban areas. For example, the moderate-to-severe
stunting rate in the pooled city-corporation sample is 42%, compared to 31% for all urban areas.
Second, slum children in city corporations have poorer mean growth outcomes than rural
children. For example, the moderate-to-severe stunting rate for slum children is 48%, compared
to 38% for rural children. Third, nonslum children in city corporations have a lower moderate-to-
severe stunting rate than rural children (31% versus 38%), but have a comparable severe stunting
rate to children in all urban areas (31%). The estimates suggest that mean growth outcomes for
urban areas conceal substantial variation in mean outcomes across and within urban entities, and
that mean outcomes are especially poor for slum children not just as an urban subpopulation but
as a national subpopulation.
         Mean levels of factors: Table 2 reports mean levels for the base set of child, maternal,
household, and neighborhood-area factors that we include in our multivariate analysis of HAZ



27
   A child is considered to be moderately-to-severely stunted if his or her HAZ score is more than two SD below the
international reference population median. A child is considered to be severely stunted if his or her HAZ score is three
SD below the international reference population median.
28
   Our estimated stunting rates are a few percentage points off from those provided in the 2013 BUHS report (NIPORT
et al. 2015), which we suspect is due to the loss of 100–200 children from our sample identified to have invalid
anthropometric measurements.

                                                          19
scores.29 Appendix Table A1 provides definitions of these and other factors that are examined
subsequently. In the pooled sample, 49% of children were female, 3% experienced an illness
with acute respiratory infection (ARI) symptoms in the two weeks before the survey, and 31%
experienced an illness with fever in the same reference period. In terms of maternal factors, 86%
of children were born when their mothers were between 18 and 34 years of age, a range
considered to have a lower risk of child death (Rustein and Winter 2014); 20% had mothers that
were currently employed; and 85% had mothers who were regularly exposed to mass media as
measured by watching TV at least once a week (TV was the most popular mass media source).
Mothers’ mean education attainment was 5.68 years. In terms of neighborhood-area factors, 69%
of children resided in an area with formal garbage collection, 48% with a proper sewerage
system, 51% served by community health workers, 48% with an available NGO health facility;
14% with an available public health facility, and 36% with an available private health facility.
All neighborhood areas had pharmacies.
         The levels of child health (recent illness with fever or ARI symptoms), mother’s age at
child’s birth, mother’s education attainment, mother’s regular exposure to mass media, and
formal garbage collection and proper sewerage system in the neighborhood area were less
favorable for slum than nonslum children. Household wealth, measured by a standardized
household asset index, was roughly one SD lower for slum children. Slum children were more
likely to have mothers who were employed (24% versus 13%). Slum neighborhood areas were
more likely to have community health workers (55% versus 44%) and less likely to have private
health facilities (33% versus 42%). NGO and public health facilities, and pharmacies, were
available at similar rates in slum and nonslum neighborhood areas.



29
   The 2013 BUHS did not collect information on potentially relevant factors such as: for the child, birth weight,
diarrhea and treatment, immunization, and deworming; for the mother, physical and mental health (for example,
underweight status) and decisionmaking authority over household expenditures on own and child health, and over
food for the household; and, for the household, food security. The 2006 BUHS collected information on some of these
factors; we find significant differences in the mean levels for several of these factors between slum and nonslum
children at that time. While we examine the effects of access to improved toilets later in the paper, the BUHS did not
gather information on open defecation. Headey et al. (2015) find that the area-level open defecation rate is negatively
associated with HAZ scores in urban areas in particular in Bangladesh. Although the 2013 BUHS collected
information on breastfeeding, we do not examine the effect of this factor because of limited variation: for children
under two years of age, mothers reported that 70% were breastfed within an hour of birth, and 94% were being
breastfed at the time of the survey. Also due to limited variation in our data, we do not include micronutrient
supplementation as factors in the regressions: for children under five years of age, 1% were given a nutrient mix and
3% were given iron supplements in the day prior to the survey.

                                                         20
   B. Bivariate associations between child HAZ scores and selected socioeconomic factors
       We examine the bivariate association between HAZ scores and selected continuous
factors, namely (1) child’s age in months, (2) standardized household wealth index, (3) duration
of mother’s residence in the current city corporation in years, conditional on having moved there,
and (4) mother’s education attainment in years. Figure 5 shows local polynomial plots of the
bivariate associations, with 95% confidence intervals.
       Slum and nonslum children have comparable mean HAZ scores at birth, and then
experience a decline in mean HAZ scores before the scores roughly level off at about two years
of age. Mean HAZ scores decline more steeply for slum than nonslum children over the first two
years of age. Mean HAZ scores are similar between slum and nonslum children for the least and
most wealthy households, and between slum and nonslum children with the most educated
mothers. Otherwise, mean HAZ scores are higher for nonslum than slum children across the
ranges of household wealth, years since the mother moved to the current city corporation, and
years of mother’s education.


   C. Effects of demographic and socioeconomic factors on child HAZ scores
       Table 3 presents multiple regression results of the effects of the base set of factors on
HAZ scores. In the first set of regressions (Columns 1–3), we include division fixed effects,
identifying effects of child, maternal, household, and neighborhood-area factors based on
variation within a division. In the second set of regressions (Columns 4–6), we include
neighborhood-area fixed effects, identifying effects of child, mother, and household factors
based on variation within an area. Given that the share of children that experienced a recent
illness with ARI symptoms is small, we construct a single indicator for whether the child
experienced a recent illness with fever or ARI symptoms.
       We begin by discussing significant results from regressions with division fixed effects.
Child’s age has a negative effect in all samples (pooled, slum, and nonslum). Child illness with
fever or ARI symptoms has a negative effect of –0.14 SD in the nonslum sample. In the pooled
sample, giving birth when the mother was younger than 18 years of age has a significant
negative effect of –0.22 SD, relative to giving birth when the mother was aged between 18 and
34. The pooled-sample effect is driven by the slum-sample effect.



                                                21
         Mother’s regular exposure to mass media has a significant positive effect of 0.25 SD in
the nonslum sample. Mother’s membership in an NGO has a significant positive effect of 0.17
SD in the slum sample. Adams, Nababan, and Hanifi (2015) document the positive link between
mother’s membership in an NGO and the use of RMNCH services. The effect of NGO
membership on HAZ scores that we find may be mediated by the use of RMNCH services,
which we do not control for in these regressions.
         In all samples, mother’s education attainment and household wealth have significant
positive effects on HAZ scores. In the pooled sample, an additional year of mother’s education
has a positive effect of 0.03 SD, and a one SD increase in household wealth (that is, going from
the mean to the 84th percentile in the wealth index) has a positive effect of 0.22 SD. Household
size has a negative effect in the slum and nonslum samples, but only the pooled-sample effect of
–0.02 SD is significant.
         The availability of community health workers and NGO and public health facilities in the
neighborhood area have negative, but mostly insignificant, effects on HAZ scores. The exception
is the nonslum-sample effect of the availability of public health facilities, which is a significant –
0.19 SD. The negative effects are presumably placement effects: areas served by community
health workers, and NGO and public health facilities, may be socioeconomically disadvantaged
in ways not adequately captured by household wealth and neighborhood environmental quality
factors that we include in the regressions. The availability of private health facilities in the
neighborhood area has a significant positive effect of 0.09 SD in the pooled sample, driven by
the slum-sample effect (0.13 SD). Residing in a nonslum neighborhood area has a significant
positive effect of 0.20 SD. Factors that have insignificant effects include the child’s gender, the
mother’s employment status, and the availability of formal garbage collection and a proper
sewerage system in the neighborhood area.30




30
   The effect of maternal employment is net of its effect through greater household income to the extent that the
household wealth index captures this potential pathway. Another potential pathway for the effect of maternal
employment would be greater maternal authority at home over food and health care decisions, which we do not control
for in our regressions. While we do not find a significant negative effect, maternal employment could have adverse
effects. Examining working mothers in Dhaka slum settlements, Kabir and Miatrot (2017) find that mothers report
poor feeding and care knowledge and practice by siblings, the mother-in-law, and the child’s father, and disruptions
in feeding and care when the responsibility for the child is shifted among caregivers. Working mothers also report that
child feeding and care suffer because of fatigue from their employment activity, and time- and labor-intensive
domestic responsibilities.

                                                         22
       The results largely hold in the regressions with neighborhood-area fixed effects. Child’s
age, child illness, mother’s age at child’s birth, mother’s education attainment, mother’s birth
location (specifically, mother’s birth in another urban area), mother’s membership in an NGO,
and household wealth continue to have significant effects on HAZ scores. For factors that are
similar between our analysis and that of Ahsan et al. (2017), inference results from our
regressions with division fixed effects for slum and nonslum samples match those from their
final stunting regression specifications. Our findings are also largely consistent with those from
studies of the determinants of child undernutrition in selected slum settlements in various urban
centers in Bangladesh (Fakir and Khan 2015; Zaman et al. 2015; Alam et al. 2011), as well as
with international evidence on the determinants of child undernutrition in slum areas (Goudet et
al. 2017; Abuya, Ciera, and Kimani-Murage 2012).


   D. Effects of the use of maternal and child health services on child HAZ scores
       Here, we examine the effects of antenatal care, delivery, and newborn exam at health
facilities on HAZ scores. The information on antenatal care, delivery, and newborn exam were
gathered in the 2013 BUHS only for the youngest child born in the three years before the survey
(61% of our full analysis sample).
       Mean levels: Table 4 reports the rates of use of health services by provider type. In the
pooled sample, mothers of 70% of children obtained antenatal care in a health facility, 49% of
children were delivered in a health facility, and 40% of children received an exam when newborn
in a health facility. While cases exist of qualified health professionals providing antenatal care
and conducting newborn exams at home, the shares fall in the low single digits, and these cases
are categorized under “no service”.
       The use of private providers and facilities dominates. Mothers of 31% of children
obtained antenatal care at a private health facility, 23% at an NGO health facility, and 16% at a
public health facility. Similarly, 21% of children were delivered at a private health facility, and
14% each at an NGO or public health facility. Eighteen percent of children had a newborn exam
at a private health facility, and 11% each at an NGO or public health facility.
       Slum children recorded lower rates of use of health services than nonslum children. The
rates of maternal antenatal care, delivery, and newborn exam in a health facility were 22–25 pp.
lower for slum children. Slum children had higher rates of use of NGO health facilities for

                                                 23
maternal antenatal care, delivery, and newborn exam, and lower rates of use of private health
facilities for these services. For example, mothers of 27% of slum children obtained antenatal
care from an NGO health facility, compared to 17% for nonslum children; mothers of 20% of
slum children obtained the same service from a private health facility, compared to 51% for
nonslum children.
       The 2013 BUHS asked the mother the reason for her choice of delivery site for the
youngest child born in the three years before the survey. Table 5 reports the distribution of
responses. In the pooled sample, the main reason that mothers chose to deliver in a health facility
was due to pregnancy or delivery complications (55% of cases), followed by safety of the health
facility (29%). The main reasons that mothers reported for choosing a specific health facility
were safety (33% of cases), prior knowledge about the provider (17%), and receipt of antenatal
care there (14%). Mothers reported cost as the reason in 6% of cases, and proximity of the health
facility to home in 10%. For children who were delivered at home, mothers predominately
reported that they felt that it was not necessary to deliver at a health facility (70% of cases). Cost
or lack of money was reported only for 12% of cases.
       Slum mothers were more likely to report cost and distance as the reasons for their choice
of a specific health facility than nonslum mothers (cost: 9% versus 4% of cases; distance: 11%
versus 7% of cases). Among those who delivered at home, slum mothers were also more likely to
report cost or lack of money as the reason for their choice than nonslum mothers (13% versus
9% of cases).
       Effects: The type of health facility for antenatal care or delivery may influence child
growth, if, for example, it is associated with quality of care. Mothers may choose to obtain
antenatal care or deliver at a specific type of health facility because they expect to obtain better
care there for any pregnancy or delivery complications. Even if they obtain better care,
complications may induce a negative association between a higher-quality health facility or
provider type and child growth.
       Table 6 presents the estimated effects on HAZ scores of the use of maternal and child
health services at a facility (Panel A), and at a facility by type (Panel B). The regressions control
for the base set of factors. Of note, the regressions control for household wealth, which could
influence whether households use free or subsidized public or NGO health services, or fee-based



                                                  24
private health services, as well as the availability of RMNCH services in the neighborhood area,
offered through community health workers or health facilities.
         Antenatal care at a health facility has a significant positive effect of 0.21 SD in the
pooled sample. The effects are similar in size and significant in the slum and nonslum samples.
Although positive, the effects of delivery or newborn exam at a health facility are insignificant in
all samples.
         Looking by type of health facility, antenatal care has a significant positive effect
irrespective of the type in the pooled sample. The pooled-sample effect of 0.28 SD for antenatal
care in a public health facility is driven by the nonslum-sample effect (0.42 SD), whereas the
pooled-sample effect of 0.14 SD for antenatal care in an NGO health facility is driven by the
slum-sample effect (0.18 SD). Delivery or newborn exam in a public health facility have
significant positive effects in the pooled sample; the corresponding effects are not always
significant in the slum and nonslum samples. The effects for delivery or newborn exam in other
types of health facilities are insignificant in all samples.31


     E. Effects of potential health-protective household amenities on child HAZ scores
         A sanitary community and home environment can protect children from illness, and
thereby promote nutrition status. Reviews of international evidence suggest that poor water and
sanitation facilities, and hygiene practices (WASH) are significantly associated with diarrhea and
intestinal parasitic infection (Strunz et al. 2014; Ziegelbauer et al. 2012; Fewtrell et al. 2005;
Clasen et al. 2007), and that diarrhea is significantly associated with poorer nutrition status
(Dewey and Mayers 2011). The international evaluative evidence also generally suggests that
improved WASH has a positive, albeit modest, effect on child growth (Dangour et al. 2013).
While much more limited, evidence from other countries suggest a negative link between indoor
air pollution and nutrition status (Mishra and Retherford 2007), and a positive link between built
home flooring and health and nutrition status (Cattaneo et al. 2009).




31
   Pairwise tests indicate that indicators for antenatal care, delivery, and newborn exam at a health facility are
significantly and positively correlated; likewise, by health-facility type. Thus, the estimated effect of antenatal care at
a health facility in our regressions may have absorbed the effects of delivery and newborn exam at a health facility.
Results from regressions where we separately examine the effects of antenatal care, delivery, and newborn exam at a
health facility do not indicate that this is the case.

                                                           25
       In terms of evidence for Bangladesh, Luby, and Halder (2008) find that a handwashing
place at the dwelling is significantly associated with a lower rate of ARI symptoms among young
children in a sample of households in Dhaka city. Lin et al. (2013) find that sanitary household
WASH conditions are significantly associated with a lower rate of intestinal parasitic infection,
better nutrition status, and lower rates of markers of environmental enteropathy among young
children in a sample of rural households. Baker et al. (2016) find that young children in
households that share toilet facilities have a significantly higher rate of diarrhea in Mirzapur city
(as well as in selected urban centers in Africa and other South Asian countries).
       Motivated by this evidence, we examine the effects of household access to piped drinking
water and an improved toilet, safe disposal of garbage by the household, household use of a
clean fuel for cooking, a finished floor in the dwelling, and a handwashing site with soap and
water at the dwelling.
       Mean levels: Table 7 reports mean levels for potential health-protective household
amenities. In the pooled sample, 19% of children belonged to households that had unshared
access to piped drinking water, and 45% to households that had shared access. Virtually all
children belonged to households that had access to an improved toilet, but shared access was
common. Specifically, 31% belonged to households that had unshared access to an improved
toilet, 37% that had access to an improved toilet which was shared with fewer than nine
households, and 30% that had access to an improved toilet which was shared with nine or more
households. Fifty-three percent of children belonged to households that safely disposed of
household garbage (through collection or by disposal in an outside bin); 71% that used a clean
cooking fuel (liquid petroleum gas, natural gas, kerosene, or biogas); 81% that had a dwelling
with a finished floor; and 45% that had a handwashing site with soap and water on the premises,
as observed by the survey interviewer.
       Household amenities are significantly less available and accessible to slum children than
nonslum children. Slum children are much more likely to belong to households that share access
to piped drinking water and an improved toilet than nonslum children. For example, 42% of slum
children belonged to households that had access to an improved toilet which was shared with
nine or more households, compared to 8% of nonslum children.
       Effects: Table 8 reports the estimated effects of potential health-protective household
amenities on HAZ scores. Given that virtually all households had access to improved toilets, we

                                                 26
restrict the analysis to children in such households, and examine the effect of shared access to an
improved toilet. The amenities are strongly correlated with our household wealth index even
when they are excluded from the construction of the index. Thus, we examine the effects of the
amenities, controlling for the base set of factors, but excluding the household wealth index.
       Sharing access to an improved toilet with nine or more households has a significant
negative effect of –0.20 SD in the pooled sample. The pooled-sample effect is driven by the
slum-sample effect (–0.27 SD). Sharing access to an improved toilet with fewer households also
has negative effects in all samples but they are insignificant. The presence of a handwashing site
with soap and water has a significant positive effect of 0.24 SD for nonslum children. The
corresponding effect for slum children is 0.04 SD, and insignificant. All other amenities have
insignificant effects. Ahsan et al. (2017) also examine safe garbage disposal and access to
improved toilets, and find that these factors have insignificant effects on child stunting status in
their full slum and nonslum regression specifications.
       As a caveat, our analysis of the effects of household amenities does not account for the
quality, reliability, or time availability of these amenities. Large-scale evidence on these
dimensions is lacking for Bangladesh. Examining a small sample of poor working mothers in
slum settlements in Dhaka city, Kabir and Miatrot (2017) find that, while mothers have access to
gas stoves, they report that child feeding suffers because of constraints on when gas supply is
available and when they can get access to shared stoves. Although home air quality may have
improved due to the use of gas for cooking, thereby promoting child health, the noted issues can
undermine child nutrition status through the food consumption channel.
       Our finding that households that share toilets with several other households have lower
child HAZ scores may be because these communal toilets are particularly unclean and poorly
maintained. Such conditions make open defecation more likely, and increase the risk of disease
transmission. Alam et al. (2016) find that the main reasons that communal toilets become
unsanitary in selected slum settlements in Dhaka city is due to a lack of adequate water for
flushing and the disposal of garbage into toilets that leads to clogging. Under an experimental
evaluation, the authors find an improvement in toilet maintenance and cleanliness after placing a
garbage bin and a small flushing bucket in each communal toilet; providing a large water storage
bucket in toilets in slum settlements that suffered from water scarcity; and providing behavior
change messages through home visits by health promoters and posters in the toilets.

                                                 27
     F. Effects of mother moving to a city corporation on child HAZ scores
        Existing evidence on the effects of within country, rural-urban migration on health and
nutrition outcomes in developing countries is highly limited, and mixed (Mu and de Brauw
2015). We examine the effect on HAZ scores of (1) the type of location from which the mother
moved from (another urban center or a rural area), (2) the reason reported by the mother for
moving to the current city corporation (work-related, family-related, or other such as education-
or property-related), and (3) number of years since the mother moved to the current city
corporation.32 Separate questions were asked to the mother on whether the move to the current
city corporation was due to loss from an adverse natural event (salinity, flood, cyclone, drought,
or river erosion) or whether any move in the past was due to an adverse natural event. Less than
1% of mothers reported adverse natural events as the reason for moving.
        Mean levels: Table 9 reports summary statistics for the various dimensions of the
mother’s move decision. In the pooled sample, 12% of children had mothers who were born in
an urban center other than the current city corporation, and 54% had mothers who were born in a
rural area. Conditional on moving to the current city corporation, 67% of children had mothers
who had moved for family reasons, 29% for work reasons, and 4% for other reasons. Mean years
since the move was 8.52 years. Slum children were more likely to have mothers who were born
in a rural area than nonslum children (57% versus 49%). Slum children were also more likely to
have mothers who had moved to the city corporation for work-related reasons than nonslum
children (33% versus 20%). Mean years since the mother’s move were similar for slum and
nonslum children.
        Effects: One can conceive of different mechanisms that generate positive or negative
effects on child growth due to the mother moving to the current city corporation, the reason for
the move, or the number of years residing in the current city corporation, depending on whether
the upside or downside risks to health and nutrition from residing in an urban area dominate.
Thus, the net effect of mother’s move to the current city corporation on child growth is
theoretically ambiguous. Table 10 reports the effects of the mother moving to the current city



32
  Comparing migrant and non-migrant households at destination in assessing the effects of migration on child
nutrition status may be biased. Nonmigrants households at origin are considered as a more appropriate comparison
group (Song and Sun 2016; Yu 2010).

                                                      28
corporation on HAZ scores, controlling for the base set of factors. The reference category for the
effect of birth location is mother born in the current city corporation. The reference category for
the effect of reason for move is mother always resided in the current city corporation. Mothers
who moved for reasons other than work or family are omitted from the regressions. The
regressions for the effect of time since the mother’s move is conditional on moving to the current
city corporation.
        Mother born in another urban center has a significant positive effect of 0.18 SD in the
pooled sample. The pooled-sample effect is driven by the slum-sample effect (0.25 SD). Mother
born in a rural area has a significant positive effect of 0.14 SD in the nonslum sample. Mother
moving for work reasons has a significant positive effect of 0.30 SD in the nonslum sample.
Consistent with the flat patterns in the bivariate plots in Figure 5, Panel C, time since the mother
moved has positive, but insignificant, effects in all samples. Discretizing years since the mother
moved to the current city corporation, Ahsan et al. (2017) also find that this factor does not have
a significant effect on child stunting status in their slum and nonslum regressions. At the very
least, the collective evidence suggests that mother’s migration to the current city corporation,
whether to a slum or nonslum neighborhood area, does not appear to have a negative effect on
child growth.
        In related research, Islam and Gagnon (2016) use 2006 BUHS data to examine the effects
of mother’s migration on the use of RMNCH services. Specifically, the authors look at the
effects of whether the mother moved to a city corporation; and, for migrant mothers, how long
the mother had resided in the current city corporation, whether the mother was born in a rural
area, and whether the mother self-reported moving for employment or education reasons. They
find that mother’s migration has significant negative effects on the use of different maternal and
child health services, while years lived in the current city corporation only has a positive effect
on the use of antenatal care services. Given these findings, we re-estimate the effects of our
various measures related to the mother moving to the current city corporation, controlling for the
use of maternal and child health services in the relevant child subsamples. Our results generally
hold.


   G. Decomposition of slum-nonslum difference in child HAZ scores



                                                 29
        Table 11 reports the decomposition results for the slum-nonslum difference in estimated
mean HAZ scores (the outcome gap), which is a significant –0.59 SD, into (1) slum-nonslum
differences in the estimated mean levels of factors (the factor-level gap), (2) slum-nonslum
differences in the estimated effects of the factors (the effect gap), and (3) interactions between
factor-level and effect gaps (the interaction gap), at the aggregate and detailed (individual factor)
decomposition levels. For the detailed decomposition, we only report results for factors that are
significant.33 We perform the aggregate and detailed decompositions for the base set of factors.
        To simplify the results and facilitate interpretation, we grouped together selected
individual factors for the detailed decomposition. Specifically, we grouped (1) indicators for
mother’s age at time of child’s birth into a “mother’s age at child’s birth” group; (2) indicators
for formal garbage collection and proper sewerage system into a “neighborhood area
environmental health” group; (3) indicators for the availability of community health workers and
of public, NGO, and private health facilities into an “RMNCH service availability” group; and
(4) indicators for administrative divisions into a “division” group.
        At the aggregate decomposition level, while both the overall factor-level gap and the
overall effect gap are significant contributors to the outcome gap, the contribution of the overall
factor-level gap is larger in size (–0.38 SD versus –0.19 SD). The overall interaction gap also
contributes to the outcome gap, but its contribution is small (–0.01 SD) and insignificant.
        At the detailed decomposition level, the main significant factor-level gap is for household
wealth (–0.28 SD), followed by the factor-level gap for mother’s education attainment (–0.09
SD). The only significant contributor to the overall effect gap (that is, in the same direction as
the overall effect gap) is the mother’s age at child’s birth. In addition, the only significant
contributor to the overall interaction gap is the mother’s age at child’s birth. The decomposition
results remain unchanged when we include factors for the use of maternal and child health
services in the regressions.


     H. Decomposition of change in HAZ scores for slum and nonslum children
        We also decompose the change in mean HAZ scores from 2006 to 2013 for slum and




33
   We do not convert the decomposition results into proportions of the outcome gap due to factor level, effect, and
interaction gaps as some studies do because this exercise fails to account for the imprecision in the estimates.

                                                        30
nonslum children. Table 12 reports means for child growth, and for child, maternal, household
and neighborhood-area factors. Mean HAZ scores significantly increased for slum and nonslum
children. Mean HAZ scores increased by 0.23 SD for slum children, and by 0.20 SD for nonslum
children. Moderate-to-severe and severe stunting rates significantly declined for slum children by
–8 pp. and –5 pp., respectively. Stunting rates for nonslum children also declined, but the
magnitudes were insignificant.
       In terms of child factors, the shares of children ill with fever or ARI symptoms decreased
significantly. Mean birth order also decreased significantly, presumably due to declining fertility.
In terms of maternal factors, mean education attainment increased significantly, while the share
who are members of NGOs and the share born in rural areas declined significantly. In terms of
household factors, mean wealth increased significantly, while mean household size declined
significantly. In terms of neighborhood-area factors, the rates of availability of community health
workers and pharmacies increased significantly, whereas the changes in the rates of availability
of public, NGO, and private health facilities were insignificant. These findings apply to all
samples. In addition, the shares of slum neighborhood areas with formal garbage collection or a
proper sewerage system increased significantly.
       Table 13 reports the decomposition results for the change in mean HAZ scores (the
outcome change) into (1) changes in the estimated mean levels of factors (the factor-level
change), (2) changes in the estimated effects of the factors (the effect change), and (3)
interactions between factor-level and effect changes (the interaction change). We do this
separately for slum and nonslum children. We do not decompose the change in the slum-
nonslum gap in mean HAZ scores because the gap changed little over the period.
       For slum children, at the aggregate decomposition level, the factor-level change
significantly contributed 0.09 SD to the outcome change. The effect and interaction changes
contributed 0.05 SD and 0.07 SD, respectively, to the outcome change, but the contributions are
insignificant. At the detailed decomposition level, the significant contributors to the overall
factor-level change are mother’s education attainment (0.04 SD) and household wealth (0.06
SD). The only significant contributor to the overall effect and interaction changes is the child’s
birth order (0.24 SD and 0.05 SD, respectively).
       The results for nonslum children are mostly similar. At the aggregate decomposition
level, only the factor-level change significantly contributed 0.13 SD to the outcome change. At

                                                 31
the detailed decomposition level, the significant contributors to the overall factor-level change
are child’s recent illness with fever or ARI symptoms (0.02 SD), mother’s education attainment
(0.04 SD), and household wealth (0.09 SD). There were no significant contributors to the overall
effect change, and the only significant contributor to the overall interaction change is the
neighborhood area’s RMNCH service availability (0.16 SD). The evidence generally suggests
that the changes in mean HAZ scores for slum and nonslum children were driven by changes in
the mean levels of factors, mainly by the increases in the mean levels of mother’s education
attainment and household wealth. The decomposition results remain qualitatively similar when
we include factors for the use of maternal and child health services in the regressions.


   5. Conclusion
       To recapitulate, the collective evidence indicates that mean child nutrition status and
socioeconomic conditions are substantially poorer for slum than nonslum residents. Compared to
nonslum residents, slum residents register lower levels for child growth; mother’s education
attainment; household wealth; access to, and availability of, health-protective household
amenities; use of maternal and child health services; and neighborhood-area environmental
quality.
       Child’s age, mother’s age at child’s birth, mother’s education attainment, and household
wealth have significant effects on child growth. The effects remain large and significant even
when accounting for unobserved heterogeneity at the neighborhood-area level. The positive
effect on child growth of residing in a nonslum neighborhood area remains significant even after
controlling for a range of child, maternal, household, and neighborhood-area factors, indicating
the continued presence of unobserved heterogeneity correlated with slum status. The use of
public health facilities for antenatal care, delivery, or newborn exam has a positive effect on
child growth; likewise, for the use of NGO or private health facilities for antenatal care. Access
to improved toilets that is shared with a large number of other households has a negative effect
on slum child growth, whereas a handwashing site with soap and water at the dwelling has a
positive effect on nonslum child growth. Mother’s move to the current city corporation,
measured by different dimensions of the move decision, does not appear to have a negative effect
on child growth.



                                                 32
          The difference in mean growth between slum and nonslum children in 2013 is driven by
differences in the mean levels of factors for slum and nonslum children, in particular, with
respect to mother’s education attainment and household wealth. Similarly, the increase in mean
growth between 2006 and 2013 for slum and nonslum children is driven by increases in the mean
levels of factors, in particular, with respect to mother’s education attainment and household
wealth.
          There is fairly consistent international evidence on the large positive effect of mother’s
education on child growth. For example, using microdata for a large set of developing countries,
Alderman and Headey (2017) find that the effect of mother’s education on child growth
increases with years of education, is larger than the effect of father’s education, and is larger for
countries with high stunting rates. Maternal education is theorized to affect child nutrition status
through a household income effect arising from greater labor earnings, which we attempt to
control for based on household asset-based wealth. Maternal education is also theorized to affect
child nutrition status through the direct delivery of health and nutrition information; delayed age
of marriage and age at child’s birth; greater ability to acquire, absorb, and apply health and
nutrition information from other sources; greater openness to RMNCH services; greater
decisionmaking authority within the household with respect to food, health, and care; and access
to more-educated social networks (Ruel et al. 2013). Using data from a slum settlement in
Dhaka, Fakir and Khan (2015) find that the effect of mother’s education attainment on child
underweight status appears to be partially mediated through her knowledge of health-promoting
behaviors. Our data do not allow us to test potential pathways. Nevertheless, the results suggest
that policies and programs that aim to raise girls’ education attainment are appropriate, and
should receive greater priority.
          Likewise, international evidence is fairly consistent in showing a large positive effect of
household economic status on child growth (Ruel et al. 2013). Cash transfers offer one way to
raise household income. Manley, Gitter, and Slavchevska (2013) find that, while the collective
evaluative evidence of both unconditional and conditional cash transfer programs is mixed in
developing countries, the aggregate effect size of these programs on child growth is small and
insignificant. However, the study indicates that the transfers may have a larger impact on poorer,
younger, and more socially disadvantaged children; on children in settings with relatively poor
nutrition status or low health service utilization rates at baseline; and on children in households

                                                   33
that have received transfers over a longer duration.34 These insights on the variation of effects
across transfer programs are useful for intervention design. In addition, Alderman and Headey
(2017) find using multi-country microdata that mother’s education and household wealth are
complements, suggesting that policies and programs that succeed in raising household economic
status may also raise the nutrition payoffs to education attainment.
         The decomposition results do not suggest that other factors are fundamentally less
important for child growth than mother’s education attainment and household wealth. Factors
included in the decompositions with the largest cross-sectional differences in levels or effects
would mechanically contribute the most to the cross-sectional difference in the level of child
growth; analogously, in the decompositions of intertemporal changes. Although the results
underscore the importance of introducing policies and programs that further promote and
leverage mother’s education attainment and household economic status, they do not discourage
policies and programs that aim to transform factors with low levels or small effects, or factors
with levels or effects that have changed little.
         The evidence suggests that the development and improvement of nutrition-sensitive
programs is key. Two ways to enhance the nutrition sensitivity of programs are by incorporating
explicit nutrition goals and by targeting women and children who are more nutritionally
vulnerable from a physiological viewpoint (Ruel et al. 2013). Given that slum residents face
multiple disadvantages, it may be necessary to saturate slum settlements with a wide array of
nutrition-sensitive programs to generate large, durable gains in nutrition status. Notwithstanding,
nutrition-specific interventions should remain part of the policy package for slum residents. In
their review of the international evidence, Goudet et al. (2017) find that nutrition-specific
interventions in slum settlements—such as micronutrient supplementation, nutrition promotion,
school feeding, and treatment of acute malnutrition—tend to have positive effects on child
nutrition status.


34
  In terms of available evidence for Bangladesh, Ferre and Sharif (2014) examine the effects of a cash transfers offered
to very poor households under a pilot program in rural Rangpur division and in slum settlements in Narayanganj city,
Dhaka division. The transfers were tied to households attending sessions for child growth monitoring, and counseling
on child care and feeding, among other conditions. Using nonexperimental methods, the authors find that the program
increased household overall, food, and protein consumption. They also find that knowledge on child feeding rose. The
authors do not find significant effects on child dietary diversity, stunting status, or underweight status. They however
find a significant negative effect on wasting status for children ages 10–22 months at program enrollment, but not for
children in the older age group of 22–46 months at program enrollment.


                                                          34
       The success of NGOs in health development in rural Bangladesh is attributed to decades
of experience, characterized by continuous learning and adaptation of interventions. Engagement
by NGOs in the provision of urban primary health services is much more recent, but a similar
process would be needed. Notwithstanding, the health development record in rural Bangladesh is
mixed. The government and NGOs have been especially successful in promoting family
planning through contraceptives, infectious disease prevention through vaccinations, and
diarrheal treatment through oral rehydration, whereas they have been less successful in other
areas of maternal and child health, and in addressing maternal and child undernutrition (Arifeen
et al. 2013). Hence, there is an even greater need for iterative learning from testing interventions
for improving the quality and increasing the use of health services—irrespective of the
provider—by slum residents and the urban poor.
       While policymakers should continue to expand access to, and improve the quality of,
preventive health technologies and services, international evidence points to insufficient demand
for preventive health among poor households. Indeed, household demand that is sustained over a
long period may be needed for investments in preventive health to translate into significant
health benefits (Brown and Clasen 2012). Reviewing experimental evaluations on the effects of
interventions on health in developing countries, Kremer and Glennerster (2012) indicate that the
patterns in the evidence suggest that household investment in preventive health is highly
sensitive to price, convenience, and salience, and that these patterns are consistent with present-
biased preferences and limited attention among households. The explanations point to the need
for behavioral interventions to influence household choices in relation to factors that we find to
be associated with child nutrition status. Dupas and Miguel (2016) also review experimental
evaluations on the effects of interventions on health in developing countries. They argue that
other patterns in the collective evidence suggest that households may find it difficult to ascertain
the benefits of investing in preventive health in settings where illness is highly prevalent and
where the sources of illness are many and diverse, or that households may perceive low benefits
to investing in preventive health.
       Findings in several studies of health and nutrition in urban slum settlements in
Bangladesh and elsewhere are consistent with one or both of the above sets of explanations. For
example, based on focus group discussions in selected slum settlements in Dhaka, Goudet et al.
(2011) find that information does not appear to be a major constraint: community health workers

                                                 35
and pregnant female residents are well-informed about the potential determinants of child
undernutrition, and awareness is high even among new community health workers and residents
who have not received any formal nutrition counseling. In an experimental study in Dhaka,
Luoto et al. (2011) examine the effects of providing free, point-of-use water treatment products
and repeated, direct counseling on the health risks of using untreated water to poor households.
The study finds that although household knowledge of risks increased and the products
dramatically reduced pathogen contamination levels when used, use rates of the products were
less than 30%. Luby et al. (2004) find in an experimental evaluation that promotion of regular,
intensive handwashing and provision of free soap over a period of nine months to slum
households in Karachi, Pakistan reduced diarrhea rates in intervention households, including
among young, undernourished children. The effects did not last, however. Revisiting evaluation
households 19 months after the intervention ended, Luby et al. (2009) find that soap
consumption had decreased in intervention households, and diarrhea rates did not significantly
differ between intervention and control households.
        Access and availability of piped water and improved sanitation facilities, and the
elimination of open defecation, appear to be insufficient for improving child health and nutrition.
The entire service chain for fecal sludge management—from containment and emptying to
treatment and disposal—is considered to be critically poor in Dhaka and other cities in
Bangladesh (Ross, Scott, and Joseph 2016; Peal et al. 2014; Stevens et al. 2014). Thus,
households may continue to be highly exposed to fecal pathogens. Studies find that virtually all
fecal sludge from latrines, across urban neighborhoods, spills into the environment. Latrines
empty into built or natural drainage systems, and water bodies, with or without any initial
containment in pits or tanks. Pit- or tank-emptying is informal and manual, and the removed
sludge is disposed of unsafely. The risk of fecal contamination of ground water is high because
of poor-quality containment and shallow water tables.35 Addressing this situation will have to
begin with government policy formulation and regulation.
        Most households in urban Bangladesh, including poor ones, seek health care from private
providers. Given this, policies, programs, and partnerships should aim to ensure quality of care


35
  Luby et al. (2015) find that microbial contamination of drinking water is associated with subsequent diarrhea in a
sample of children in rural Bangladesh.



                                                        36
among such providers. A variety of (typically small-scale) interventions have been tested in
different developing-country settings with the aim of improving the utilization and quality of
private RMNCH services. These include social marketing, vouchers, franchising, regulation,
accreditation, and contracting. While empirical evidence remains scarce on the effects of these
interventions, and the evidence that exists is generally of poor quality (Patouillard et al. 2007;
Madhavan et al. 2010), recent rigorous evidence is promising. For example. Bennett and Yin
(2014) and Bjorkman-Nyqvist, Svensson, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2012) find that the entry of
better providers motivates incumbent private providers to respond by improving quality and
reducing prices in local drug markets. Under an experimental evaluation, Das et al. (2016) find
that general training offered to informal private health providers in rural West Bengal, India
increased correct case management for selected common conditions (respiratory distress, child
diarrhea, and chest pain) based on information gathered from standardized patients.
       Finally, addressing maternal and child undernutrition in urban (slum) areas would
presumably hinge on two higher-level actions. First is higher political and bureaucratic
prioritization of nutrition in the country’s health development agenda in particular and its
economic development agenda more generally. Second is a more central treatment of maternal
and child nutrition for the urban poor and slum residents in the development and implementation
of government national health strategies and operational plans, including in strategies and plans
related to urban health.




                                                 37
References

Abuya, Benta A., James Ciera, and Elizabeth Kimani-Murage. 2012. “Effect of Mother’s
       Education on Child’s Nutritional Status in the Slums of Nairobi.” BMC Pediatrics, 12(80).
Adams, Alayne M., Herfina Y. Nababan, and S. M. Manzoor Ahmed Hanifi. 2015. “Building
       Social Networks for Maternal and Newborn Health in Poor Urban Settlements: A Cross
       Sectional Study in Bangladesh.” PLoS ONE, 10(4): e0123817.
Adams, Alayne M., Rubana Islam, and Tanvir Ahmed. 2015. “Who Serves the Urban Poor? A
       Geospatial and Descriptive Analysis of Health Services in Slum Settlements in Dhaka,
       Bangladesh.” Health Policy and Planning, 30: i32–i45.
Afsana, Kaosar, and Syed Shabab Wahid. 2013. “Health Care for Poor People in the Urban Slums
       of Bangladesh.” Lancet, 382: 2049–2051.
Ahsan, Karar Zunaid, Shams El Arifeen, Md. Abdullah Al-Mamun, Shusmita H. Khan, and Nitai
       Chakraborty. 2017. “Effects of Individual, Household and Community Characteristics on
       Child Nutritional Status in the Slums of Urban Bangladesh.” Archives of Public Health,
       75(9).
Alam, Khurshid, Sakiba Tasneem, and Elizabeth Oliveras. 2012a. “Performance of Female
       Volunteer Community Health Workers in Dhaka Urban Slums.” Social Science and
       Medicine, 75: 511–515.
Alam, Khurshid, Sakiba Tasneem, and Elizabeth Oliveras. 2012b. “Retention of Female Volunteer
       Community Health Workers in Dhaka Urban Slums: A Case Control Study.” Health Policy
       and Planning, 27: 477–486.
Alam, Mahbub-Ul, Farzana Yeasmin, Farzana Begum, Mahbubur Rahman, Fosiul Alam Nisame,
       Stephen Luby, Peter Winch, and Leanne Unicomb. 2016. “Can Behavior Change
       Approaches Improve the Cleanliness and Functionality of Shared Toilets? A Randomized
       Control Trial in Dhaka, Bangladesh.” Discussion Paper 9. Water and Sanitation for the
       Urban Poor.
Alam, Md. Ariful, M. A. Hakim, M. A. Rouf, Md. Obidul Haque, M. E. Ali, and I. S. M. Ziadul.
       2011. “Nutritional Status of Urban Slum Children below Five Years: Assessment by
       Anthropometric Measurements with Special Reference to Socioeconomic Status.” Journal
       of Food, Agriculture, and Environment, 9(2): 85–90.
Alam, Narul, Dilruba Begum, Syed Masud Ahmed, and Peter Kim Streatfield. 2011. “MANOSHI
       Community Health Solutions in Bangladesh: Impact Evaluation Surveys in Dhaka Urban
       Slums 2007, 2009, 2011.” Scientific Report 118. Dhaka: International Center for
       Diarrhoeal Diseases Research.
Alderman, Harold, and Derek D. Headey. 2017. “How Important is Parental Education for Child
       Nutrition?” World Development, 94: 448–464.
Andaleeb, Syed Saad. 2000. “Public and Private Hospitals in Bangladesh: Service Quality and
       Predictors of Hospital Choice.” Health Policy and Planning, 15(1): 95–102.
Angeles, Gustavo, Peter Lance, Janine Barden-O’Fallon, Nazrul Islam, A. Q. M. Mahbub, and
       Nurul Islam Nazem. 2009. “The 2005 Census and Mapping of Slums in Bangladesh:
       Design, Select Results and Application.” International Journal of Health Geographics,
       8(32).
Arifeen, Shams El., Aliki Christou, Laura Reichenbach, Ferdous Arifina Osman, Kishwar Azad,
       Khaled Shamsul Islam, Faruque Ahmed, Henry B. Perry, and David H. Peters. 2013.



                                              38
        “Community-Based Approaches and Partnerships: Innovations in Health-Service Delivery
        in Bangladesh.” Lancet, 382(9909): 2012–2026.
Baker, Kelly K., Ciara E. O’Reilly, Myron M. Levine, Karen L. Kotloff, James P. Nataro, Tracy
        L. Ayers, et al. 2016. “Sanitation and Hygiene-Specific Risk Factors for Moderate-to-
        Severe Diarrhea in Young Children in the Global Enteric Multicenter Study, 2007-2011:
        Case-Control Study.” PLoS Med, 13(5): e1002010.
Banu, Morsheda, and Hashima E. Nasreen. 2011. “Factors Influencing the Performance of
        Delivery Centers in Urban Slums in Bangladesh: A Qualitative Study.” OIDA International
        Journal of Sustainable Development, 2(12): 67–76.
Bennett, Daniel, and Wesley Yin. 2014. “The Market for High-Quality Medicine.” Working Paper
        20091. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bjorkman-Nyqvist, Martina, Jakob Svensson, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2012. “Can Good
        Products Drive Out Bad? Evidence from Local Markets for (Fake?) AntiMalarial Medicine
        in Uganda.” Discussion Paper 9114. London: Center for Economic Policy Research.
Black, Robert E., Cesar G. Victora, Susan P. Walker, Zulfiqar A. Bhutta, Parul Christian,
        Mercedes de Onis, Majid Ezzati, Sally Grantham-McGregor, Joanne Katz, Reynaldo
        Martorell, Ricardo Uauy, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013.
        “Maternal and Child Undernutrition and Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income
        Countries.” Lancet, 382: 427–451.
Black, Robert E., Lindsay H. Allen, Zulfiqar A. Bhutta, Laura. E. Caulfield, Mercedes de Onis,
        Majid Ezzati, Colin Mathers, Juan Rivera. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition:
        Global and Regional Exposures and Health Consequences.” Lancet, 371(9608): 243–260.
Blinder, Alan S. 1973. “Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates.” Journal
        of Human Resources, 8(4): 436–455.
Cattaneo, Matias D., Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, Sebastian Martinez, and Rocio Titiunik.
        2009. “Housing, Health, and Happiness.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
        1(1): 75–105.
Cesar, Victora G., Linda Adair, Caroline Fall, Pedro C. Hallal, Reynaldo Martorell, Linda Richter,
        and Harshpal Singh Sachdev. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Consequences
        for Adult Health and Human Capital.” Lancet, 371(9609): 340–357.
Choudhury, Nuzhat, Allisyn C. Moran, M. Ashraful Alam, Karar Zunaid Ahsan, Sabina F. Rashid,
        and Peter Kim Streatfield. 2012. “Beliefs and Practices during Pregnancy and Childbirth
        in Urban Slums of Dhaka, Bangladesh.” BMC Public Health, 12(1): 791–796.
Chowdhury, A. Mushtaque R., Abbas Bhuiya, Mahbub Elahi Chowdhury, Sabrina Rasheed, Zakir
        Hussain, and Lincoln C. Chen. 2013. “The Bangladesh Paradox: Exceptional Health
        Achievement despite Economic Poverty.” Lancet, 382: 1734–1745.
Clasen, Thomas, Wolf-Peter Schmidt, Tamer Rabie, Ian Roberts, and Sandy Cairncross. 2007.
        “Interventions to Improve Water Quality for Preventing Diarrhoea: Systematic Review and
        Meta-Analysis.” British Medical Journal, 334(782).
Currie, Janet, and Tom Vogl. 2013. “Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing
        Countries.” Annual Review of Economics, 5: 1–36.
Dangour, A. D., L. Watson, O. Cumming, S. Boisson, Y. Che, Y. Velleman, S. Cavill, E. Allen,
        and R. Uauy. 2013. “Interventions to Improve Water Quality and Supply, Sanitation and
        Hygiene Practices, and their Effects on the Nutritional Status of Children.” Cochrane
        Database of Systematic Reviews, 8.



                                               39
Das, Jishnu, Abhijit Chowdhury, Reshmaan Hussam, and Abhijit V. Banerjee. 2016. “The Impact
        of Training Informal Health Care Providers in India: A Randomized Controlled Trial.”
        Science, 354(6308).
Das, Jishnu, Alaka Holla, Aakash Mohpal, and Karthik Muralidharan. 2016. “Quality and
        Accountability in Health Care Delivery: Audit-Study Evidence from Primary Care in
        India.” American Economic Review, 106(12): 3765–3799.
Das, Jishnu, Alaka Holla, Veena Das, Manoj Mohanan, Diana Tabak, and Brian Chan. 2012. “In
        Urban and Rural India, a Standardized Patient Study Showed Low Levels of Provider
        Training and Huge Quality Gaps.” Health Affairs, 32(12): 2774–2784.
Daymont, Thomas N., and Paul J. Andrisani. 1984. “Job Preferences, College Major, and the
        Gender Gap in Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources, 19(3): 408–428.
Dewey, Kathryn G., and Daniel R. Mayers. 2011. “Early Child Growth: How Do Nutrition and
        Infection Interact? Maternal & Child Nutrition, 7(Suppl. 3): 129–142.
Dupas, Pascaline, and Edward Miguel. 2016. “Impacts and Determinants of Health Levels in Low-
        Income Countries.” Working Paper 22235. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic
        Research.
El Arifeen, Shams, Aliki Christou, Laura Reichenbach, Ferdous Arfina Osman, Kishwar Azad,
        Khaled Shamsul Islam, Faruque Ahmed, Henry B. Perry, David H. Peters. 2013.
        “Community-Based Approaches and Partnerships: Innovations in Health-Service Delivery
        in Bangladesh” Lancet, 382: 2012–2026.
Ellis, Peter, and Mark Roberts. 2016. Leveraging Urbanization in South Asia: Managing Spatial
        Transformation for Prosperity and Livability. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ezeh, Alex, Oyinlola Oyebode, David Satterthwaite, Yen-Fu Chen, Robert Ndugwa, Jo Sartori,
        Blessing Mberu, G. J. Melendez-Torres, Tilahun Haregu, Samuel I. Watson, Waleska
        Caiaffa, Anthony Capon, and Richard J. Lilford. 2017. “The History, Geography, and
        Sociology of Slums and the Health Problems of People Who Live in Slums.” Lancet,
        389(10068): 547–558.
Fakir, Adnan M. S., and M. Wasiqur Rahman Khan. 2015. “Determinants of Malnutrition Among
        Urban Slum Children in Bangladesh.” Health Economics Review, 5(22).
Ferre, Celine, and Iffath Sharif. 2014. “Can Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Education and
        Nutrition Outcomes for Poor Children in Bangladesh? Evidence from a Pilot Project.”
        Policy Research Working Paper 7077. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Fewtrell, Lorna, Rachel B. Kaufmann, David Kay, Wayne Enanoria, Laurence Haller, and John M
        Colford Jr. 2005. “Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Interventions to Reduce Diarrhoea in
        Less Developed Countries: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Lancet Infectious
        Diseases, 5: 42–52.
Fortin, Nicole, Thomas Lemiuex, and Sergio Firpo. 2011. “Decomposition Methods in
        Economics” Chapter 1. Pages 1–102. Edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. In
        Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 4a. Elsevier B.V.
Gardeazabal, Javier, and Arantza Ugidos. 2004. “More on Identification in Detailed Wage
        Decompositions.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(4): 1034–1036.
Gazi, Rukhsana, Marufa Sultana, Humayun Kabir, and Nirod Chandra Saha. 2015. “Accessibility,
        Availability and Perceived Quality of Reproductive Health Services in Selected Urban
        Areas of Bangladesh: User and Nonusers’ Perspectives.” Reproductive System and Sexual
        Disorders, 4(3).



                                             40
GOB (Government of Bangladesh). 2014. Population and Housing Census 2011: National Volume
        3: Urban Area Report. Dhaka: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Statistics Division,
        Ministry of Planning, GOB.
GOB (Government of Bangladesh). 2015. Preliminary Report on the Census of Slum Areas and
        Floating Population 2014.Dhaka: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Statistics and
        Informatics Division, Ministry of Planning, GOB.
Goudet, Sophie, Paula Griffiths, Barry Bogin, and Nyovani Madise. 2017. “Interventions to Tackle
        Malnutrition and Its Risk Factors in Children Living in Slums: A Scoping Review.” Annals
        of Human Biology, 44(1): 1–10.
Greene, William H. 2008. Econometric Analysis. 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice
        Hall.
Haddad, Slim, Katia Sarla Mohindra, Kendra Siekmans, Genevieve Mak, and Delampady
        Narayana. 2012. “‘Health Divide’ Between Indigenous and Non-Indigenous Populations
        in Kerala, India: Population Based Study.” BMC Public Health, 12: 390.
Headey, Derek, John Hoddinott, and Seollee Park. 2016. “Drivers of Nutritional Change in Four
        South Asian Countries: A Dynamic Observational Analysis.” Maternal & Child Nutrition,
        12(Suppl. 1): 210–218.
Headey, Derek, John Hoddinott, Disha Ali, Roman Tesfaye, and Mekdim Dereje. 2015. “The
        Other Asian Enigma: Explaining the Rapid Reduction of Undernutrition in Bangladesh.”
        World Development, 66: 749–761.
Heller, Lauren R. 2013. “Do Slums Matter? Location and Early Childhood Preventive Care
        Choices among Urban Residents of Bangladesh.” Social Science and Medicine, 94: 43–55.
Hossain, M. A., M. Moniruzzaman, and M. A. Islam. 2010. “Urban Environmental Health in
        Bangladesh Slum: A Comparative Study of Two Metropolitan Cities. Journal of Science
        Foundation, 8: 67–76.
ICDDRB (International Center for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh). 2015. Technical
        Assistance for Assessment of Contribution of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for
        Urban Health Services. Dhaka: ICDDRB.
IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2016. Global Nutrition Report 2016: From
        Promise to Impact: Ending Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC: IFPRI.
Islam, Md. Rezaul, Md. Farukuzzaman, and Md. Amirul Islam. 2014. “Situation of Slum’s
        Children in Dhaka City, Bangladesh: A Sample Survey.” Journal of Economics and
        Sustainable Development, 5(18): 27–33.
Islam, Mohammad Mainul, and Anita J. Gagnon. 2016. “Use of Reproductive Health Care
        Services among Urban Migrant Women in Bangladesh.” BMC Women’s Health, 16:15.
Jann, Ben. 2008. “The Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition for Linear Regression Models.” Stata
        Journal 8(4): 453–479.
Jolly, S.P., M. Rahman, K. Afsana, F. M. Yunus, A. M. R. Chowdhury. 2016. “Evaluation of
        Maternal Health Service Indicators in Urban Slum of Bangladesh.” PLoS ONE, 11(10):
        e0162825.
Jones, F. L. 1983. “On Decomposing the Wage Gap: A Critical Component of Blinder’s Method.”
        Journal of Human Resources, 18(1): 126–130.
Kabir, Ashraful, and Mathilde R. L. Miatrot. 2017. “Factors Influencing Feeding Practices of
        Extreme Poor Infants and Young Children in Families of Working Mothers in Dhaka
        Slums: A Qualitative Study.” PLoS ONE, 12(2).



                                              41
Kabir, Russell, and Hafiz T. A. Khan. 2013. “Utilization of Antenatal Care among Pregnant
        Women of Urban Slums in Dhaka City, Bangladesh.” IOSR Journal of Nursing and Health
        Science, 2(2): 16–19.
Kamal, Nahid, Sian Curtis, Mohammad S. Hasan, and Kanta Jamil. 2016. “Trends in Equity in
        Use of Maternal Health Services in Urban and Rural Bangladesh.” International Journal
        for Equity in Health, 15: 27.
Khan, M. M. H., and Alexander Kramer. 2014. “Role of Women’s Education and Wealth Index to
        Minimize Slum versus Nonslum Disparities in Socio-Economic and Health-Related
        Indicators in Bangladesh.” Global Journal of Quantitative Science, 1(2): 1–12.
Khutan, Fatema, Sabrina Rasheed, Allisyn C. Moran, Ashraful M. Alam, Mohammad Sohel
        Shomik, Munira Sultana, Nuzhat Choudhury, Mohammad Iqbal, and Abbas Bhuiya. 2012.
        “Causes of Neonatal and Maternal Deaths in Dhaka Slums: Implications for Service
        Delivery.” BMC Public Health, 12(1): 84.
Kremer, Michael, and Rachel Glennerster. 2012. “Improving Health in Developing Countries:
        Evidence from Randomized Evaluations.” In Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 2,
        Edited by Mark V. Pauly, Thomas G. Mcguire, and Pedro P. Barros. (pp. 201–315).
        Elsevier.
Kumar, Abhishek, and Aditya Singh. 2013. “Decomposing the Gap in Childhood Undernutrition
        between Poor and Non-Poor in Urban India, 2005–06.” PLoS ONE, 8(5): e64972.
Lance, Peter, Gustavo Angeles, and Nahid Kamal. 2012. Smiling Sun Franchise Program (BSSFP)
        Impact Evaluation Report. Chapel Hill, NC: MEASURE Evaluation.
Lilford, Richard J., Oyinlola Oyebode, David Satterthwaite, G. J. Melendez-Torres, Yen-Fu Chen,
        Blessing Mberu, Samuel I. Watson, Jo Sartori, Robert Ndugwa, Waleska Caiaffa, Tilahun
        Haregu, Anthony Capon, Ruhi Saith, and Alex Ezeh. 2017. “Improving the Health and
        Welfare of People Who Live in Slums.” Lancet, 389(10068): 559–570.
Lin, Audrie, Benjamin F. Arnold, Sadia Afreen, Rie Goto, Tarique Mohammad Nurul Huda,
        Rashidul Haque, et al. 2013. “Household Environmental Conditions are Associated with
        Enteropathy and Impaired Growth in Rural Bangladesh.” American Journal of Tropical
        Medicine & Hygiene, 89(1): 130–137.
Lu, Yao. 2010. “Rural-Urban Migration and Health: Evidence from Longitudinal Data in
        Indonesia.” Social Science & Medicine, 70: 412–419.
Luby, Stephen P., Amal K. Halder, Tarique Md. Huda, Leanne Unicomb, M. Sirajul Islam,
        Benjamin F. Arnold, and Richard B. Johnston. 2015 “Microbiological Contamination of
        Drinking Water Associated with Subsequent Child Diarrhea.” American Journal of
        Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 93(5): 904–911.
Luby, Stephen P., and Amal K. Halder. 2008. “Associations among Handwashing Indicators,
        Wealth, and Symptoms of Childhood Respiratory Illness in Urban Bangladesh.” Tropical
        Medicine and International Health, 13(6): 835–844.
Luby, Stephen P., Mubina Agboatwalla, Anna Bowen, Eben Kenah, Yushuf Sharker, and Robert
        M. Hoekstra. 2009. “Difficulties in Maintaining Improved Handwashing Behavior,
        Karachi, Pakistan.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 81(1): 140–145.
Luby, Stephen P., Mubina Agboatwalla, John Painter, Arshad Altaf, Ward L. Billhimer, and
        Robert M. Hoekstra. 2004. “Effect of Intensive Handwashing Promotion on Childhood
        Diarrhea in High-Risk Communities in Pakistan: A Randomized Controlled Trial.” Journal
        of the American Medical Association, 291(21): 2547–2554.



                                              42
Luoto Jill, Nusrat Najnin, Minhaj Mahmud, Jeff Albert, M. Sirajul Islam, Stephen Luby, et al.
        2011. “What Point-of-Use Water Treatment Products Do Consumers Use? Evidence from
        a Randomized Controlled Trial among the Urban Poor in Bangladesh.” PLoS ONE, 6(10):
        e26132.
Madhavan S., D. Bishai, C. Stanton, and A. Harding. 2010. “Engaging the Private Sector in
        Maternal and Neonatal Health in Low and Middle Income Countries.” Working Paper 12.
        US: Future Health Systems Research Programme Consortium.
Manley, James, Seth Gitter, and Vanya Slavchevska. 2013. “How Effective are Cash Transfers at
        Improving Nutritional Status?” World Development, 48: 133–155.
Marx, Benjamin, Thomas Stoker, and Tavneet Suri. 2013. “The Economics of Slums in the
        Developing World.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(4): 187–210.
Mberu, Blessing U., Tilahun N. Haregu, Catherine Kyobutungi, and Alex C. Ezeh. 2016. “Health
        and Health-Related Indicators in Slum, Rural, and Urban Communities: A Comparative
        Analysis” Global Health Action, 9: 33163.
Mishra, Vinod, and Robert D. Retherford. 2007. “Does Biofuel Smoke Contribute to Anemia and
        Stunting in Early Childhood.” International Journal of Epidemiology, 36: 117–129.
Mu, Ren, and Alan de Brauw. 2015. “Migration and Young Child Nutrition: Evidence from Rural
        China.” Journal of Population Economics, 28: 631–657.
Nahar, Samsun, and M. Maksudur Rahman. 2013. “Factors Influencing Health and Healthcare
        Delivery System for the Urban Poor in Chittagong City, Bangladesh.” Asian Journal of
        Management Research, 4(2): 288–296.
Nguyen, Phuong Hong, Derek Headey, Edward A. Frongillo, Lan Mai Tran, Rahul Rawat, Marie
        T. Ruel, and Purnima Menon. 2017. “Changes in Underlying Determinants Explain Rapid
        Increases in Child Linear Growth in Alive & Thrive Study Areas Between 2010 and 2014
        in Bangladesh and Vietnam.” Journal of Nutrition, 147(3): 462–469.
NIPORT (National Institute of Population Research and Training), MEASURE Evaluation,
        International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR, B), and
        Associates for Community and Population Research (ACPR). 2008. 2006 Bangladesh
        Urban Health Survey. Dhaka, Bangladesh and Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA:
        NIPORT, MEASURE Evaluation, ICDDR, B, and ACPR.
NIPORT (National Institute of Population Research and Training), International Centre for
        Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDRB), and MEASURE Evaluation. 2015.
        Bangladesh Urban Health Survey 2013 Final Report. Dhaka, Bangladesh and Chapel Hill,
        North Carolina: NIPORT, ICDDRB, and MEASURE Evaluation.
NIPORT (National Institute of Population Research and Training)-Bangladesh, Mitra and
        Associates, and ICF International. 2016. Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey
        2014. Dhaka: NIPORT, Mitra and Associates, and ICF International.
Oaxaca, Ronald L., and Michael R. Ransom. 1999. “Identification in Detailed Wage
        Decompositions.” Review of Economic and Statistics, 81(1): 154–157.
Oaxaca, Ronald. 1973. “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets.” International
        Economic Review, 14(3): 693–709.
Patouillard, Edith, Catherine A. Goodman, Kara G. Hanson, and Anne J. Mills. 2007. “Can
        Working with the Private For-Profit Sector Improve Utilization of Quality Health Services
        by the Poor? A Systematic Review of the Literature.” International Journal for Equity in
        Health, 6: 17.



                                               43
Peal, Andy, Barbara Evans, Isabel Blackett, Peter Hawkins, and Chris Heymans. 2014. “Fecal
       Sludge Management: A Comparative Analysis of 12 Cities.” Journal of Water, Sanitation
       and Hygiene for Development, 4(4): 563–575.
Ross, Ian, Rebecca Scott, and Ravikumar Joseph. 2016. “Fecal Sludge Management: Diagnostics
       for Service Delivery in Urban Areas.” Water and Sanitation Program (WSP); Water and
       Sanitation Program Technical Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ruel, Marie T., Harold Alderman, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013.
       “Nutrition-Sensitive Interventions and Programmes: How Can They Help to Accelerate
       Progress in Improving Maternal and Child Nutrition?” Lancet, 382: 536–551.
Rustein, Shea, and Rebecca Winter. 2014. The Effects of Fertility Behavior on Child Survival and
       Child Nutritional Status: Evidence from the Demographic and Health Surveys, 2006 to
       2012. DHS Analytical Studies No. 37. Rockville: United States Agency for International
       Development.
Song, Yang, and Wenkai Sun. 2016. “Health Consequences of Rural-to-Urban Migration:
       Evidence from Panel Data in China.” Health Economics, 25: 1252–1267.
Srinivasan, Chittur S., Giacomo Zanello, and Bhavani Shankar. 2013 “Rural-Urban Disparities in
       Child Nutrition in Bangladesh and Nepal.” BMC Pubic Health, 13: 581.
Stevens, Lucy, Rafiul Islam, Alexis Morcrette, Noemie de la Brosse, and Abdullah al Mamun.
       2015. “Faecal Sludge Management in Faridpur, Bangladesh: Scaling Up Through Service
       Level Agreements.” Briefing Paper 2248. 38th WEDC International Conference,
       Loughborough University, UK.
Strunz, Eric C., David G. Addiss, Meredith E. Stocks, Stephanie Ogden, Jurg Utzinger, and
       Matthew C. Freeman. 2014. “Water, Sanitation, Hygiene, and Soil-Transmitted Helminth
       Infection: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” PLoS Med, 11(3): e1001620.
Strunz, Eric C., David G. Addiss, Meredith E. Stocks, Stephanie Ogden, Jurg Utzinger, and
       Matthew C. Freeman. 2014. “Water, Sanitation, Hygiene, and Soil-Transmitted Helminth
       Infection: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” PLoS Med, 11(3): e1001620.
Sudhinaraset, May, Matthew Ingram, Heather K. Lofthouse, and Dominic Montagu. 2013. “What
       is the Role of Informal Healthcare Providers in Developing Countries? A Systematic
       Review.” PLoS ONE, 8(2): e54978.
Uddin, M. Sheikh Giash, and M. Mozaffar Hosain. 2011. “Factors Associated with Child Health
       in Urban Areas in Bangladesh.” Bangladesh Journal of Science Research, 24(2): 145–154.
Uddin, Md. Jasim, Charles P. Larson, Elizabeth Oliveras, A. I. Khan, M. A. Quiayum, and Nirod
       Chandra Saha. 2010. “Child Immunization Coverage in Urban Slums of Bangladesh:
       Impact of an Intervention Package.” Health Policy and Planning, 25: 50–60.
UN (United Nations). 2015a. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision. New York:
       Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, UN.
UN (United Nations). 2015b. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
       Development. New York: UN.
UN (United Nations). 2017. New Urban Agenda: Quito Declaration on Sustainable Cities and
       Human Settlements for All. New York: UN.
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme) 2016. World Cities Report 2016:
       Urbanization and Development: Emerging Futures. Nairobi: Kenya: UN-Habitat.
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2003. The Challenge of Slums:
       Global Report on Human Settlements 2003. London: Earthscan Publications.



                                              44
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 1998. The State of the World’s Children. New York:
       UNICEF.
Van de Poel, Ellen, Owen O’Donnell, and Eddy Van Doorslaer. 2007. “Are Urban Children Really
       Healthier? Evidence from 47 Developing Countries.” Social Science & Medicine, 65(10):
       1986–2003.
Wagstaff, Adam, and Eddy van Doorslaer, and Naoko Watanabe. 2003. “On Decomposing the
       Causes of Health Sector Inequalities with an Application to Malnutrition Inequalities in
       Vietnam.” Journal of Econometrics, 112: 207–223.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. “A Conceptual Framework for Action on the Social
       Determinants of Health.” Social Determinants of Health Discussion Paper 2. Geneva:
       WHO.
World Bank. 2016. World Development Indicators 2016. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Yun, Myeong-Su. 2004. “Decomposing Differences in the First Moment.” Economic Letters,
       82(2): 275–280.
Yun, Myeong-Su. 2008. “Identification Problem and Detailed Oaxaca Decomposition: A General
       Solution and Inference.” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 33(1): 27–38.
Zaman, Sultan Uz, Nuhad Raisa Seoty, Masud Alam, Rashidul Haque, and Nawzia Yasmin. 2015
       “Household Food Insufficiency and Child Nutritional Status in Urban Slum, Dhaka,
       Bangladesh.” Acta Medica International, 2(1): 65–69.
Ziegelbauer, Kathrin, Benjamin Speich, Daniel Mausezahl, Robert Bos, Jennifer Keiser, Jurg
       Utzinger. 2012. “Effect of Sanitation on Soil-Transmitted Helminth Infection: Systematic
       Review and Meta-Analysis.” PLoS Med, 9(1): e1001162.




                                              45
Figure 1. Urban child stunting rates in international perspective
                                      A. Urban stunting rates




                       B. Urban stunting rates for the poorest and richest quintiles




Source: www.who.int.
Note: Countries with statistics for the period 2005–09 are included in the figure.




                                                        46
Figure 2. Urban child stunting rates, Bangladesh versus other South Asian countries




Note: Statistics extracted from the latest DHS reports for Bangladesh (2014), Maldives (2009), Nepal (2016), and
Pakistan (2012–13); the 2010 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey report for Bhutan; and the 2013–14 Rapid Survey
of Children report for India.




                                                      47
Figure 3. Child stunting rates in Bangladesh, urban versus rural
                                           A. National




                                               B. By division




Note: Own estimates using DHS data, and based on WHO 2006 child growth standards. Statistics are for the six
divisions that were in existence in 1997 DHS.



                                                    48
Table 1. Mean HAZ scores and stunting rates
                                                      City corporations                                       2014 DHS
                                             Pooled   Slum      Nonslum            Slum-              Rural           Urban
                                                                                 nonslum
                                              (1)      (2)             (3)           (4)               (5)               (6)
                HAZ scores                   –1.69    –1.88           –1.30      –0.58***             –1.60             –1.30
 Moderate-to-severe stunting                 0.42     0.48            0.31        0.16***             0.38              0.31
             Severe stunting                 0.20     0.23            0.13        0.10***             0.12              0.10
Note: Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights. Inference is based on robust standard errors, clustered at the neighborhood-area
level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




       Figure 4. Cumulative distribution functions for HAZ scores
                                   1
                                   .8
                                   .6
                      Proportion
                                   .4
                                   .2
                                   0




                                        -6     -4      -2             0              2       4            6

                                                                 HAZ scores

                                                            Nonslum           Slum



       Note: Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights.




                                                                 49
Table 2. Mean values for factors
                Factor                           Pooled          Slum          Nonslum         Slum–
                                                                                              Nonslum
                                                   (1)             (2)          (3)              (4)
                                                                         A. Child
                           Age (in months)       30.12           30.08        30.20             –0.12
                                    Female        0.49            0.49         0.50              0.00
                                Birth order       2.06            2.16         1.87            0.29***
                   Ill with ARI symptoms          0.03            0.03         0.03              0.00
                             Ill with fever       0.31            0.33         0.28            0.05***

                                                                         B. Mother
              Age at child’s birth <18            0.09            0.11         0.07           0.04***
            Age at child’s birth 18–34            0.86            0.84         0.89           –0.05***
              Age at child’s birth >34            0.05            0.05         0.05             0.00
 Completed formal education (in years)            5.68            4.33         8.32           –3.98***
                            Employed              0.20            0.24         0.13           0.11***
    Regularly exposed to mass media               0.85            0.81         0.93           –0.12***
                 Member of an NGO                 0.15            0.18         0.09           0.10***

                                                                      C. Household
               Standardized wealth index         –0.37           –0.73        0.34            –1.07***
                                    Size          4.87            4.76        5.07            –0.31***

                                                                 D. Neighborhood area
    Formal garbage collection available           0.69           0.62        0.84     –0.22***
      Proper sewerage system available            0.48           0.41        0.62     –0.21***
                 CHW service available            0.51           0.55        0.44     0.10***
          NGO health facility available           0.48           0.48        0.46       0.02
         Public health facility available         0.14           0.14        0.14       0.00
                    Pharmacy available            1.00           1.00        1.00       0.00
   Other private health facility available        0.36           0.33        0.42     –0.09**
Note: ARI stands for acute respiratory infection; CHW stands for community health worker. Estimates are
adjusted for sampling weights. Inference is based on robust standard errors clustered at the neighborhood-
area level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                                   50
Figure 5. Bivariate polynomial plots for child HAZ scores
                      A. Child: Age in months                                                                                                          B. Household: Standardized wealth index
                    0




                                                                                                                                           0
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                           -.5
                    -1




                                                                                                                                           -1
        HAZ score




                                                                                                                               HAZ score
                    -1.5




                                                                                                                                           -1.5
                    -2




                                                                                                                                           -2
                    -2.5




                                                                                                                                           -2.5
                            0      10                 20                 30                 40                  50   60                           -3         -2        -1                     0          1        2

                                                               Child's age in months                                                                                    Household asset index

                                                            95% CI                     Slum                                                                           95% CI                      Slum
                                                            Nonslum                                                                                                   Nonslum




                           C. Mother: Duration of residence in current city                                                                            D. Mother: Education attainment in years
                                         corporation in years
                    0




                                                                                                                                           0
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                           -.5
                    -1




                                                                                                                                           -1
        HAZ score




                                                                                                                               HAZ score
                    -1.5




                                                                                                                                           -1.5
                    -2




                                                                                                                                           -2
                    -2.5




                                                                                                                                           -2.5

                            0      5                  10                 15                 20                  25   30                           0               5                         10               15

                                        Years lived in current city corporation (conditional on moving there)                                                         Mother's years of education

                                                            95% CI                     Slum                                                                           95% CI                      Slum
                                                            Nonslum                                                                                                   Nonslum



Note: Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights.




                                                                                                                          51
Table 3. Effects on child HAZ scores, base set of factors
Ordinary least square regressions
                  Factor                               Division fixed effects            Neighborhood area fixed effects
                                               Pooled          Slum         Nonslum     Pooled      Slum         Nonslum
                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)             (6)
                                     Child
                                      Age –0.016***         –0.017***      –0.013***   –0.016***   –0.017***   –0.014***
                                               (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)
                                   Female       0.041          0.040          0.014      0.052       0.068      –0.002
                                               (0.045)        (0.059)        (0.068)    (0.053)     (0.063)     (0.096)
                               Birth order      0.031          0.046          0.006      0.017       0.022      –0.006
                                               (0.024)        (0.030)        (0.038)    (0.029)     (0.035)     (0.052)
 Recently ill with fever or ARI symptoms       –0.020          0.030        –0.139*     –0.055      –0.013      –0.171*
                                               (0.052)        (0.069)        (0.071)    (0.063)     (0.075)     (0.103)

                                  Mother
                 Age at child’s birth <18     –0.219***    –0.290***       0.037       –0.263**    –0.344***     0.117
                                               (0.085)      (0.104)       (0.133)       (0.105)     (0.117)     (0.197)
                 Age at child’s birth >34       0.085       –0.146        0.525**       –0.001      –0.114       0.337
                                               (0.134)      (0.165)       (0.210)       (0.153)     (0.178)     (0.279)
   Completed formal education (in years)      0.033***     0.038***       0.022*       0.033***     0.032**     0.033*
                                               (0.008)      (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.011)     (0.013)     (0.018)
                                Employed        –0.06       –0.041         –0.08        –0.047      –0.046      –0.053
                                               (0.062)      (0.075)       (0.101)       (0.074)     (0.082)     (0.155)
        Regularly exposed to mass media         0.105        0.069        0.246*         0.078       0.051       0.258
                                               (0.066)      (0.076)       (0.136)       (0.085)     (0.091)     (0.214)
                     Member of an NGO           0.079       0.171**       –0.195         0.101      0.152*      –0.077
                                               (0.072)      (0.083)       (0.122)       (0.081)     (0.088)     (0.182)

                             Household
               Standardized wealth index      0.219***     0.212***       0.248***     0.205***    0.179***     0.248**
                                               (0.038)      (0.047)        (0.064)      (0.053)     (0.064)     (0.098)
                     Number of members        –0.022*       –0.018         –0.030       –0.017      –0.012      –0.030
                                               (0.013)      (0.017)        (0.019)      (0.017)     (0.020)     (0.031)

                     Neighborhood area
      Formal garbage collection available      –0.018       –0.006        –0.083          ––          ––          ––
                                               (0.069)      (0.083)       (0.119)
        Proper sewerage system available        0.037        0.020         0.058          ––          ––          ––
                                               (0.056)      (0.076)       (0.079)
                  CHW service available        –0.018       –0.017        –0.052          ––          ––          ––
                                               (0.055)      (0.072)       (0.080)
            NGO health facility available      –0.013       –0.069         0.089          ––          ––          ––
                                               (0.059)      (0.075)       (0.079)
           Public health facility available    –0.077       –0.009        –0.186*         ––          ––          ––
                                               (0.079)      (0.103)       (0.110)
          Private health facility available    0.089*       0.131*         0.048          ––          ––          ––
                                               (0.053)      (0.070)       (0.077)
                            Nonslum area      0.197***        ––            ––            ––          ––          ––
                                               (0.062)
                                 Intercept    –1.576***    –1.567***     –1.365***     –1.357***   –1.434***   –1.340***
                                               (0.153)      (0.190)       (0.252)       (0.153)     (0.170)     (0.349)

                                                               52
Table 3. Effects on child HAZ scores, base set of factors
Ordinary least square regressions
                  Factor                               Division fixed effects             Neighborhood area fixed effects
                                               Pooled          Slum         Nonslum      Pooled      Slum         Nonslum
                                                 (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)             (6)

                            Observations       7,565        5,000         2,565            7,565         5,000        2,565
                      R-squared statistic      0.082        0.064         0.064            0.268         0.171        0.409
Note: ARI stands for acute respiratory infection; CHW stands for community health worker. Estimates are adjusted for sampling
weights. Robust standard errors, clustered at the neighborhood-area level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p<0.01, **
p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                                               53
Table 4. Mean values for use of maternal and child health services,
youngest child born in the three years before the survey
             Type                    Pooled        Slum       Nonslum      Slum–Nonslum
                                        (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)
                                                         A. Antenatal care
             Any health facility       0.70        0.62         0.86          –0.24***

           Public health facility     0.16         0.14          0.18            –0.04**
            NGO health facility       0.23         0.27          0.17            0.10***
          Private health facility     0.31         0.20          0.51            –0.31***

                                                            B. Delivery
             Any health facility      0.49         0.41         0.66             –0.25***

           Public health facility     0.14         0.12          0.17            –0.05***
            NGO health facility       0.14         0.17          0.09            0.08***
          Private health facility     0.21         0.12          0.40            –0.28***

                                                        C. Newborn exam
             Any health facility      0.40         0.33       0.55               –0.22***

           Public health facility     0.11         0.10          0.15            –0.05***
            NGO health facility       0.11         0.13          0.07            0.06***
          Private health facility     0.18         0.11          0.33            –0.23***
Note: Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights. Inference is based on robust standard errors
clustered at the neighborhood-area level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                              54
Table 5. Distribution of reported reasons for choice of delivery site,
youngest child born in the three years before the survey
                   Reason                         Pooled        Slum              Nonslum     Slum–
                                                                                            Nonslum
                                                          (1)       (2)          (3)            (4)
                                                              A. Why chose a facility for delivery
                       Due to complications              0.55      0.56         0.54           0.02
          Referred by doctor/service provider            0.09      0.09         0.08           0.00
                                     It is safe          0.29      0.29         0.29          –0.01
                         Other (unspecified)             0.07      0.07         0.08          –0.02

                                                                B. Why chose specific facility for
                                                                   delivery
                                     Low cost            0.06         0.09       0.04          0.05***
                            Near to my house             0.10         0.11       0.07           0.04**
                                      It is safe         0.33         0.32       0.34            –0.02
                            Provider is known            0.17         0.14       0.21         –0.06***
                       Had antenatal care here           0.14         0.13       0.15            –0.01
                    Had previous delivery here           0.03         0.02       0.04         –0.03***
                           Other (unspecified)           0.17         0.18       0.15             0.03

                                                                    C. Why chose delivery at home
                                Not necessary            0.70         0.70       0.71          –0.01
                Costs too much/lack of money             0.12         0.13       0.09         0.04**
                           Better care at home           0.05         0.05       0.06          –0.01
                           Other (unspecified)           0.13         0.12       0.14          –0.02
Note: The sample for Panels A and B is youngest child born in a health facility in the three years before the
survey; the sample for Panel C is youngest children born at home in the three years before the survey.
Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights. Inference is based on robust standard errors clustered at the
neighborhood-area level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                                    55
Table 6. Effects of type of health facility/provider for antenatal care, delivery, and
newborn exam on child HAZ scores
Ordinary least square regressions
                                           Pooled                Slum                   Nonslum
                                             (1)                  (2)                      (3)
                                                              A. Use of health facility
 Antenatal care at a health facility       0.210**             0.198**                   0.213*
                                           (0.079)              (0.094)                  (0.123)
       Delivery at a health facility        0.088                0.079                    0.082
                                           (0.071)              (0.090)                  (0.112)
Newborn exam at a health facility           0.059                0.072                    0.036
                                           (0.076)              (0.099)                  (0.107)

                                                           B. Use of health facility type
                    Antenatal care
              Public health facility       0.281**               0.176                    0.417**
                                           (0.116)              (0.148)                   (0.162)
                NGO health facility         0.143*              0.182*                      0.001
                                           (0.089)              (0.105)                   (0.141)
              Private health facility      0.214**               0.200                     0.243*
                                           (0.092)              (0.117)                   (0.137)
                          Delivery
              Public health facility       0.223**               0.195                      0.230
                                           (0.100)              (0.135)                    (0.147)
                NGO health facility         0.007                0.034                     –0.121
                                           (0.093)              (0.112)                    (0.154)
              Private health facility       0.052                0.020                      0.074
                                           (0.098)              (0.153)                    (0.127)
                   Newborn exam
              Public health facility       0.264*               0.284*                      0.233
                                           (0.108)              (0.147)                    (0.155)
                NGO health facility        –0.067               –0.057                     –0.102
                                           (0.112)              (0.135)                    (0.164)
              Private health facility       0.009                0.033                     –0.024
                                           (0.101)              (0.157)                    (0.128)
Note: Regressions control for the base set of factors (see Table 3). Estimates are adjusted for sampling
weights. Robust standard errors, clustered at the neighborhood-area level, are reported in parentheses. ***
denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                                     56
Table 7. Mean values for health-protective household amenities
                                                          Pooled            Slum        Nonslum        Slum–
                                                                                                     Nonslum
                                                                (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
                     No access to piped drinking water         0.36          0.44         0.22        0.21***
               Unshared access to piped drinking water         0.19          0.05         0.47       –0.43***
                 Shared access to piped drinking water         0.45          0.52         0.31        0.21***
                   Access to improved toilet, unshared         0.31          0.14         0.62       –0.48***
    Access to improved toilet, shared with <9 other hhs.       0.37          0.41         0.30        0.11***
    Access to improved toilet, shared with ≥9 other hhs.       0.31          0.42         0.08        0.35***
                                Safe disposal of garbage       0.53          0.45         0.68       –0.23***
                              Use of clean cooking fuel        0.71          0.64         0.87       –0.23***
                              Finished floor in dwelling       0.81          0.73         0.95       –0.22***
    Handwashing site, with water and soap, at dwelling         0.45          0.29         0.74       –0.45***
Note: Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights. Inference is based on robust standard errors clustered at the
neighborhood-area level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                                      57
Table 8. Effects of health-protective household amenities on child HAZ scores
Ordinary least square regressions
                                                                Pooled         Slum                    Nonslum
                                                                  (1)           (2)                       (3)
                   Unshared access to piped drinking water       0.119        –0.015                     0.102
                                                                (0.108)      (0.170)                    (0.146)
                     Shared access to piped drinking water       0.066         0.098                    –0.045
                                                                (0.064)      (0.076)                    (0.116)
   Access to an improved toilet, shared with <9 other hhs.      –0.101        –0.129                    –0.033
                                                                (0.093)      (0.130)                    (0.128)
         Access to an improved toilet, shared with ≥9 hhs.     –0.202*      –0.268**                     0.026
                                                                (0.103)      (0.133)                    (0.174)
                                   Safe disposal of garbage      0.081         0.076                     0.115
                                                                (0.062)      (0.078)                    (0.093)
                                Use of a clean cooking fuel     –0.006        –0.046                     0.191
                                                                (0.080)      (0.091)                    (0.168)
                                  Finished floor in dwelling     0.079         0.113                     0.043
                                                                (0.078)      (0.086)                    (0.187)
       Handwashing site, with water and soap, at dwelling        0.093         0.038                   0.237**
                                                                (0.061)      (0.076)                    (0.095)
Note: Sample is restricted to children in households with access to an improved toilet. Regressions control for the
base set of factors (see Table 3), except for household asset index. Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights.
Robust standard errors, clustered at the neighborhood-area level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p<0.01,
** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                                       58
Table 9. Mean values for mother’s migration to current city corporation
                                  Pooled       Slum        Nonslum       Slum–
                                                                        Nonslum
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
                                                   A. Birth location
  Born in another urban center     0.12         0.11         0.13        –0.02*
           Born in a rural area    0.54         0.57         0.49       0.08***

                                                       B. Reason for move
                                                       (conditional on moving)
             For family reasons         0.67          0.63        0.74      –0.11***
              For work reasons          0.29          0.33        0.20       0.13***
              For other reasons         0.04          0.04        0.06       –0.02**

                                                  C. Time since mother’s move
                                                      (conditional on moving)
              Years since move          8.52         8.60        8.37         0.22
Note: A mother who moved to the current city corporation just before the survey was
assigned one month for time since move. “Another urban center” is any urban entity other
than the current city corporation. Panels B and C report statistics conditional on the mother
moving to the current city corporation. Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights.
Inference is based on robust standard errors clustered at the neighborhood-area level. ***
denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                            59
Table 10. Effects of mother’s migration to current city corporation on child
HAZ scores
                                       Pooled           Slum         Nonslum
                                         (1)             (2)            (3)
                                                   A. Birth location
     Born in another urban center     0.181**         0.252**          0.064
                                       (0.084)         (0.110)        (0.122)
              Born in a rural area      0.054           0.016         0.140*
                                       (0.054)         (0.071)        (0.078)

                                                       B. Reason for move
                 For family reasons          0.024         0.018         0.056
                                            (0.057)       (0.077)       (0.079)
                   For work reasons          0.051         –0.016      0.298***
                                            (0.074)       (0.090)       (0.113)

                                                 C. Time since mother’s move
                                                     (conditional on moving)
       Time since move (in years)            0.006        0.007         0.002
                                            (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.008)
Note: A mother who moved to the current city corporation just before the survey was
assigned one month for time since move. Regressions control for the base set of factors
(see Table 3). The reference category is “mother born in the current city corporation”
for factors in Panel A; the reference category is “mother always resided in current city
corporation” for factors in Panel B. “Another urban center” is any urban entity other
than the current city corporation. Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights. Robust
standard errors, clustered at the neighborhood-area level, are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                          60
Table 11. Decomposition of slum-nonslum difference in mean child HAZ scores
Based on ordinary least square regressions
                     Factors                        Outcome     Factor level      Effect                  Interaction
                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)                        (4)
                                                                         Aggregate
                                                   –0.581***     –0.379***      –0.193**                    –0.010
                                                     (0.053)      (0.054)        (0.075)                    (0.075)

                                                                                  Detailed
               Child ill with fever or ARI symptoms                        –0.007*       0.047**            0.008*
                                                                           (0.004)        (0.028)           (0.006)
                        Mother: completed education                       –0.091**           ––                ––
                                                                           (0.047)
                            Mother: age at child birth                        ––        –0.053***          –0.017*
                                                                                          (0.017)          (0.009)
                           Standardized wealth index                      –0.280***          ––               ––
                                                                           (0.066)
Note: ARI stands for acute respiratory infection. Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights. Robust standard errors,
clustered at the neighborhood-area level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p<0.01; ** p<0.05 and * p<0.1.




                                                         61
Table 12. Mean levels for child growth and factors, 2006 and 2013
                                                     Pooled                           Slum                      Nonslum
                                          2006      2013      2013–         2006    2013      2013–     2006    2013    2013–
                                                               2006                            2006                      2006
                                           (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)     (8)     (9)
                            HAZ score –1.83 –1.69             0.14**        –2.12   –1.88    0.23***    –1.51   –1.30   0.20*
           Moderate-to-severe stunting 0.46         0.42     –0.04**         0.56    0.48    –0.08***    0.36    0.31   –0.05
                       Severe stunting 0.22         0.20       –0.02         0.28    0.23    –0.05***    0.16    0.13   –0.02

                                   Child
                                    Age    29.79   30.12     0.33           30.13   30.08     –0.05     29.42   30.20     0.78
                                 Female    0.52    0.49     –0.03            0.49    0.49      0.01      0.56    0.50   –0.06**
                             Birth order   2.45    2.06    –0.38***          2.59    2.16    –0.43***    2.29    1.87   –0.42***
                Ill with ARI symptoms      0.14    0.03    –0.11***          0.14    0.03    –0.11***    0.13    0.03   –0.10***
                          Ill with fever   0.42    0.31    –0.10***          0.43    0.33    –0.10***    0.40    0.28   –0.12***

                               Mother
             Age at child’s birth <18      0.10    0.09      0.00           0.12    0.11      –0.01     0.07    0.07      0.00
           Age at child’s birth 18–34      0.85    0.86      0.00           0.83    0.84       0.02     0.88    0.89      0.00
             Age at child’s birth >34      0.05    0.05      0.00           0.05    0.05       0.00     0.05    0.05      0.00
Completed formal education (in years)      4.91    5.68    0.76***          3.24    4.33     1.09***    6.75    8.32    1.57***
     Born in current city corporation      0.30    0.34      0.04           0.29    0.32       0.03     0.31    0.38      0.06
          Born in another urban area       0.09    0.12    0.03***          0.07    0.11     0.04***    0.11    0.13      0.02
                 Born in a rural area      0.60    0.54    –0.06**          0.63    0.57     –0.07**    0.57    0.49     –0.08*
                           Employed        0.18    0.20      0.02           0.23    0.24       0.01     0.13    0.13      0.00
   Regularly exposed to mass media         0.87    0.85     –0.02           0.83    0.81      –0.02     0.91    0.93      0.02
                Member of an NGO           0.30    0.15    –0.15***         0.30    0.18     –0.12***   0.30    0.09    –0.21***

                          Household
            Standardized wealth index      –0.09   0.07     0.15*           –0.56   –0.31    0.25***    0.43    0.81    0.37***
                                 Size      5.52    4.87    –0.66***          5.26    4.76    –0.50***   5.81    5.07    –0.74***

                  Neighborhood area
   Formal garbage collection available     0.60    0.69      0.09*          0.43    0.62     0.19***    0.80    0.84      0.04
     Proper sewerage system available      0.49    0.48      –0.01          0.31    0.41      0.10*     0.69    0.62     –0.07
               CHW service available       0.17    0.51     0.35***         0.20    0.55     0.35***    0.13    0.44    0.31***

                                                                       62
Table 12. Mean levels for child growth and factors, 2006 and 2013
                                                     Pooled                                      Slum                                  Nonslum
                                          2006      2013      2013–                  2006      2013        2013–             2006      2013     2013–
                                                               2006                                         2006                                 2006
                                           (1)       (2)        (3)                    (4)      (5)          (6)              (7)       (8)       (9)
          NGO health facility available   0.45      0.48       0.03                   0.45     0.48         0.04             0.45      0.46      0.01
         Public health facility available 0.18      0.14      –0.05                   0.17     0.14        –0.04             0.19      0.14     –0.06
        Private health facility available 0.32      0.36       0.05                   0.29     0.33         0.04             0.34      0.42      0.08
                    Pharmacy available 0.76         1.00     0.24***                  0.66     1.00       0.33***            0.87      1.00    0.13***
Note: ARI stands for acute respiratory infection; CHW stands for community health worker. Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights. Inference is based on
robust standard errors clustered at the neighborhood-area level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1.




                                                                            63
Table 13. Decomposition of change in mean child HAZ scores between 2006 and 2013
Based on ordinary least squares regressions
                                                  Outcome       Factor level      Effect                            Interaction
                                                     (1)             (2)            (3)                                 (4)
                                                                         A. Slum areas
                                                                         Aggregate
                                                  0.222***        0.094**          0.054                               0.074
                                                   (0.069)        (0.044)        (0.088)                              (0.069)

                                                                                        Detailed
                                    Child: birth order                          –0.023*         0.239**               0.045*
                                                                                (0.013)          (0.119)              (0.024)
                      Mother: completed education                              0.043***            ––                   ––
                                                                                (0.015)
            Household: standardized wealth index                               0.055***             ––                  ––
                                                                                (0.019)

                                                                                     B. Nonslum areas
                                                                                       Aggregate

                                                              0.210**           0.134**             0.019              0.057
                                                              (0.101)           (0.054)            (0.120)            (0.106)

                                                                                        Detailed
           Child: Recent illness with ARI or fever                              0.024*                ––                ––
                                                                                (0.013)
                      Mother: completed education                               0.036*                ––                ––
                                                                                (0.020)
            Household: standardized wealth index                               0.093***               ––                ––
                                                                                (0.030)
Neighborhood area: RMNCH service availability                                     ––                  ––             0.164**
                                                                                                                     (0.072)
Note: ARI stands for acute respiratory infection; RMNCH stands for reproductive, maternal, neonatal, and child health.
“RMNCH service availability” groups together indicators for the availability of community health workers, and NGO, public,
and private health facilities. Estimates are adjusted for sampling weights. Robust standard errors, clustered at the neighborhood-
area level, are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p<0.01; ** p<0.05 and * p<0.1.




                                                               64
Table A1. Definitions of main variables
                        Variable                                                          Definition
                                                               Outcome
                                                     HAZ      Height-for-age z-scores, standardized using 2006 WHO growth
                                                              standards
                             Moderate-to-severe stunting      Whether height-for-age z-score is two SD below the international
                                                              reference median
                                          Severe stunting     Whether height-for-age z-score is three SD below the international
                                                              reference median

                                                               Factor
                                                A. Child
                                          Age (in months)     Child's age in months (0–59 months).
                                                   Female     Whether the child is female.
                                               Birth order    Order in which the child was born.
                                  Ill with ARI symptoms       Whether the child had symptoms of acute respiratory infection (ARI) in
                                                              the two weeks before the survey.
                                             Ill with fever   Whether the child had a fever in the two weeks before the survey.
                          Antenatal care at health facility   Whether the mother received antenatal care at a health facility for the
                                                              child. A health facility is a medical college hospital, specialized
                                                              government hospital, district hospital, Maternal and Child Welfare
                                                              Center (MCWC), upazilla health complex, Health and Family Welfare
                                                              Center (H&FWC), BRAC static clinic, BRAC birthing hut, Marie
                                                              Stopes clinic, Smiling Sun Franchise Program (SSFP) clinic, Urban
                                                              Primary Health Care Project (UHSCP) clinic, private hospital/clinic, or
                                                              qualified doctor’s chamber, or private medical college hospital.
                   Antenatal care at public health facility   Whether the child’s mother received antenatal care at a public health
                                                              facility. Public health facilities are medical college hospital, specialized
                                                              government hospital, district hospital, MCWC, upazilla health
                                                              complex, H&FWC, satellite Clinic/EPI outreach, or community clinic.
                    Antenatal care at NGO health facility     Whether the child’s mother received antenatal care at an NGO health
                                                              facility. A NGO health facility is a NGO static clinic, NGO satellite
                                                              clinic, or birthing hut.
                  Antenatal care at private health facility   Whether the child’s mother received antenatal care at a private health
                                                              facility. A private health facility is a private hospital/clinic, qualified
                                                              doctor's chamber, or private medical college hospital.
                               Delivered at health facility   Whether child was delivered at a health facility. Health facility defined
                                                              as for antenatal care.
                         Delivery in public health facility   Whether the child was delivered at a public health facility. Public health
                                                              facility defined as for antenatal care.
                         Delivery in NGO health facility      Whether the child was delivered at an NGO health facility. NGO health
                                                              facility defined as for antenatal care.
                        Delivery in private health facility   Whether the child was delivered at a private health facility. Private
                                                              health facility is defined as for antenatal care.
                         Newborn exam at health facility      Whether child received an exam within two months after birth at health
                                                              facility. Health facility is defined as for antenatal care.
                  Newborn exam at public health facility      Whether child received an exam within two months after birth at
                                                              public health facility. Public health facility is defined as for antenatal
                                                              care.
                   Newborn exam at NGO health facility        Whether child received an exam within two months after birth at NGO
                                                              health facility. NGO health facility is defined as for antenatal care.


                                                                 65
Table A1. Definitions of main variables
                        Variable                                                              Definition
                  Newborn exam at private health facility    Whether child received an exam within two months after birth at
                                                             health facility. Private health facility is defined as for antenatal care.

                                              B. Mother
                                Age at child’s birth <18     Whether mother's age at child’s birth was under 18 years.
                             Age at child’s birth 18 to 34   Whether the mother’s age at child’s birth was between 18 and 34 years.
                                Age at child’s birth >34     Whether mother’s age at child’s birth was over 34 years.
                             Completed formal education      Years of completed education through either religious or secular
                                                             schools.
                                     Born in current city    Whether mother was born in the current city.
                              Born in another urban area     Whether mother was born in another city, district town, or another town.
                                         Born in village     Whether mother was born in a village.
                               Moved for family reason       Whether mother has moved to current city due to family reasons: join
                                                             parents, spouse/in-laws, children, or other relatives.
                                  Moved for work reason      Whether the mother has moved to current city due to work-related
                                                             reasons: service, work, or transfer; higher labor earnings; search for
                                                             work
                                  Moved for other reason     Whether the mother has moved to current city due to other reasons: own
                                                             education, children’s education, purchase new land or house; need to
                                                             look after properties.
                                       Years since move      Number of years mother has been living in the current city, if she had
                                                             moved from another urban center or a rural area.
                                              Employed       Whether mother is currently employed.
                         Regular exposure to mass media      Whether mother watches TV at least once a week.
                                    Member of an NGO         Whether mother is a member of Grameen Bank, BRAC, ASA, or
                                                             Proshika.

                                          C. Household
                                           Wealth index      Standardized asset-based wealth index obtained from the first Principal
                                                             Component Analysis component, based on information on dwelling
                                                             space per household member, number of rooms in dwelling, whether
                                                             the dwelling has a separate room for the kitchen; whether dwelling floor
                                                             is finished (parquet or polished wood, ceramic tiles, mozaik or cement
                                                             floor); whether dwelling has a finished roof (tin, wood, ceramic tiles or
                                                             cement roof), whether dwelling has finished walls (tin, cement, brick or
                                                             wood plank walls); whether household has an electric connection, TV,
                                                             fridge, computer, electric fan, air conditioner, mobile phone, or
                                                             generator; whether household uses clean cooking fuel (electricity, LPG,
                                                             natural gas, biogas, or kerosene); whether household has access to piped
                                                             drinking water; whether the household has access to an improved toilet
                                                             facility.
                                           Finished floor    Whether the main material of the dwelling floor is parquet or polished
                                                             wood, ceramic tiles, mozaik, or cement.
                          Access to piped drinking water     Whether the main source of drinking water for members of the
                                                             household is piped water (piped into dwelling, piped to yard or plot, or
                                                             public tap or standpipe).
                   Shared access to piped drinking water     Whether the household has piped water at dwelling that is shared with
                                                             other households.



                                                                66
Table A1. Definitions of main variables
                        Variable                                                               Definition
                             Access to an improved toilet      Whether the household has flush or pour flush toilet (flush to sewer
                                                               system or septic tank, flush to somewhere else) or pit latrine (ventilated
                                                               improved pit latrine with or without slab or open pit).
   Access to an improved toilet, shared with <9 other hhs      Whether the household shares an improved toilet facility with fewer
                                                               than nine other households.
   Access to an improved toilet, shared with ≥9 other hhs      Whether the household shares an improved toilet facility with nine or
                                                               more households.
                                  Safe disposal of garbage     Whether garbage is collected from home or disposed in a bin outside
                                                               the household.
                              Use of a clean cooking fuel      Whether household mainly uses electricity, LPG, natural gas, biogas, or
                                                               kerosene for cooking.
      Handwashing site, with water and soap, at dwelling       Whether household has a handwashing site with water and soap, all
                                                               observed by the interviewer.

                                D. Neighborhood area
                    Formal garbage collection in the area      Whether garbage is collected from home or in the neighborhood area by
                                                               government, community association, or private company.
                      Proper sewerage system in the area       Whether households in the neighborhood area dispose of sewerage into
                                                               proper sewerage system.
                       CHW service available in the area       Whether the neighborhood area has community health workers who
                                                               provide services in reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health.
                Public health facility available in the area   Whether the neighborhood area has a health facility operated by the
                                                               government.
               Private health facility available in the area   Whether the neighborhood area has a health facility operated by the
                                                               private sector.
                 NGO health facility available in the area     Whether the neighborhood area has a health facility operated by the
                                                               NGO sector.
                                             Nonslum area      Whether the neighborhood area is a nonslum area.




                                                                  67
