                                                    WPS8076


Policy Research Working Paper                      8076




        Energy Prices and International Trade
               Incorporating Input-Output Linkages

                                  H. Ron Chan
                                Edward Manderson
                                   Fan Zhang




South Asia Region
Office of the Chief Economist
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8076


  Abstract
 This paper examines the effect of energy costs on indus-                           analysis finds that ignoring input-output relationships can
 try export competitiveness. Most studies in the literature                         lead to significant over- or underestimates of the effect of
 use direct energy consumption (energy consumption at                               energy price shocks on exports, depending on intermediate
 the final stage of production) and domestic energy prices                          factor intensities and trade relationships. Using estimated
 to compute energy costs faced by domestic industries.                              trade elasticities, the study simulates the economic conse-
 Using multi-country input-output information, this study                           quences of energy cross-subsidies and carbon taxes. The
 measures the effect of aggregate energy costs on export per-                       results show that energy cross-subsidies that raise energy
 formance, where aggregate energy costs include not only                            tariffs on industry to support lower rates for households
 direct energy costs, but also indirect energy costs passed on                      and farmers in India could reduce the country’s net manu-
 through the upstream supply chain. This study develops a                           facturing exports by $6.1 billion a year. Similarly, a carbon
 theoretical trade model that incorporates tradable interme-                        tax that unilaterally increases energy prices by 10 percent
 diate goods to inform its empirical strategy. It then estimates                    in the European Union could reduce European Union-
 a reduced-form model using a panel data for 10 manu-                               wide net manufacturing exports by 1.9 percent annually.
 facturing sectors in 43 countries from 1991 to 2012. The


  This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, South Asia Region. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at fzhang1@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Energy Prices and International Trade: Incorporating Input-Output
                                                 Linkages∗


               H. Ron Chan†                         Edward Manderson‡                      Fan Zhang§
       University of Manchester                 University of Manchester                  World Bank




Keywords: Energy cross-subsidization, carbon leakages, energy costs, exports, competitive-
ness, input-output linkages
JEL Classiﬁcations: Q4, Q5, F1



  ∗ This paper is part of a broader analytical effort to assess the cost of power sector distortions in South Asia
being conducted by the Ofﬁce of the Chief Economist of the World Bank South Asia Region. We thank Vivien
Foster, Martin Rama, Yadviga Viktorivna Semikolenova, Govinda Timilsina, Maria Vagliasindi, and seminar
participants at the University of Toulouse for helpful comments on earlier drafts. Jiarui Wang provided excellent
research assistance. Financial support from the Trade and Competitiveness Multi-Donor Trust Fund and the
Partnership for South Asia Trust Fund is greatly appreciated.
   † School of Social Sciences, University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building-3.078, Oxford Road, Manchester,

M13 9PL, United Kingdom. Contact: ron.chan@manchester.ac.uk
   ‡ School of Social Sciences, University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building-3.078, Oxford Road, Manchester,

M13 9PL, United Kingdom. Contact: edward.manderson@manchester.ac.uk
   § World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC, USA. Contact: fzhang1@worldbank.org
1     Introduction

Changes in energy prices are usually thought to have implications for the competitiveness

of economies. Policies leading to higher energy prices therefore tend to be subjected to

close scrutiny and much debate. Prominent examples include climate change policies such

as environmental taxes and cap and trade systems. There are concerns that these poli-

cies, when unilaterally enforced, could hinder the ability of domestic industry to compete

in export markets, especially in the short term and for energy-intensive sectors. Through

their effects on energy prices, they may even induce ﬁrms to shift production to countries

where emission constraints are less stringent, a response that may lead to an increase in

global carbon emissions – the so-called carbon leakage effect. Another policy that may lead

to unintended consequences for trade through energy price adjustments is energy cross-

subsidization. Many countries, especially in Eastern Europe and South Asia, impose higher

energy tariffs on industry to support lower rates for residential or agricultural consumers.

Energy cross-subsidies may therefore hamper the international competitiveness of indus-

tries, although this has received little attention in the discussion on the economic incidence

of energy subsidies.

In this paper, we examine the effect of energy costs on manufacturing exports.1 Most stud-

ies in the literature have used direct energy consumption (energy consumption at the ﬁnal

stage of production) and domestic energy prices to compute energy costs faced by domestic

industries. We contribute to the literature by considering both direct and indirect energy

costs (energy consumption at intermediate stages of production). Taking into account indi-

rect energy costs is important because even if a sector is not energy intensive on the basis

of direct energy consumption, it may still be vulnerable to energy price shocks if it uses

energy-intensive intermediate inputs. Furthermore, a sector that uses imported intermedi-

ate goods may also be indirectly affected by energy price changes in the origin countries.

Our paper relates to two strands of empirical literature. One strand consists of a small

number of recent studies that analyze the relationship between energy prices and interna-

tional trade using econometric techniques. For example, Aldy and Pizer (2015) use historical

electricity price data for the United States to investigate how production and net imports
    1 Changesin energy prices could also affect transport costs, which in turn has implications for international
trade ﬂows (Bridgman, 2008; Chen and Hsu, 2012). Analysis on this aspect is beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                       2
change in response to energy prices. At the global level, Sato and Dechezleprêtre (2015) use

energy price indices from 42 countries during 1996–2011 to study the impact of changes in

energy price differences between trading partners on trade ﬂows. Based on direct energy

costs alone, these studies ﬁnd a signiﬁcant yet small negative effect of higher energy costs

on export performance.

Using input-output information, another strand of literature on the trade-energy nexus em-

phasizes the importance of accounting for the indirect energy consumption of intermediate

inputs. For example, Bordigoni, Hita and Le Blanc (2012) ﬁnd that the energy content em-

bodied in imported intermediate inputs is close to the total direct energy consumption of

European industry. A signiﬁcant part of the embodied energy costs of manufactured prod-

ucts in Europe is therefore not affected by domestic energy price changes. Sato et al. (2015)

evaluate the impact of embodied energy on energy security. They ﬁnd that the geographic

diversity of embodied energy imports is much greater than that of direct energy imports,

and that there is considerable variation across countries in the diversiﬁcation of embodied

energy imports.

This paper builds on both strands of literature by combining an econometric model of inter-

national trade with multi-country input-output information to measure the effect of energy

costs aggregated over all stages of production on export performance. We ﬁrst develop a

theoretical framework based on a Melitz-type trade model in which each country produces

one variety in each sector and there are multiple countries and sectors with heterogeneous

productivity. We incorporate tradable intermediate goods in the model to inform our em-

pirical strategy. We then compute the embodied cost (direct plus indirect cost) of factor

inputs (electricity, natural gas and labor) using the OECD inter-country input-output ta-

bles for 10 sectors of production. The key parameters of interest are estimated by Poisson

pseudo maximum likelihood using panel data for 43 countries from 1991 to 2012. We control

for exporter-by-importer ﬁxed effects, exporter-year ﬁxed effects, importer-year ﬁxed effects

and sector-year ﬁxed effects to sweep out variations due to bilateral trade resistance (such as

distance, and differences in language and culture) and time-varying shocks at country and

sector levels (such as exchange rate ﬂuctuations and regulatory and technology changes).

The causal effect of energy costs on trade is identiﬁed by country-sector-year variation in-

cluding differences in electricity prices, sector-speciﬁc energy intensity, and inter-country


                                              3
inter-sectoral production linkages. We also conduct various sensitivity analyses, such as

considering alternative levels of sector disaggregation, accounting for the delayed response

of trade to changes in input costs, allowing for heterogeneous effects of energy costs based

on characteristics of the trading partners, and controlling for country-sector-year ﬁxed ef-

fects to avoid potential bias from possible omitted variables (such as adjustment in ﬁrms’

markup).

We ﬁnd a robust and asymmetric effect of the energy costs of exporting and importing

countries on trade. A one percent increase in the exporter’s (importer’s) aggregate electric-

ity costs is associated on average with an approximately 0.07 percent decrease (0.10 percent

increase) in exports for a sector of average electricity intensity. Aggregate natural gas costs

also have a signiﬁcant impact on trade, although of a smaller magnitude. Using the esti-

mated trade elasticities, we simulate the economic consequences of energy cross-subsidies

in Bulgaria and India and those of a carbon tax in the European Union. We ﬁnd that en-

ergy cross-subsidies imposing a 15 percent implicit electricity tax on industry in India could

reduce its net manufacturing exports by about $6.1 billion a year. Similarly, a carbon tax

unilaterally increasing energy prices by 10 percent in the European Union could reduce

EU-wide net manufacturing exports by 1.9 percent annually.

Our results suggest that input-output relationships are important for understanding the

energy-trade relationship. Some sectors use signiﬁcantly more indirect energy (at inter-

mediate stages) than direct energy. For these sectors, when intermediate goods are mostly

non-traded, a country’s own energy price change may have a substantial multiplier effect on

its exports through domestic sectoral linkages. A case in point is India’s machinery sector,

whose indirect energy intensity is almost ﬁve times its direct energy intensity. Because India

is largely self-sufﬁcient in intermediate inputs, a model that ignores inter-sectoral linkages

would underestimate the impact of higher energy costs on the net exports of the country’s

machinery sector by a factor of almost four. Conversely, if indirect energy is mostly im-

ported, changes in domestic energy prices would be relatively less important for a sector’s

exports. This is the case for Bulgaria. For an EU-wide carbon tax, we ﬁnd that a model

accounting only for direct energy consumption would underestimate the impact of higher

energy prices on EU-wide net manufacturing exports by a factor of two. This reﬂects the

intensive trading of intermediate goods within the European Union, which increases each


                                              4
sector’s exposure to higher energy prices through regional multiplier effects.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 outlines the theoretical framework.

Section 3 discusses the empirical approach and data. Section 4 presents empirical and

simulation results. Section 5 concludes.



2     Theoretical Framework

The objective of this section is to motivate an empirical model in which we can test the

effect of energy prices on trade. We build a Melitz-type model in which there are multi-

ple countries and sectors, and in which ﬁrms are heterogeneous in productivity. Most of

the discussions here follows Eaton and Kortum (2002); Anderson and van Wincoop (2003,

2004); Chaney (2008); Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2012); Costinot, Donaldson

and Komunjer (2012); Head and Mayer (2014); Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014); and

Caliendo and Parro (2015). We outline the basic model with multiple sectors (and factors)

and then move on to include tradable intermediate goods.



2.1   Many Sectors and Factors


We consider a partial equilibrium framework in which there are N countries and K sectors,

and we treat input prices as exogenous. In the following, subscript i ( j) refers to country

i ( j) and subscript k to sector k. Following Costinot, Donaldson and Komunjer (2012),

Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014), and others, the representative consumer has a two-

tier utility function in which the upper tier follows Cobb-Douglas and the lower tier follows

constant elasticity of substitution (CES) utility function. Formally, the utility function for

the representative consumer in country j is given by:

                                                   K
                                                  ∏ C j,k
                                                             βk
                                           Cj =                                            (1)
                                                  k =1


where:                                                                     σk
                                                             σk −1        σk −1
                              C j,k =          c j,k ( ω )    σk
                                                                     dω                    (2)
                                        ω ∈Ω




                                                  5
where β k is the income share of sector k, ω represents each variety, Ω is the entire variety

space, and σk is the elasticity of substitution for varieties within sector k. Each ﬁrm needs

to pay a ﬁxed cost for each variety, has increasing returns, and has no extra cost to diversify

horizontally. Therefore, ﬁrms in each country produce that country’s own variety; in other

words, each variety is sourced from one country only. We can therefore rewrite (2) as:

                                                                                                 σk
                                         N                                  σk −1               σk −1

                              C j,k =   ∑       ω ∈Ωij,k
                                                              c j,k ( ω )    σk
                                                                                    dω                  (3)
                                        i =1


where Ωij,k is the variety space in sector k that country j imports from country i; both Ω

and Ωij,k are endogenously determined, as described below. Assume that the representative

consumer in country j receives an income of Yj . The total value of exports (of good k with

variety ω ) from country i to country j is given by:


                                                  k −1                    1−σk
                                  xij,k (ω ) = Pjσ
                                                 ,k β k Yj ( pij,k ( ω ))                               (4)


where Pj,k is the price index for sector k in country j, deﬁned as:

                                                                               1
                                                        N                    1−σk

                                                       ∑
                                                               1−σk
                                         Pj,k =               Pij ,k                                    (5)
                                                       i =1


and:                                                                                       1
                                                                                         1−σk
                                                                     1−σk
                                  Pij,k =              pij,k (ω )             dω                        (6)
                                               Ωij,k


where pij,k (ω ) is the price charged by each ﬁrm ω .

Each ﬁrm pays a ﬁxed cost of exports (and production) f ij , and a variable cost of production

depends on the cost of M factors. In equilibrium, each ﬁrm chooses to export to only one

country because of increasing returns. The total cost for a ﬁrm in country i, producing

quantity q and shipping to country j, is given by:                   2



                                                                             M
                                                            q
                                                                            ∏ w m ,i
                                                                                     α m,k
                                 TCij,k (q) = f ij +          τ                                         (7)
                                                            ϕ ij,k          m =1


where m = 1, 2, ..., M denotes each primary factor; τ is iceberg transport cost between i and
  2 The  resulting cost function (7) is an equilibrium product of a producer with a Cobb-Douglas production
function.



                                                            6
j; ϕ is the productivity term drawn from a continuous distribution function Gk ( ϕ); αm,k is the

factor intensity in m, which is allowed to differ from sector to sector and meets the condition

∑m αm,k = 1; wm,i is the input price for factor m in country i; and the ﬁrm is assumed to be a
price taker in the factor markets. Assume that all factors are used in a perfectly competitive,

nontradable, homogenous-good sector in all countries and that the returns to factors, w,
                                 M                     α
are predetermined. Deﬁne Wi,k ≡ ∏m      m,k
                                   =1 wm,i as the marginal cost. Since the demand for

each variety in sector k is isoelastic (with price elasticity of σk ), monopolistically competitive

ﬁrms price a markup over marginal cost:

                                                        σk τij
                                          pij,k =              W                                          (8)
                                                      σk − 1 ϕ i,k

Following Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004), Chaney (2008), and Costinot and Rodríguez-

Clare (2014), we assume that ﬁrms’ productivity follows a Pareto distribution:


                                           Gk ( ϕ) = 1 − ϕ−γk                                             (9)


where γk is the shape parameter. Because of the presence of a ﬁxed cost of exporting, low-

productivity ﬁrms will choose not to produce and export (extensive margins). Applying the

demand and price functions described in equations (4) and (8) and setting proﬁts equal to

zero, we therefore have the cutoff productivity:

                                                                    1
                                  ∗                     f ij      σk −1       τij Wi,k
                                 ϕij ,k   = Aσk                           ·                              (10)
                                                       β k Yj                   Pj,k

where Aσk is a parameter that depends on σk only. The aggregate exports from country i to

country j in sector k are given by:

                                                   ∞
                                 Xij,k =                   xij,k (ω )dGk (ω )                            (11)
                                                   ∗
                                                  ϕij ,k



Plugging equations (4), (8), (9) and (10) into equation (11), we have:

                                                                               − γs
                                                     γs         τij Wi,s                        γs
                        Xij,s = Aσs ,γs β s Yj      σs −1
                                                                                      f ij (1− σs −1 )   (12)
                                                                  Pj,s




                                                            7
Taking a logarithmic transformation on both sides gives:3

                γk                                                                    γk
log Xij,k =          log β k + log Yj − γk log Wi,k + γk log Pj,k +            1−             log f ij − γk log τij
              σk − 1                                                                σk − 1
                                                                                                            (13)

The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of equation (13) takes into account the demand-side

factors while the fourth term takes into account the bilateral trade cost between countries

i and j. We hope to control for these two factors using with the ﬁrst factor controlled by

an importer-year ﬁxed effect and the last one by an exporter-importer ﬁxed effect. We will

explain more on this in Section 3. The second term, log Wi,k , takes into account the input

costs facing sector k in country i. Namely:

                                                     M
                                       log Wi,k =    ∑       αm,k log(wm,i )                                (14)
                                                    m =1


which is the main variable of interest in our empirical model.

The third term, log Pj,k , represents the multilateral resistance term ﬁrst deﬁned in Anderson

and van Wincoop (2003). The price index in an importing country, as illustrated in equation

(5), depends on the prices (and thus costs and trade barriers) of country j and all other

countries. In the empirical model, we use factor input costs of importing countries as a

proxy for log Pj,k . Note that even though the model suggests that the coefﬁcients of log Wi,k

and log Pj,k have the same size (and opposite signs), the effects of exporters’ and importers’

energy costs on trade are likely to differ, because we are using importers’ costs to approxi-

mate for the price index. Our empirical model described in Section 3 allows for asymmetric

effects of exporters’ and importers’ costs on trade.



2.2    Intermediate Goods


In the previous subsection, each sector uses a bundle of factors at different factor intensities.

However, there are no linkages among sectors. Each sector produces its good using M fac-

tors and each sector can be analyzed separately. In this subsection, we relax this restriction

and allow each sector to use all the factors as well as intermediate goods from other sectors.

Following the literature, we assume that there are a number of perfectly competitive ﬁrms
   3 log( A
          σs ,γs ) is a constant that captured by sector(-by-year) ﬁxed effect. It is omitted in equation (13) to
simplify the notation.


                                                         8
that produce a composite intermediate good Hk . The aggregation of this intermediate good

Hk originated from sector k is produced in exactly the same way as the ﬁnal consumption

good from sector k, that is:


                                                                                   σk
                                                                   σk −1          σk −1
                               Hi,k =               h i ,k ( ω )    σk
                                                                           dω                           (15)
                                            ω ∈Ωk


The composite intermediate good producer in country i that produces H by procuring in-

termediate goods (domestically and abroad) has the following demand for each variety of

goods:
                                                                     −σk
                                                    p i ,k ( ω )
                                  h i ,k ( ω ) =                            Hi,k                        (16)
                                                        Pi,k

Here the price index Pi,k represents both the price index for the composite intermediate

goods and the price index for ﬁnal (consumption) goods, as the same set of ﬁrms export

their varieties to the composite intermediate goods producer and to country i for ﬁnal goods.

Following the literature, we also assume that the producer of a variety produces the same

proportion of that variety for both ﬁnal goods and intermediate goods. The production of

a variety in sector k depends on all M factors and all intermediate goods from the other K

sectors. Therefore, in the presence of intermediate goods, the total production and export

cost, described in equation (7), is modiﬁed as follows:


                                                                           φ                     1− φ
                                                          M                        K
                                         q                     αM                         αS
                      TCij,k (q) = f ij + τij,k
                                         ϕ             ∏      wmm
                                                                ,i                ∏      Pi,ll          (17)
                                                      m =1                        l =1

                                                                           Wi,k


The assumption on intermediate goods aggregation leads to the same price elasticity of

demand for intermediate goods as that for ﬁnal goods. We therefore have the same format

of markup-over-marginal-cost relationship as described in equation (8); the only difference

is that marginal cost (Wi,k ) now also depends on the price of intermediate goods in the form

of a Cobb-Douglas cost function.

After incorporating intermediate goods, the estimation model will look almost exactly like

equation (13) except that we will now replace Wi,k , which represents the direct costs of

primary inputs, with Wi,k , which represents the aggregate (direct plus indirect) costs of the

factor inputs. The estimation equations for each of the K sectors derived from equation (13)

                                                      9
are now interlinked and are no longer independent. In other words, price indices { Pi,k }

depend on the input costs of other sectors. In the next section, we explain how to use an

input-output matrix to compute the aggregate cost of factor inputs which is a function of

factor input prices and factor intensities.



3     Empirical Strategy

In this section, we ﬁrst estimate the theoretical model developed in Section 2.1 in which

each sector uses its own factors of production but there are no linkages between sectors.

In this case, we consider the impact of only the the direct costs of factor inputs on trade.

We then extend this analysis by estimating the theoretical model developed in Section 2.2,

where each sector purchases intermediate goods produced by other sectors as described

by input-output linkages. This more realistic approach allows us to estimate the effect of

aggregate energy costs on export performance.



3.1     Baseline Model


Our baseline model measures the effects of direct electricity, natural gas and labor costs

on bilateral exports at the sector level.4 We estimate the model using the Poisson pseudo-

maximum likelihood (PPML) estimator proposed by Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006). This

is a weighted nonlinear least squares estimator, and although it is a count data estimator, it

can be used for continuous variables (such as exports) because it does not require the data

to strictly follow a Poisson distribution. We use this estimator because it delivers consistent

estimates of gravity equations under very general conditions and performs well even when

the dependent variable displays a relatively large proportion of zero observations. Using

the example of a gravity model, Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006) demonstrate that the

PPML estimator outperforms a log-linear speciﬁcation estimated by ordinary least squares

by providing estimates that are robust to different patterns of heteroskedasticity.

Our baseline empirical model is derived directly from the theoretical analysis. From equa-
    4 Ideally,
           we would also like to examine the effect of coal prices on international trade. However, coal prices
are determined mostly through privately-negotiated contracts and are largely not publicly available.




                                                      10
tion (13), the model to be estimated takes the following form:
                     
                     
 Exportsijkt = exp      ∑          α1s log( ElectricityCostskt ) + α2s log( NGCostskt )
                         {i, j }
                     s=

             +α3s log( LaborCostskt ) + α4 log(SectorOutputikt ) + δij + δit + δjt + δkt + ε ijkt

                                                                                                (18)


where Exportsijkt represents annual bilateral trade ﬂows between exporting country i and

importing country j in sector k in year t. ElectricityCost, NGCost, and LaborCost measure

the direct unit input costs of electricity, natural gas, and labor respectively. These cost terms

are calculated by interacting input prices with intensities, deﬁned as input expenditure per

unit of value added. Following our theoretical framework, we expect negative coefﬁcients

for the input costs of exporters (α1i , α2i , and α3i ), and positive coefﬁcients for the input costs

of importers (α1 j , α2 j , and α3 j ). Equation (18) also includes SectorOutput as a measure of the

gross economic output of sector k in exporting country i. It controls for the possibility that

the volume of exports is greater the bigger the scale of the sector. Thus we expect α4 to be

positive.

An advantage of our panel speciﬁcation is that it allows for the inclusion of various ﬁxed

effects that can help mitigate biases from omitted variables. In particular, δij represents

ﬁxed effects that control for time-invariant determinants of trade ﬂows between each coun-

try pair. These include distance, common border, and differences in religion, culture, and

language between trading partners. δit and δjt are exporter-year and importer-year ﬁxed

effects, respectively, which capture all time-varying country-speciﬁc factors that affect the

trade ﬂows of the exporting and importing countries. These include exchange rate regimes,

infrastructure investments, and regulatory changes that affect export performance. δkt rep-

resents sector-time effects that capture sector-speciﬁc shocks to bilateral trade. Finally, ε ijkt

denotes an error term.

Our estimation strategy relies on energy prices having an effect on trade that is conditional

on the energy intensities of the sector. Since energy prices are observed at the national level,

it is the interaction with the electricity intensity and natural gas intensity that generates

inter-sectoral variation and allows the coefﬁcients α1i , α1 j and α2i ,α2 j to be identiﬁed.


                                                     11
Our econometric model includes separate input cost terms for exporters and importers to

allow for potential asymmetric effects of the energy costs of the exporting and importing

countries on bilateral trade. The theoretical framework suggests that there may be asym-

metries in the magnitudes of the estimated cost impacts. The reason is that domestic costs

of production are expected to have a direct impact on the exports of country i, while input

costs in country j will indirectly affect exports from country i to country j by affecting the

prevailing product price in country i. In our econometric model, we test for statistically

signiﬁcant differences between (the absolute values of) α1i and α1 j for electricity costs and

between (the absolute values of) α2i and α2 j for natural gas costs.



3.2   Input-Output Extended Model


The econometric model developed in the previous subsection estimates the effect of direct

energy costs on trade. Higher factor prices may also have an indirect effect on trade ﬂows

by raising the cost of production of intermediate inputs, if these costs are then passed

on by input suppliers. Furthermore, if a sector’s intermediate inputs are imported, then

both domestic and foreign factor prices and the factor intensities of intermediate and direct

factor inputs would affect the domestic costs of production. Because we observe input-

output linkages across countries, we assume that each sector in each country produces a

speciﬁc intermediate good. Each sector uses outputs from other sectors (as well as its own

output) as intermediate inputs; that is, there are N × K intermediate goods. In this case the

Cobb-Douglas cost function for sector k in country i can be written as:


                                                    K   N
                                    Ci,k = Wi,kk ∏ ∏ Pj,s
                                               β        s, j,k     α
                                                                                          (19)
                                                   s =1 j =1

where W is the cost of direct factor inputs and Pj,s is the price of intermediate inputs pro-

duced by sector s in country j, and αs, j,k is sector k’s intensity of the intermediate good

produced by sector s in country j . Thus in total there are NK + 1 inputs to production.

Taking logarithms on both sides of equation (19) gives:



                           log Ci,k = β k log Wi,k + ∑ ∑ αs, j,k log Pj,s                 (20)
                                                         s     j




                                                   12
The price of intermediate goods from sector s in country j ( Pj,s ) is assumed to be the sum of

production costs and a markup, that is, Pj,s = (1 + η j,s )Cj,s , where η j,s is the markup:



                                 log Pj,s = log CjP
                                                  ,s + log(1 + η j,s )                         (21)


Substituting equation (21) for the price term in equation (20) gives:


                  log Ci,k = β k · log Wi,k + ∑ ∑ αs, j,k log Cj,s + log(1 + η j,s )           (22)
                                              s   j



Equation (22) can be rewritten in matrix form as the following:


                      CNK×1 = β NK×1 · WNK×1 + A NK× NK CNK×1 + Ψ NK×1                         (23)



where the elements within A include the α terms (i.e. input-output linkages among sectors)

and the elements within Ψ include the markup terms. The ﬁrst item on the right-hand side

of this equation calculates the dot product of β and W . Assuming that the mark-up Ψ is

stable over time and can be controlled for by a set of ﬁxed effects, we can rewrite equation

(23) as the following by dropping the markup term:


                                                       −1
                                      Ci = 1 − A            β·W                                (24)


Using the input-output relationship (matrix A), the factor intensities of all sectors (vector

β) and a vector of input prices W , we are able to compute the direct plus indirect cost

of factor inputs. In the input-output extended model, we replace the direct cost terms

(calculated as the interaction terms of factor intensities and input prices) with the direct

plus indirect costs described in equation (24). It is worth emphasizing that by using input-

output tables, we assume that intersectoral linkages are exogenous – a (small) change in

input prices would not shift the input-output relationship drastically. We do not account

for substitution possibilities among primary factors and intermediate inputs. In this way,

we should interpret the results from the input-output extended model as an estimation of

short-term effects.



                                                  13
3.3   Data


We estimate our empirical model using energy and bilateral trade data for 10 manufacturing

sectors in 43 countries from 1991 to 2012. The full set of countries included in our analysis

is listed in Table 1.

We use data on electricity and natural gas prices from the International Energy Agency (IEA)

Energy Prices and Taxes database, the Energy Regulators Regional Association (ERRA) Tar-

iff Database, and various government and media reports. The IEA database records after-tax

prices for residential and industrial consumers, while the ERRA database records after-tax

prices for residential and non-residential consumers. For a subset of nine countries covered

by both the IEA and the ERRA, we cross-check the price data from the two datasets and

ﬁnd that the data are fairly consistent. We use IEA data on industrial energy prices wher-

ever available. We use ERRA data on nonresidential energy prices for one country (Saudi

Arabia) that is not covered by the IEA. Table 2 lists the sources of energy price data for each

country.

Energy consumption data are from the IEA World Energy Statistics and Balances database.

This database reports ﬁnal electricity and natural gas consumption for 10 manufacturing

sectors at the two-digit level of the international Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation, Revision

3.1 (ISIC Rev. 3.1). One of the sectors is labelled “non-speciﬁed". According to IEA docu-

mentation, this sector includes rubber and rubber products as well as any manufacturing

activities not covered by the other nine sectors. Because there may be measurement errors

associated with the energy intensity of this miscellaneous category, we conduct a robustness

check by excluding the “non-speciﬁed” sector from the sample.5

We gather data on manufacturing value added, employment costs and number of employees

from the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) Industrial Statis-

tics Database (INDSTAT2). The sector-speciﬁc wages are calculated by dividing employment

costs by the total number of total employees. Factor intensities are measured as the value of

factor inputs divided by value added.6
   5 The IEA notes that for some countries, “non-speciﬁed” could be a sector average where a sector-wise

breakdown is not possible.
   6 About 1.5 percent of the observations have factor intensity values below zero or greater than one. We

dropped these observations as outliers.




                                                   14
The multicountry inter-sectoral input-output relationships are obtained from the OECD

Inter-Country Input-Output Database (ICIO). The ICIO tables are available for the years

1995, 2000, 2005, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011. As our sample spans the period from 1991 to

2012, we use the 1995 edition of ICIO table for samples in 1991-1995, the 2000 edition for

1996-2000, the 2005 edition for 2001 to 2005, and the 2011 edition for 2011 and 2012. While

both the IEA and the ICIO tables rely on ISIC Rev 3.1 to classify industries, ICIO sectors

are slightly more disaggregated than IEA sectors because some IEA sectors are aggregated

from multiple ISIC two-digit sectors. For the main analysis, we aggregate ICIO sectors to

match the IEA data. We also apply different levels of sector disaggregation for robustness

checks. Table 3 shows the correspondence between IEA and ICIO sectors.

Bilateral trade data are obtained from the United Nations COMTRADE Database. Trade

data are reported at the six-digit Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System

(HS) level. Using the concordance provided by Pierce and Schott (2012), we convert the

data from the HS level to the ISIC Rev. 3.1. We always use the trade values reported by the

exporters.

Manufacturing value added, employment costs, export value and IEA and ERRA energy

prices are reported in current prices denominated in US dollars. Energy prices from gov-

ernment reports are reported in current prices denominated in local currencies. We convert

local currencies into U.S. dollars using the exchange rates reported by the World Bank.

We convert values for different years into 2010 prices using country-speciﬁc GDP deﬂators

obtained from the International Monetary Fund.



3.4   Descriptive Statistics


Table 4 provides summary statistics for the key variables. Table 5 shows how intensively

each row sector uses inputs from each column sector. The numbers are the weighted aver-

age shares of factor inputs across all countries in the sample in 2010. While the production

of most sectors relies largely on inputs from subsectors within their own two-digit classiﬁ-

cation, there are strong interdependencies among the machinery, transport equipment and

metals sectors.7 For example, for the manufacture of transport equipment, 12 percent of
   7 In addition, because the “non-speciﬁed’" sector includes rubber and plastic products, a large share of its

inputs are from the chemicals sector.


                                                      15
inputs are from the metals sector, and 24 percent from the machinery sector.

Table 6 lists average direct factor intensity and aggregate factor intensity by sector. It shows

that for sectors that rely heavily on intermediate goods from energy-intensive sectors, there

is a substantial difference between direct and indirect energy intensities. For example, the

indirect energy intensity of the machinery and transport equipment sectors is two to three

times higher than their direct energy intensity. Ignoring indirect energy consumption would

therefore signiﬁcantly underestimate the true energy cost faced by these sectors.

There is also signiﬁcant variation in countries’ trade dependency on intermediate goods, as

shown in Figure 1. In Bulgaria, for example, about 50 percent of intermediate goods for

production are imported and close to 60 percent of the outputs produced as intermediate

goods are destined for the export market. In India, in contrast, less than 20 percent of

intermediate goods are imported or exported.



4     Empirical and Simulation results

4.1   Regression results


Table 7 reports the main estimation results. Columns (1) and (3) correspond to regressions

for the baseline model, which accounts for direct factor costs only. Columns (2) and (4)

correspond to regressions for the input-output extended model, which accounts for direct

and indirect energy costs based on equation (24). In addition, columns (1) and (2) show

results for the full sample estimation, while columns (3) and (4) show results for regressions

that exclude the “non-speciﬁed" sector. Because our cost variables involve interaction terms

of factor prices and intensities, the size of the impact of factor price changes on exports

depends on factor intensities. To ease interpretation of the coefﬁcients, each factor intensity

is scaled by its sample average so that the value is equal to 1 for a sector of average factor

intensity. This means that the coefﬁcients of factor costs in the baseline model can be inter-

preted as the estimated percentage change in bilateral exports for a 1 percent increase in the

factor price for a sector of average factor intensity. For consistency, factor intensities in the

input-output extended model are scaled by the same sample mean.

Table 7 shows that bilateral exports are negatively correlated with origin countries’ electric-

                                               16
ity costs and positively correlated with destination countries’ electricity costs. The coefﬁ-

cients are statistically signiﬁcant in all models. Evaluated at the average electricity intensity,

the baseline model suggests that a 1 percent increase in exporters’ electricity cost is asso-

ciated with a reduction in exports of 0.11 percent. In contrast, the input-output extended

model predicts a smaller export reduction of 0.07 percent. The estimated export elasticity

of importers’ electricity cost is 0.14 based on the baseline model, and 0.10 based on the

input-output extended models. Excluding the “non-speciﬁed" sector from the regression

produces similar results.

It is not surprising that the estimated trade elasticities are different between the baseline

and input-output extended models. In the input-output model, the electricity cost term

measures direct plus indirect electricity costs. Thus a 1 percent increase in this cost could

reﬂect an increase in domestic electricity costs or an increase in the electricity costs of up-

stream trading partners that supply intermediate inputs – or both. In the baseline model,

in contrast, a 1 percent increase in electricity costs is entirely an increase in the domestic

electricity price. The coefﬁcients of electricity costs in the two models may therefore differ

substantially for a sector if a large share of its electricity costs are embodied in intermedi-

ate inputs. Such differences become more salient when we conduct simulation analysis for

different countries and sectors.

The trade elasticities of natural gas costs are smaller than those of electricity costs. The

input-output extended model predicts that a 1 percent increase in aggregate natural gas

cost for origin countries would cause a 0.04 percent reduction in exports, while a 1 percent

increase for destination countries’ would cause a 0.04 percent increase in exports. These

coefﬁcients are statistically signiﬁcant. The coefﬁcients estimated by the baseline model are

of the expected sign but are not statistically signiﬁcant.

Coefﬁcients on the labor cost terms are all signiﬁcant and of the expected sign. The effect

of labor costs on trade is in general much greater than the effect of energy costs. The export

elasticity of origin countries’ labor costs is between -0.16 and -0.22 across various models,

while the elasticity of destination countries’ labor costs ranges between 0.15 and 0.22.

Table 7 also reveals evidence of asymmetric effects of exporter and importer factor costs,

especially for electricity. In particular, the importer factor costs are found to have a larger



                                               17
absolute effect on bilateral trade than the exporter factor costs across all models and the

difference (of their magnitudes) is statistically signiﬁcant. Finally, consistent with predic-

tions of the gravity model, estimates of all models show that sector output is signiﬁcantly

positively correlated with export and the elasticity is close to 1.



4.2   Robustness Check


In this subsection, we conduct sensitivity analysis using alternative model speciﬁcations.

First, we consider the possibility that sector output may be endogenous to export value,

especially for export-oriented sectors. As a robustness check, we move sector output to the

left-hand side of equation (18) and redeﬁne our dependent variable as export intensity, that

is, the ratio of exports to sector output. The results are reported in Table 8. The resulting

coefﬁcients are almost identical to those of the main model. This is expected, since the

estimated trade elasticity of sector output in the main model is close to 1.

Second, we consider the possibility that bilateral trade may not respond to price changes

immediately as a result of market imperfections or adjustment costs. There could also be

contemporaneous feedback from exports to energy prices if export-oriented sectors dom-

inate domestic industrial energy consumption. To account for delayed responses and the

potential endogeneity of energy prices, we control for one-year lagged explanatory variables

rather than contemporaneous variables. The resulting coefﬁcients, shown in Table 9 are very

similar in signiﬁcance and size.

Third, we consider alternative levels of sector disaggregation. In previous regressions, we

mapped export, ICIO, and value added data into the 10 manufacturing sectors used by the

IEA so as to match energy consumption data. To account for potential aggregation bias

in the factor content of trade (Feenstra and Hanson, 1999), we reestimate trade elasticities

according to the sector aggregation used by the ICIO tables (15 sectors) as well as a sector

aggregation based on the three-digit ISIC Rev. 3.1 (54 industries). Because energy consump-

tion data are not available at these more disaggregated levels, we assume that the energy

intensity of industries at the two-digit and three-digit levels of ISIC Rev 3.1 is the same if

they belong to the same IEA sector. Regression results based on the alternative disaggrega-

tion levels, reported in Tables 10 and 11, are fairly close to the main results, although with


                                               18
a lower goodness of ﬁt.

Fourth, we consider alternative treatment of ﬁrms’ markup. Our estimation strategy relies

on the assumption that markup is stable over time so that it is absorbed in the country pair

ﬁxed effects. If this assumption is violated, our estimation of the input-output model could

be biased because markup could be correlated with both energy cost and trade value. To

control for potential variation in markup over time, we estimate an alternative model with

two additional sets of ﬁxed effects: importer-sector-year ﬁxed effects and exporter-sector-

year ﬁxed effects. Now variations in the factor input costs of exporters and importers, as

well as in the sector outputs of exporters, would also be absorbed in these ﬁxed effects. To

identify the effects of energy costs on trade value, we control for a cost gap term (exporter

cost minus importer cost) rather than separate exporter and importer cost terms. The re-

gression results using cost gap terms, with and without this alternative set of ﬁxed effects,

are reported in Tables 12 and 13 respectively. The coefﬁcients of electricity, natural gas and

labor cost gap terms in the input-output extended model are all negative and statistically

signiﬁcant. In addition, their sizes are well within the range of the importer and exporter

trade elasticities from the main model. These results suggest that potential biases from the

omitted variable of ﬁrms’ markup may not be a concern.

Finally, we investigate potential heterogeneous effects of factor costs on trade according to

the characteristics of pairs of trading partners. In particular, we include in equation (18)

interaction terms between factor costs and the following variables: a dummy variable equal

to 1 if the trading partners are contiguous and 0 otherwise; a dummy variable equal to 1 if

the trading partners belong to the same trading bloc (such as European Union or NAFTA)

and 0 otherwise; a dummy variable equal to 1 if the trading partners are both in the euro

zone and 0 otherwise; a continuous variable measuring the absolute distance between the

trading partners; and a continuous variable measuring the relative distance between the

trading partners.8 To simplify notation, we report estimation results with controls for cost

gap terms rather than separate cost terms for exporters’ and importers’ factor inputs. The
   8 Relative   distance is a measure of GDP-weighted distance from the perspective of exporting country, that is,
                                                           Distij         Yj
                                            RelDistij =               ×
                                                          ∑k Distik       YW

where Yj is the importing country’s GDP, YW is the world’s GDP, Distij is the great circle distance (measured in
km) between two countries i and j.



                                                          19
results are reported in Table 14.

The results indicate that while including interaction terms for contiguous countries and

trading blocs does not change the estimation results from the input-output extended model,

it tends to increase the absolute value of trade elasticities of direct factor costs in the baseline

model. That is, when two countries share a common border or belong to the same trading

bloc, the effect of the energy or labor cost gap is increased. Another ﬁnding from Table 14

is that distance could exacerbate the effect of energy costs on trade. According to the input-

output extended model, a one-mile increase in the relative or absolute distance between

two trading partners is associated with a 0.01 percentage point increase in the effect of the

electricity cost gap. In other words, the greater the distance the more important is the effect

of electricity cost on trade.



4.3   Simulation Analysis


Next we analyze the economic consequences of two policies using the estimated trade elas-

ticities reported in Section 4.1.9 The ﬁrst policy concerns the use of energy cross-subsidies

and its impact on industrial competitiveness. Energy cross-subsidies place an implicit tax

on industry. In India, for example, the electricity price for industry is on average 15 percent

higher than the cost of supply, to support lower tariffs for residential and agriculture con-

sumers. In this counterfactual, we ask how manufacturing exports in Bulgaria and India

would change with the removal of a 15 percent implicit tax on electricity. Bulgaria and

India are selected for the analysis because they represent two different patterns of trade in

intermediate goods, as discussed in Section 3.4: India has a strikingly low level of imports

and exports of intermediate goods, while Bulgaria is much more engaged in global value

chains (see Figure 1). The simulation analysis shows that a country’s level of participation

in global value chains signiﬁcantly affects the correlation between domestic energy price

shocks and exports.

The second counterfactual considers the implications of carbon pricing for international

trade. The EU Emissions Trading System created the world’s ﬁrst and largest carbon market.

A number of countries outside Europe, such as China and the United States, have adopted
   9 Counterfactuals based on alternative estimates of trade elasticities reported in Section 4.2 are similar and

do not change our main ﬁndings.


                                                       20
similar programs. Carbon trading schemes put a price on carbon emissions and would

increase the cost of fossil-fuel based energy in countries where they are in force. There

is concern that a unilateral adoption of carbon regulation could lead to carbon leakage.

Indeed, the European Commission considers that energy- and trade-intensive sectors face

a higher risk of carbon leakage. To protect their competitiveness, these sectors are granted

a higher share of free emissions allowances. To gauge the potential magnitude of carbon

leakage, we simulate the impact of a 10 percent unilateral price increase for electricity in the

European Union on EU manufacturing exports.

Table 15 describes the impact of removing energy cross-subsidies on export and net export

values. According to the input-output extended model, removing a 15 percent implicit elec-

tricity tax on industry would increase India’s net manufacturing exports by 9.5 percent, or

around $6.1 billion a year. Since India is quite self-sufﬁcient in the production of interme-

diate inputs, multiplier effects of energy price shocks are accumulated along the supply

chain. The baseline model, which considers energy requirements only at the ﬁnal stage of

production, therefore underestimates the impact of energy price shocks by a factor of almost

two. The pattern becomes more conspicuous for the machinery and transport equipment

sectors, for which indirect energy consumption accounts for a large share of total energy

consumption. For the machinery sector, ignoring indirect energy consumption would result

in an underestimation of the impact of energy price shocks by a factor of four.

The story is different for Bulgaria. Because Bulgaria has extensive exchanges of intermedi-

ate inputs with other countries, the competitive advantage for its exporters from a decline in

energy prices is partially offset by the decline in the input costs of its trading partners. The

estimation from the input-output extended model indicates an increase in net manufactur-

ing exports of 5.7 percent, while the estimation from the baseline model shows an increase

of 7.0 percent. At the sectoral level, the difference between the baseline and input-output

estimations for the machinery sector is somewhat smaller than that for India. The reason is

that Bulgaria’s greater reliance on inputs from outside the country means smaller multiplier

effects within the domestic supply chain.

Table 16 describes the effects of a 10 percent across-the-board increase in electricity prices

in the European Union on the exports of EU and non-EU countries. Exports decline for all

sectors in the European Union. And for each sector, the input-output model predicts a larger

                                              21
decline than the baseline model does. The impact on net exports ranges from 0.9 percent for

the transport equipment sector (with the lowest aggregate energy intensity) to 4.4 percent for

the basic metals sector (with the highest). For the European Union as a whole, the input-

output model predicts an overall impact of a 1.9 percent reduction in net manufacturing

exports annually. This is almost three times the size of the reduction predicted by the

baseline model. The difference reﬂects multiplier effects within the European Union where

there is intensive trade in intermediate goods between EU ﬁrms.



5   Conclusion

This paper seeks to contribute to the literature on energy prices and international trade by

taking into account the effect of embodied energy costs (costs of direct plus indirect energy

consumption) on exports. We start with the premise that energy price shocks affect not only

the cost of direct energy consumption (at the ﬁnal stage of production) but also the cost of

indirect energy consumption embodied in intermediate inputs. In addition, with the rapid

expansion of global value chains, domestic energy prices may not tell the full story if a

ﬁrm relies heavily on imported intermediate goods that are energy intensive. We develop a

theoretical framework that incorporates tradable intermediate inputs in a Meliz-type trade

model and apply the theoretical model to energy, trade, and multi-country input-output

data for 10 manufacturing sectors in 43 countries from 1991 to 2012.

We identify a robust effect of energy costs on export performance. We use the estimated

trade elasticities to simulate two counterfactuals: the removal of energy-cross subsidies in

Bulgaria and India, and a unilateral 10 percent increase in electricity prices in the European

Union. We ﬁnd that removing cross-subsidies which impose a 15 percent implicit electricity

tax on industry in India could increase its net manufacturing exports by as much as 9.5

percent, or $6.1 billion a year. A carbon tax that unilaterally increases electricity prices by

10 percent in the European Union could cause an EU-wide reduction in net manufacturing

exports of 1.9 percent annually.

The simulation analysis also yields a nuanced understanding of the causal link between

energy price shocks and exports. First, even if a sector is not energy intensive on the

basis of direct energy consumption, it may still be vulnerable to energy price shocks if

                                              22
it uses energy-intensive intermediate inputs. Second, if a country is not actively engaged

in global value chains, domestic price shocks could have a multiplier effect on its overall

competitiveness. However, it is worth noting that in cases where the input-output model

predicts a larger effect for energy costs, the effect is still small in magnitude compared to

that of labor costs. The predicted trade elasticity of labor costs is several times higher than

that of energy costs in all cases.

Our results should be interpreted as an upper-bound estimation because we do not ac-

count for substitution possibilities among primary factors and intermediate inputs, as well

as the substitution of intermediates imports among countries. Analysis of long-run dy-

namic impacts such as those based on a computable general equilibrium model could yield

new insights into the effect of energy price changes on industrial competitiveness in the

international market.




                                              23
References

Aldy, Joseph E., and William A. Pizer. 2015. “The Competitiveness Impacts of Cli-

  mate Change Mitigation Policies.” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource

  Economists, 2(4): 565–595.

Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the

  Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 170–192.

Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. “Trade Costs.” Journal of Economic Literature,

  42(3): 691–751.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2012. “New Trade

  Models, Same Old Gains?” American Economic Review, 102(1): 94–130.

Bordigoni, Mathieu, Alain Hita, and Gilles Le Blanc. 2012. “Role of Embodied Energy in

  the European Manufacturing Industry: Application to Short-Term Impacts of a Carbon

  Tax.” Energy Policy, 43: 335–350.

Bridgman, Benjamin. 2008. “Energy Prices and the Expansion of World Trade.” Review of

  Economic Dynamics, 11(4): 906–916.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects

  of NAFTA.” Review of Economic Studies, 82(1): 1–44.

Chaney, Thomas. 2008. “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of Inter-

  national Trade.” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1707–21.

Chen, Shiu-Sheng, and Kai-Wei Hsu. 2012. “Reverse globalization: Does high oil price

  volatility discourage international trade?” Energy Economics, 34(5): 1634–1643.

Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2014. “Trade Theory with Numbers:

  Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization.” Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Eco-

  nomics, Chapter 4. Elsevier.

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer. 2012. “What Goods Do Coun-

  tries Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas.” Review of Economic Studies,

  79(2): 581–608.


                                             24
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econo-

  metrica, 70(5): 1741–1779.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-

  Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990.” The Quarterly

  Journal of Economics, 114(3): 907–940.

Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2014. “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cook-

  book.” Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Chapter 3. Elsevier.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen Ross Yeaple. 2004. “Export Versus FDI

  with Heterogeneous Firms.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 300–316.

Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott. 2012. “Concording U.S. Harmonized System Codes

  over Time.” Journal of Ofﬁcial Statistics, 28(1): 53–68.

Santos Silva, Joäo, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity.” The Review of Eco-

  nomics and Statistics, 88(4): 641–658.

Sato, Masahiro, Ali Kharrazi, Hirofumi Nakayama, Steven Kraines, and Masaru Yarime.

  2015. “The Resilience of Embodied Energy Networks: A Critical Dimension for Sustain-

  able Development Goals (SDGs).” Global Environmental Research, 19(2): 187–198.

Sato, Misato, and Antoine Dechezleprêtre. 2015. “Asymmetric Industrial Energy Prices

  and International Trade.” Energy Economics, 52(S1): S130–S141.




                                                25
Figure 1: Share of Imported Intermediate Goods Imported or Exported, 2010




                                   26
OECD                        Non-OECD

Australia                   Brazil
Austria                     Bulgaria
Belgium-Luxembourg          Colombia
Canada                      Croatia
Czech Republic              India
Denmark                     Indonesia
Estonia                     Lithuania
Finland                     Malaysia
France                      Philippines
Germany                     Russian Federation
Greece                      Saudi Arabia
Hungary                     South Africa
Ireland                     Thailand
Italy                       Vietnam
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States



        Table 1: Countries in the Dataset




                       27
Country               Data sources

OECD countries        IEA
Non-OECD countries:
Brazil                IEA
Bulgaria              IEA
Colombia              IEA
Croatia               IEA
India                 Various sources, including Ministry of Petroleum
                      and Natual Gas and Planning Commission
Indonesia             Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources
Lithuania             IEA
Malaysia              Tenaga Nasional (TNB), Petronas
Philippines           Meralco, FirstGen
Russian Federation    IEA
Saudi Arabia          ERRA
South Africa          IEA
Thailand              Energy Policy and Planning Ofﬁce (Ministry of En-
                      ergy)
Vietnam               Various sources including media reports

                 Table 2: Sources of Energy Prices Data




                                     28
Sectors in IEA                            Sectors in ICIO                                     ISIC Rev 3.1

Non-ferrous metals                        Basic metals                                        27
(plus iron and steel)
Chemicals and petrochemicals              Chemicals and chemical products                     24
Non-metallic minerals                     Other non-metallic mineral products                 26
Transport equipment                       Motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers         34
                                          Other transport equipment                           35
Machinery                                 Fabricated metal products                           28
                                          Machinery and equipment, nec                        29
                                          Computer, electronic and optical equipment          30,32,33
                                          Electrical machinery and apparatus, nec             31
Food and tobacco                          Food products, beverages and tobacco                15,16
Paper, pulp and print                     Pulp, paper, paper products, printing and           21,22
                                          publishing
Wood and wood products                    Wood and products of wood and cork                  20
Textiles and leather                      Textiles, textile products,          leather and    17,18,19
                                          footwear
Non-Speciﬁed                              Rubber and plastics products                        25
                                          Manufacturing nec; recycling                        36,37



                                Table 3: List of Sectors in Our Dataset



                                               Obs.         Mean      Std. Dev.   Min      Max

        Value of exportsa                      104711       0.52      2.68        0        120.99
        Electricity prices, per MWh            104711       108.22    54.28       25.78    550.80
        Electicity consumptionb                104711       10.42     23.53       0        263.12
        Natural gas prices, per MWh            104711       29.33     14.85       4.07     79.20
        Natural gas    consumptionb            104711       10.92     39.51       0        881.10
        Average annual wage                    104711       27142     27273       697      1011431
        Number of employees                    104711       295991    532874      300      5995462
        Value addeda                           104711       21.63     59.66       0.0093   849.31
        Sector   outputa                       104711       60.14     133.38      0.047    1577.3
        Note: All prices or values are in constant 2010 US dollars.

                                       Table 4: Summary statistics
 a   In billions of US dollars.
 b   In millions of megawatt-hours.



                                                       29
                    Food     Textiles   Wood      Paper    Chemicals      Minerals     Metals    Machinery       Transport     Others

     Food            69.5      0.5        0.6      7.7          4.2          2.1         0.8          6.4            0.8         7.4
     Textiles        4.1       72.0       0.3      1.9         13.2          0.4         0.3          2.9            0.5         4.5
     Wood            0.9       3.2       68.3      2.9          9.1          1.9         2.2          6.3            0.9         4.2
     Paper           1.2       2.2        4.1      64.3        11.6          0.4         0.9          7.2            1.1         7.0
     Chemicals       4.6       0.9        0.4      3.8         74.4          1.7         1.6          5.7            0.7         6.3
     Minerals        1.2       1.4        2.5      5.3         13.8          49.3        5.7         12.3            1.6         7.0




30
     Metals          0.5       0.6        2.7      1.0          3.6          2.0        67.4         17.0            1.4         3.8
     Machinery       0.4       0.5        0.5      1.4          4.1          2.0        24.6         57.3            2.1         7.0
     Transport       0.2       1.0        0.5      0.7          2.3          1.1        12.2         24.1           49.6         8.2
     Others          0.9       5.0        3.8      2.9         34.5          1.3         5.9         10.8            1.8        33.0
     Note: The table shows, for each row sector, the percentage of inputs that comes from each column sector. All ﬁgures are based on
     weighted average transactions in the 2010 OECD ICIO tables.

                                                 Table 5: Input-Output Relationships
                     Electricity             Natural gas                    Labor
Sector         Direct     Aggregate      Direct    Aggregate       Direct    Aggregate

Food            0.040        0.054        0.016        0.019       0.354        0.371
Textile         0.043        0.056        0.011        0.016       0.509        0.468
Wood            0.065        0.073        0.007        0.013       0.448        0.432
Paper           0.101        0.094        0.022        0.022       0.405        0.403
Chemicals       0.112        0.103        0.040        0.036       0.309        0.337
Minerals        0.089        0.093        0.052        0.039       0.382        0.390
Metal           0.263        0.194        0.053        0.040       0.392        0.402
Machinery       0.021        0.093        0.004        0.020       0.440        0.422
Transport       0.022        0.062        0.005        0.014       0.438        0.430
Others          0.106        0.101        0.029        0.029       0.449        0.396
Note: “Aggregate" columns show the factor intensities after taking into account both
direct and indirect costs.

                   Table 6: Mean Factor Intensities by Sector




                                           31
                                          (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
Variable                               Baseline          IO        Baseline         IO

Exporter electricity cost             -0.1073∗∗∗      -0.0745∗∗∗   -0.1250∗∗∗   -0.0759∗∗∗
                                       (0.0241)        (0.0185)     (0.0271)     (0.0199)

Importer electricity cost             0.1358∗∗∗       0.0970∗∗∗    0.1613∗∗∗    0.1010∗∗∗
                                       (0.0259)        (0.0156)     (0.0286)     (0.0175)

Exporter gas cost                       -0.0241       -0.0439∗∗∗   -0.0633∗     -0.0441∗∗∗
                                       (0.0225)        (0.0123)     (0.0355)     (0.0129)

Importer gas cost                       0.0116        0.0430∗∗∗     0.0573∗     0.0428∗∗∗
                                       (0.0188)        (0.0068)     (0.0308)     (0.0069)

Exporter labor cost                   -0.1621∗∗∗      -0.2080∗∗∗   -0.1697∗∗∗   -0.2219∗∗∗
                                       (0.0438)        (0.0416)     (0.0454)     (0.0451)

Importer labor cost                   0.1495∗∗∗       0.2168∗∗∗    0.1565∗∗∗    0.2211∗∗∗
                                       (0.0408)        (0.0313)     (0.0421)     (0.0346)

Sector output                         1.0168∗∗∗       1.0286∗∗∗    1.0189∗∗∗    1.0308∗∗∗
                                       (0.1118)        (0.1054)     (0.1130)     (0.1077)

Importer-exporter pair FE                 Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
Exporter-year FE                          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
Importer-year FE                          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
Sector-year FE                            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes

Observations                            104711         104711        94777        94777
R2                                      0.8514         0.8467       0.8531        0.8461
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the importer-exporter pair
level. The dependent variable is the real value of exports. All models are estimated in
Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) and include the set of importer-exporter
pair ﬁxed effects, importer-year ﬁxed effects, exporter-year ﬁxed effects, and sector-year
ﬁxed effects. Columns (2) and (4) apply the input-output (IO) extended model to compute
the embodied costs of all three inputs (electricity, natural gas, and labor). Columns (3)
and (4) exclude the “non-speciﬁed" sector.
     ∗   Signiﬁcance at the 10 percent level.
     ∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 5 percent level.
     ∗∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 1 percent level.

                            Table 7: Main Regression Results




                                                 32
                                            (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
Variable                                 Baseline          IO        Baseline        IO

Exporter electricity cost               -0.0820∗∗∗      -0.0810∗∗∗   -0.0983∗∗∗   -0.0879∗∗∗
                                         (0.0215)        (0.0215)     (0.0275)     (0.0228)

Importer electricity cost               0.0890∗∗∗       0.0669∗∗     0.1052∗∗∗    0.0698∗∗
                                         (0.0223)        (0.0311)     (0.0278)     (0.0315)

Exporter gas cost                         -0.0017       -0.0321∗∗∗    -0.0116     -0.0334∗∗∗
                                         (0.0138)        (0.0119)     (0.0213)     (0.0122)

Importer gas cost                         -0.0011       0.0346∗∗∗     0.0097      0.0354∗∗∗
                                         (0.0126)        (0.0126)     (0.0200)     (0.0124)

Exporter labor cost                     -0.2988∗∗∗      -0.1967∗∗∗   -0.3111∗∗∗   -0.2131∗∗∗
                                         (0.0506)        (0.0464)     (0.0518)     (0.0482)

Importer labor cost                     0.2844∗∗∗       0.1566∗∗     0.2943∗∗∗    0.1598∗∗
                                         (0.0451)        (0.0661)     (0.0467)     (0.0676)

Importer-exporter pair FE                   Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Exporter-year FE                            Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Importer-year FE                            Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Sector-year FE                              Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes

Observations                              104711         104711        94777        94777
R2                                        0.6404         0.6279       0.6356       0.6210
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the importer-exporter pair
level. The dependent variable is the ratio of the value of exports to the value of sec-
tor output. All models are estimated in Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML)
and include the set of importer-exporter pair ﬁxed effects, importer-year ﬁxed effects,
exporter-year ﬁxed effects, and sector-year ﬁxed effects. Columns (2) and (4) apply the
input-output (IO) extended model to compute the embodied costs of all three inputs
(electricity, natural gas, and labor). Columns (3) and (4) exclude the “non-speciﬁed" sec-
tor.
       ∗   Signiﬁcance at the 10 percent level.
       ∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 5 percent level.
       ∗∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 1 percent level.

  Table 8: Results with Exports/Sector Output as the Dependent Variable




                                                   33
                                          (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
Variable                               Baseline          IO        Baseline        IO

Exporter electricity cost             -0.1291∗∗∗      -0.0813∗∗∗   -0.1514∗∗∗   -0.0835∗∗∗
                                       (0.0264)        (0.0208)     (0.0304)     (0.0225)

Importer electricity cost             0.1567∗∗∗       0.0887∗∗∗    0.1861∗∗∗    0.0925∗∗∗
                                       (0.0277)        (0.0153)     (0.0314)     (0.0169)

Exporter gas cost                       -0.0423       -0.0460∗∗∗   -0.0752∗     -0.0459∗∗∗
                                       (0.0297)        (0.0136)     (0.0392)     (0.0143)

Importer gas cost                       0.0271        0.0411∗∗∗     0.0670∗     0.0407∗∗∗
                                       (0.0252)        (0.0080)     (0.0344)     (0.0081)

Exporter labor cost                   -0.1411∗∗∗      -0.2081∗∗∗   -0.1471∗∗∗   -0.2203∗∗∗
                                       (0.0418)        (0.0466)     (0.0430)     (0.0504)

Importer labor cost                   0.1391∗∗∗       0.2042∗∗∗    0.1446∗∗∗    0.2078∗∗∗
                                       (0.0413)        (0.0337)     (0.0424)     (0.0364)

Sector output                         1.0224∗∗∗       1.0271∗∗∗    1.0244∗∗∗    1.0290∗∗∗
                                       (0.0979)        (0.0932)     (0.0983)     (0.0952)

Importer-exporter pair FE                 Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Exporter-year FE                          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Importer-year FE                          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Sector-year FE                            Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes

Observations                            104711         104711        94777        94777
R2                                      0.8682         0.8636       0.8696       0.8632
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the importer-exporter pair
level. The dependent variable is the real value of exports. All control variables are
one-year lags. All models are estimated in Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML)
and include the set of importer-exporter pair ﬁxed effects, importer-year ﬁxed effects,
exporter-year ﬁxed effects, and sector-year ﬁxed effects. Columns (2) and (4) apply the
input-output (IO) extended model to compute the embodied costs of all three inputs
(electricity, natural gas, and labor). Columns (3) and (4) exclude the “non-speciﬁed"
sector.
     ∗   Signiﬁcance at the 10 percent level.
     ∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 5 percent level.
     ∗∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 1 percent level.

                         Table 9: Results with Lagged Controls




                                                 34
                                          (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)
Variable                               Baseline          IO       Baseline         IO

Exporter electricity cost             -0.0883∗∗∗      -0.0328∗    -0.0965∗∗∗    -0.0250
                                       (0.0204)       (0.0196)     (0.0221)    (0.0190)

Importer electricity cost             0.1108∗∗∗       0.1198∗∗∗   0.1240∗∗∗    0.1166∗∗∗
                                       (0.0216)       (0.0153)     (0.0232)    (0.0146)

Exporter gas cost                       -0.0234       -0.0221∗∗   -0.0528∗∗     -0.0181
                                       (0.0167)       (0.0111)     (0.0235)    (0.0113)

Importer gas cost                       0.0141        0.0514∗∗∗   0.0480∗∗     0.0488∗∗∗
                                       (0.0143)       (0.0063)     (0.0208)    (0.0065)

Exporter labor cost                   -0.1945∗∗∗       -0.0409    -0.1885∗∗∗    -0.0210
                                       (0.0394)       (0.0592)     (0.0396)    (0.0621)

Importer labor cost                   0.1567∗∗∗       0.4205∗∗∗   0.1487∗∗∗    0.4362∗∗∗
                                       (0.0410)       (0.0432)     (0.0405)    (0.0445)

Sector output                         0.8774∗∗∗       0.8872∗∗∗   0.8790∗∗∗    0.8909∗∗∗
                                       (0.0897)       (0.0788)     (0.0910)    (0.0808)

Importer-exporter pair FE                 Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Exporter-year FE                          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Importer-year FE                          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Sector-year FE                            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes

Observations                            153740         153740      134589       134589
R2                                      0.7497         0.7512      0.7502       0.7506
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the importer-exporter pair
level. The dependent variable is the real value of exports. All models are estimated in
Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) and include the set of importer-exporter
pair ﬁxed effects, importer-year ﬁxed effects, exporter-year ﬁxed effects, and sector-year
ﬁxed effects. Columns (2) and (4) apply the input-output (IO) extended model to compute
the embodied costs of all three inputs (electricity, natural gas, and labor). Columns (3)
and (4) exclude the “non-speciﬁed" sector.
     ∗   Signiﬁcance at the 10 percent level.
     ∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 5 percent level.
     ∗∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 1 percent level.

     Table 10: Results Using Data Aggregated to the ICIO Classiﬁcation




                                                 35
                                           (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
 Variable                               Baseline          IO        Baseline         IO

 Exporter electricity cost             -0.0722∗∗∗      -0.0464∗∗∗   -0.0811∗∗∗   -0.0397∗∗∗
                                        (0.0163)        (0.0139)     (0.0179)     (0.0138)

 Importer electricity cost             0.0905∗∗∗       0.0974∗∗∗    0.1040∗∗∗    0.0970∗∗∗
                                        (0.0171)        (0.0110)     (0.0187)     (0.0110)

 Exporter gas cost                       -0.0168       -0.0256∗∗∗   -0.0411∗∗    -0.0220∗∗∗
                                        (0.0131)        (0.0075)     (0.0183)     (0.0077)

 Importer gas cost                       0.0102        0.0395∗∗∗    0.0387∗∗     0.0383∗∗∗
                                        (0.0112)        (0.0054)     (0.0160)     (0.0054)

 Exporter labor cost                   -0.2457∗∗∗      -0.1518∗∗∗   -0.2418∗∗∗   -0.1395∗∗
                                        (0.0470)        (0.0548)     (0.0480)     (0.0597)

 Importer labor cost                   0.1860∗∗∗       0.3863∗∗∗    0.1790∗∗∗    0.4082∗∗∗
                                        (0.0458)        (0.0382)     (0.0464)     (0.0404)

 Sector output                         0.8366∗∗∗       0.8691∗∗∗    0.8390∗∗∗    0.8737∗∗∗
                                        (0.0653)        (0.0638)     (0.0661)     (0.0648)

 Importer-exporter pair FE                 Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
 Exporter-year FE                          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
 Importer-year FE                          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
 Sector-year FE                            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes

 Observations                            513526         513526       475224       475224
 R2                                      0.4448         0.4417       0.4420        0.4379
 Note: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the importer-exporter pair
 level. The dependent variable is the real value of exports. All models are estimated in
 Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) and include the set of importer-exporter
 pair ﬁxed effects, importer-year ﬁxed effects, exporter-year ﬁxed effects, and sector-year
 ﬁxed effects. Columns (2) and (4) apply the input-output (IO) extended model to compute
 the embodied costs of all three inputs (electricity, natural gas, and labor). Columns (3)
 and (4) exclude the “non-speciﬁed" sector. The aggregation is based on ISIC Rev. 3.1.
      ∗   Signiﬁcance at the 10 percent level.
      ∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 5 percent level.
      ∗∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 1 percent level.

Table 11: Results Using Data Aggregated to the ISIC Three-Digit Classiﬁcation




                                                  36
                                          (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)
Variable                               Baseline          IO        Baseline          IO

Electricity cost gap                  -0.0945∗∗∗      -0.0859∗∗∗   -0.1116∗∗∗   -0.0889∗∗∗
                                       (0.0273)        (0.0131)     (0.0349)      (0.0147)

Natural gas cost gap                   -0.0360∗       -0.0438∗∗∗   -0.0789∗∗    -0.0438∗∗∗
                                       (0.0210)        (0.0072)     (0.0336)      (0.0076)

Labor cost gap                        -0.1517∗∗∗      -0.2146∗∗∗   -0.1521∗∗∗   -0.2244∗∗∗
                                       (0.0411)        (0.0287)     (0.0418)      (0.0315)

Sector output                         1.0259∗∗∗       1.0273∗∗∗    1.0265∗∗∗     1.0296∗∗∗
                                       (0.1059)        (0.1059)     (0.1062)      (0.1080)

Importer-exporter pair FE                 Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
Exporter-year FE                          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
Importer-year FE                          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
Sector-year FE                            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes

Observations                            104711         104711        94777         94777
R2                                      0.8497         0.8468       0.8505         0.8465
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the importer-exporter pair
level. The dependent variable is the real value of exports. All models are estimated in
Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) and include the set of importer-exporter
pair ﬁxed effects, importer-year ﬁxed effects, exporter-year ﬁxed effects, and sector-year
ﬁxed effects. ‘Cost gap’ is the exporter cost (in log) minus the importer cost (in log).
Columns (2) and (4) apply the input-output (IO) extended model to compute the em-
bodied costs of all three inputs (electricity, natural gas, and labor). Columns (3) and (4)
exclude the “non-speciﬁed" sector.
     ∗   Signiﬁcance at the 10 percent level.
     ∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 5 percent level.
     ∗∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 1 percent level.

                            Table 12: Results with Cost Gaps




                                                 37
                                         (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)
Variable                              Baseline           IO        Baseline        IO

Electricity cost gap                   -0.0115        -0.0939∗∗∗   -0.0301     -0.0685∗∗∗
                                      (0.0230)         (0.0198)    (0.0278)     (0.0211)

Natural gas cost gap                  -0.0292*        -0.0435∗     -0.0789∗∗   -0.0266∗∗∗
                                      (0.0152)         (0.0173)    (0.0089)     (0.0100)

Labor cost gap                         0.0030         -0.2755∗∗∗    0.0181      -0.0876∗
                                      (0.0593)         (0.0545)    (0.0589)     (0.0460)

Importer-exporter pair FE                Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes
Exporter-sector-year FE                  Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes
Importer-sector-year FE                  Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes

Observations                           104711          104711       94777        94777
R2                                     0.9798          0.9798       0.9801       0.9800
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the importer-exporter pair
level. The dependent variable is the real value of exports. All models are estimated in
Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) and include the set of importer-exporter
pair ﬁxed effects, exporter-sector-year ﬁxed effects, and importer-sector-year ﬁxed effects.
‘Cost gap’ is the exporter cost (in log) minus the importer cost (in log). Columns (2)
and (4) apply the input-output (IO) extended model to compute the embodied costs of
all three inputs (electricity, natural gas, and labor). Columns (3) and (4) exclude the
“non-speciﬁed" sector.
     ∗   Signiﬁcance at the 10 percent level.
     ∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 5 percent level.
     ∗∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 1 percent level.

               Table 13: Results with a Different Set of Fixed Effects




                                                 38
                                                     (1)         (2)              (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
     Variable                                 Baseline           IO          Baseline        IO        Baseline         IO         Baseline          IO         Baseline           IO

     Elec cost gap                           -0.0877∗∗∗     -0.0801∗∗∗      -0.1025∗∗∗    -0.0823∗∗∗   -0.1066∗∗∗   -0.0864∗∗∗    -0.1073∗∗∗     -0.0853∗∗∗     -0.1026∗∗∗    -0.0884∗∗∗
                                               (0.0237)      (0.0130)        (0.0308)      (0.0121)     (0.0312)     (0.0141)      (0.0388)       (0.0134)       (0.0310)      (0.0131)

     NG cost gap                              -0.0405∗∗     -0.0421∗∗∗       -0.0147      -0.0446∗∗∗    -0.0314     -0.0438∗∗∗      -0.0237      -0.0459∗∗∗      -0.0332      -0.0459∗∗∗
                                               (0.0192)      (0.0070)        (0.0142)      (0.0071)     (0.0203)     (0.0085)      (0.0181)       (0.0089)       (0.0203)      (0.0084)

     Labor cost gap                          -0.1502∗∗∗     -0.2042∗∗∗      -0.1381∗∗∗    -0.2084∗∗∗   -0.1490∗∗∗   -0.2135∗∗∗     -0.1138∗∗     -0.2086∗∗∗     -0.1734∗∗∗    -0.2145∗∗∗
                                               (0.0416)      (0.0294)        (0.0410)      (0.0290)     (0.0438)     (0.0304)      (0.0467)       (0.0311)       (0.0477)      (0.0304)

     Sector output                            1.0413∗∗∗     1.0417∗∗∗       1.0286∗∗∗     1.0279∗∗∗    1.0260∗∗∗    1.0280∗∗∗      1.0288∗∗∗     1.0267∗∗∗      1.0233∗∗∗      1.0249∗∗∗
                                               (0.1100)      (0.1098)        (0.1025)      (0.1048)     (0.1066)     (0.1065)      (0.1046)       (0.1055)       (0.1053)      (0.1057)

     Elec cost gap × interaction               -0.0092       -0.0083∗∗           0.0530    -0.0176      0.0569        0.0009        0.0346         0.0001        -0.0292       -0.0157∗∗
                                               (0.0254)      (0.0039)        (0.0399)      (0.0154)     (0.0352)     (0.0157)      (0.0425)       (0.0136)       (0.0299)      (0.0061)




39
     NG cost gap × interaction                 0.0040         -0.0020       -0.1328∗∗      0.0002       -0.0634      -0.0019        -0.0603        0.0036       0.0398∗∗∗       -0.0055
                                               (0.0097)      (0.0038)        (0.0527)      (0.0097)     (0.0623)     (0.0126)      (0.0419)       (0.0089)       (0.0138)      (0.0047)

     Labor cost gap × interaction             -0.0394∗∗       -0.0067       -0.0652∗∗      -0.0308      -0.0542      -0.0158       -0.0976∗∗       -0.0092       -0.0346        -0.0171
                                               (0.0182)      (0.0073)        (0.0309)      (0.0230)     (0.0581)     (0.0347)      (0.0455)       (0.0276)       (0.0267)      (0.0118)

     Interactions                               Relative distance                   Contiguity               Euro zone                 Trading blocs              Absolute distance
     Note: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the importer-exporter pair level. The dependent variable is the real value of exports. All models are estimated in
     Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) and include the set of importer-exporter pair ﬁxed effects, importer-year ﬁxed effects, exporter-year ﬁxed effects, and sector-year
     ﬁxed effects. ‘Cost gap’ is the exporter cost (in log) minus the importer cost (in log). Even-numbered columns apply the input-output (IO) extended model to compute the
     embodied costs of all three inputs (electricity, natural gas, and labor).
         ∗   Signiﬁcance at the 10 percent level.
         ∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 5 percent level.
         ∗∗∗   Signiﬁcance at the 1 percent level.

                                                                         Table 14: Results with More Interactions
                                                                       India                                                     Bulgaria
                                                       Baseline                        IO                         Baseline                         IO
                                              Exports     Net exports      Exports      Net exports      Exports     Net exports       Exports     Net exports

                 Overall impact                3.42%          5.45%          4.33%          9.52%         4.37%          7.04%          2.96%           5.65%

                Wood                           5.23%          6.54%          4.50%          10.47%        3.18%          6.03%          2.43%           5.69%
                Chemicals                      2.78%          5.61%          3.75%          8.77%         7.72%         12.26%          2.02%           4.72%
                Non-metallic minerals          4.51%          7.70%          5.01%          11.69%        3.47%          8.09%          2.61%           6.10%
                Basic metals                   8.29%         16.21%          7.47%          17.46%        11.63%        23.89%          7.27%           16.95%




40
                Food products                  2.23%          2.62%          3.63%          8.44%         1.76%          3.52%          1.71%           3.99%
                Textiles                       4.47%          5.83%          4.47%          10.44%        1.12%          2.94%          0.82%           1.92%
                Pulp and paper                 3.36%          8.64%          3.77%          8.81%         2.77%          7.93%          2.32%           5.42%
                Machinery                      0.70%          1.58%          3.29%          7.70%         1.03%          1.94%          1.91%           4.46%
                Transport                      1.30%          2.10%          3.29%          7.72%         1.19%          2.24%          1.19%           2.77%
                Note: The table lists predicted changes in exports and net exports in 2010 for India and Bulgaria. The simulation is done using results in columns
                (3) and (4) in Table 7 (i.e. exclduing the “non-speciﬁed" sector) from the baseline and input-output extended models respectively, based on
                observed input-output relationships and actual trading volumes in 2010.

     Table 15: Simulation Results: Effect on Manufacturing Exports in India and Bulgaria from a Unilateral 15 Percent Decrease in Electricity Price
                                                                     EU                                                     Non-EU
                                                    Baseline                        IO                        Baseline                       IO
                                            Exports     Net exports     Exports     Net exports      Exports     Net exports      Exports     Net exports

                Overall impact              -0.19%         -0.71%         -0.53%         -1.91%       0.33%         1.02%          0.58%          1.03%

               Wood                         -0.06%         -0.46%         -0.40%         -1.37%       0.09%         0.53%          0.37%          0.64%
               Chemicals                    -0.45%         -1.11%         -0.86%         -3.18%       0.31%         1.85%          1.09%          2.11%
               Non-metallic minerals        -0.51%         -1.25%         -0.75%         -2.77%       0.34%         2.18%          0.70%          1.85%
               Basic metals                 -0.40%         -2.72%         -1.31%         -4.44%       1.37%         3.20%          1.27%          2.02%
               Food products                -0.05%         -0.40%         -0.71%         -2.04%       0.19%         0.71%          0.57%          0.98%




41
               Textiles                     -0.07%         -0.56%         -0.43%         -1.40%       0.61%         1.14%          0.66%          0.99%
               Pulp and paper               -0.20%         -1.21%         -0.71%         -2.43%       0.54%         2.20%          0.72%          1.64%
               Machinery                    -0.09%         -0.27%         -0.28%         -1.07%       0.12%         0.35%          0.29%          0.51%
               Transport                    -0.09%         -0.23%         -0.25%         -0.91%       0.03%         0.29%          0.24%          0.43%
               Note: The simulation assumes a 10 percent increase in both electricity and natural gas prices across the European Union. The simulation is
               done using results in columns (3) and (4) in Table 7 (i.e. exclduing the “non-speciﬁed" sector) from the baseline and input-output extended
               models respectively, based on observed input-output relationships and actual trading volumes in 2010. Non-EU averages are based on the non-EU
               countries in the sample.

     Table 16: Simulation Results: Effect on EU and Non-EU Manufacturing Exports from a 10 Percent Increase in Energy Prices in the European
     Union
