                                                       WPS8187


Policy Research Working Paper                         8187




         The Impact of Digital Technologies
                on Routine Tasks
                      Do Labor Policies Matter?

                                Rita K. Almeida
                              Carlos H. L. Corseuil
                                Jennifer P. Poole




Education Global Practice Group
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8187


  Abstract
 There is a strong concern that technology is increasingly                          content of jobs at the local level. In addition, the paper
 replacing routine tasks, displacing lower-skilled workers.                         investigates whether the stringency of labor regulations
 Labor market institutions exist to protect workers from                            influences this adjustment, by comparing the effect across
 shocks but, by increasing labor costs, labor policy may also                       industries subject to different degrees of enforcement of
 constrain firms from adjusting the workforce and, hence,                           labor regulations. Using the fact that industries vary in
 from fully benefiting from technology adoption. This paper                         the degree of reliance on digital technologies, the estimates
 assesses the link between access to digital technologies and                       suggest that digital technology adoption leads to a reduc-
 the demand for skills in the largest Latin American country,                       tion in employment in local labor markets. The decrease in
 Brazil. Between 1996 and 2006, the country experienced                             employment is larger for routine tasks, thereby shifting the
 a period of strong growth in Internet service provision, as                        composition of the workforce toward nonroutine, cognitive
 well as in the enforcement of labor market regulations at                          skills. However, and in contrast with labor policy intentions,
 the subnational level. The paper’s empirical strategy exploits                     the evidence points to the idea that labor market regula-
 administrative data to assess the extent to which the adop-                        tions differentially benefit the skilled workforce, particularly
 tion of digital technology affects employment and the skill                        those workers employed in nonroutine, cognitive tasks.




  This paper is a product of the Education Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at poole@
  american.edu.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
               The	Impact	of	Digital	Technologies	on	Routine	Tasks:			
                           Do	Labor	Policies	Matter?	

                   Rita K. Almeida                                       Carlos H. L. Corseuil
															The	World	Bank	and	IZA                                      										IPEA	
                                            Jennifer P. Poole
                                        American	University	and	IZA	




Keywords: Information Technology; Skills; Jobs; Enterprise development; Labor
Regulations.	
JEL: J24; O3.




  This paper is a product of the Education GP. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. This work has benefitted
from funding by the World Bank’s Latin America and Caribbean’s Chief Economist Office, under the regional
study “Digital Technology Adoption, Skills, Productivity, and Jobs in Latin America”. Carlos Corseuil
acknowledges financial support from CNPq. Ivette Contreras, Jon Mallek, Nadine Neumann, and Katcha
Poloponsky provided excellent research assistance. We thank Miriam Bruhn, Lourenço Paz, and Diego Vera-
Cossio for helpful discussions, as well as workshop participants at American University, the World Bank, the
American Economic Association annual meetings, IPEA, NBER Summer Institute 2017, and the Midwest
International Economic Development Conference.

  Corresponding Author: 4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, School of International Service, American University,
(202) 885-6689, poole@american.edu.
1.	     Introduction	            	


Economists have long recognized the efficiency gains from technological change. However,
there is also concern, in both developing and developed countries alike, that routine, manual
tasks are increasingly being replaced by technology, displacing lower-skilled workers (Autor,
Levy, and Murnane 2003). Policy makers must weigh the broad economic benefits from
technology adoption against the potential costs to the domestic economy. The gains from a
more productive and flexible economy in the long run may be accompanied by short-term
costs for workers, in terms of unemployment, income volatility, and poverty risk. Labor
market institutions, including employment protection regulations, exist to protect workers
from shocks, but they also have the unintended consequence of increasing the cost of labor
for businesses. We analyze the impact that digital technology adoption has on local
employment opportunities and on the employment composition of different skill groups. We
pay special attention to the inherent policy trade-off—between job security for workers, on
the one hand, and economy-wide productivity and growth, on the other hand—arguably one
of the most prominent public policy debates around the globe.


Our paper exploits administrative data for Brazil, a country that underwent a substantive,
subnational internet rollout, as well as significant increases in the enforcement of labor
market regulations between 1996 and 2006. We first assess the extent to which the adoption
of digital technology affects the overall demand for workers and different types of skills. Our
empirical strategy exploits the fact that industries vary in their degree of reliance on digital
technologies. In particular, industries that intensively use technology located in cities with
early provision of internet services are most likely to adopt digital technologies. In addition,
given the fact that de	facto	labor regulations are heterogeneous within the country1, we also
explore the role of social protections in influencing the impact of digital technology on labor
demand and on the demand for different skills.



1 The de	jure labor regulations in Brazil, established in the 1988 Federal Constitution, are effective throughout
the country. However, as the Ministry of Labor is designated with enforcing compliance with regulations, there
is significant heterogeneity both within the country and over time in terms of how binding is the labor law.

                                                       2
Theoretically, the expected signs of these impacts are ambiguous. First, the effect of
technology on labor demand depends on the degree to which workers are substitutes or
complements for technology. In addition, it also depends on the degree to which technology
allows businesses to become more efficient and thus expand output and employment.
Second, increased enforcement of regulations, on the one hand, raises the cost of maintaining
a formal workforce, such that areas facing stricter enforcement will have increased
difficulties in adjusting labor to technology shocks, limiting employment. On the other hand,
labor laws purposefully improve job quality through worker protections, such that
companies in strictly-enforced areas hire more, as workers view formal employment as a
more attractive option than informal employment, and firms demand more workers to meet
per-worker hour restrictions.


Our research linking access to digital technology and labor market outcomes is innovative
for four main reasons. First, we exploit a matched employer-employee database from the
Brazilian Ministry of Labor covering the formal-sector labor force, between 1996 and 2006,
and match it with subnational data on the municipal rollout of internet service over time.
According to data from the Brazilian Census Bureau on the provision of internet services in
each municipality, our time-period covers a significant expansion of internet services
throughout the Brazilian economy. To our knowledge, we are the first to explore this unique
data set with time-series and within-country variation in access to digital technologies.2
Second, the administrative data allow us to analyze the impacts of digital technology
adoption on the overall levels of employment at the city and industry level, across broad
sectors and regions of the country. Third, we exploit a unique concordance between the
Brazilian Classification of Occupations (CBO) and the U.S. Department of Labor's
Occupational Information Network (O*NET) to assign a numerical index capturing the
importance of distinct "activities" in each occupation. These skill indices allow us to
construct measures of “routine” tasks and “non-routine” tasks used in each occupation. With
these variables, we calculate each municipality-by-industry’s average task intensity across



2Dutz, et al. (2017) rely on a different database from Brazil to consider internet rollout over time and across
municipalities in the country.

                                                      3
its workforce as the main dependent variables. Fourth, we match these data with
administrative information on the enforcement of labor market regulations, captured by the
municipal incidence of labor inspections (as published by the Brazilian Ministry of Labor).


Our empirical strategy to estimate the effect of digital technologies on employment and the
demand for skills relies on substantial variation across municipalities and over time. The fact
that the internet rollout varied across municipalities and over time makes it possible to
control for municipality-specific and time-specific effects. We interact this main supply-side
technology variable with industry-specific information on the demand for information and
communications technology, relying on data from the Current	 Population	 Survey computer
supplement, which asks workers whether they use a computer at their job. Industries that
use information technology intensively and that are located in cities that have early access to
internet services are likely early adopters of digital technologies. Therefore, the identification
of the effect of technology uses across-municipality differences in internet services provision
over time for industries that differentially use information technology.


Our work significantly contributes to a growing literature. While we are not the first to
investigate the impact of digital technology on employment and the task content of
occupations using micro data3, we are among the first papers to explore this question for an
emerging economy.4 Furthermore, to our knowledge we are the first paper allowing
technology to impact industries differently depending on their exposure to labor market
regulatory enforcement. Contrary to previous studies that rely on cross-country or across-
state variation in existing de	 jure labor regulations5, we explore the fact that Brazilian
employers are exposed to varying degrees of de	 facto labor regulations, measured by the
number of Ministry of Labor inspections per establishment in the city and broad sector.


3 See, for example, Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2009), Bö ckerman, et al. (2016), and Akerman, et al. (2015)
for research on industrialized countries.
4 To our knowledge, the only other paper assessing the impact of technology adoption on employment and the

skill content of jobs in a developing country context is Almeida, Fernandes, and Violaz (2017). However, unlike
us, their work focuses on the medium-term impact of the adoption of an advanced software within firms. Unlike
the Brazilian data, where there is detailed information on the occupational disaggregation within firms, the
Chilean data are less detailed.
5 As examples, please see Besley and Burgess (2004) and Autor, Kerr, and Kugler (2007),



                                                      4
Especially in a developing country context where enforcement is not homogeneous, we argue
exploring time-series and within-country variation in regulatory enforcement, captured by
labor inspections, offers a better measure of an employer’s flexibility in adjusting labor
following the adoption of new technology than looking at variations in de	 jure regulations.
We thus investigate the differential impact of digital technologies on labor demand and skills
among otherwise identical industries facing different de	facto enforcement of the labor law,
based on their municipal location.


Our main findings suggest that the rollout of internet in Brazil between 1996 and 2006 is
associated with firms saving on their labor resources. Notably, technology-intensive
industries, across all sectors of the economy, reduce their relative reliance on routine tasks,
thereby shifting the skill composition of industries and cities toward non-routine tasks.
Among the set of non-routine tasks, tech-intensive industries increase their relative use of
cognitive skills as compared to manual skills in the aftermath of technology adoption. In
addition, the evidence shows that the stringency of the enforcement of labor market
regulations at the subnational level matters. However, in contrast with labor policy
intentions, our results suggest that labor market regulations differentially benefit the more
skilled workforce, particularly those workers performing more non-routine and cognitive
tasks.


The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 offers an overview of the main
theoretical predictions, through the lens of the existing literature, relating technology
adoption and the subnational enforcement of labor regulations to labor market outcomes.
Section 3 presents the main data sets and provides detailed descriptive statistics. In Section
4, we present our main reduced-form empirical model, while sections 5 and 6 describe our
main results for the effects of technology across distinct regulatory environments,
respectively. We offer conclusions and policy implications in the final section.




                                               5
2.	     Theoretical	Predictions	


Digital technologies are one of the main drivers of the world economy today. The impact of
technology on the labor market is a topic of continuous discussion. The debate is supported
by the empirical relationship between the expansion of technology over the last decades and
the coincident polarization of the labor force, leading to a decrease in the share of middle-
skilled jobs, while the employment shares of high-skilled and low-skilled jobs increase
(Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; Acemoglu and Autor 2011). Though this correlation is well-
established for developed countries, the evidence is still scarce for emerging economies.


There is also a large and growing literature on the implications of regulations on the labor
market (e.g., Kugler (1999), Kugler and Kugler (2009), Ahsan and Pages (2009), Petrin and
Sivadasan (2013), and several other studies cited in Heckman and Pages (2004)). However,
Bertola, et al. (2000) suggest that differences in enforcement are as, or even more, important
than differences in regulations for labor market outcomes.


In this section, we offer a brief overview of the theoretical arguments and empirical evidence
linking labor market outcomes and technological change, relying heavily on existing
literature. We also present a short summary of the theoretical predictions and empirical
research on the labor market implications of regulatory enforcement. Generally speaking,
we note that theory offers ambiguous predictions, and thus, these are inherently empirical
research questions.


2.1.	   The	effect	of	technical	change	on	labor	markets	


Employment	The effect of technology on overall labor demand is theoretically ambiguous.
Technology allows producers to become more efficient. A more efficient production process
may allow companies to save on labor resources, increasing the use of technological capital,
reducing overall employment. On the other hand, the productivity advances associated with
technological change offer the opportunity to expand production and output with given


                                              6
resources. These output expansion effects may eventually help companies increase
employment opportunities.


De Stefano, et al. (2014) find no evidence of such an effect for firms in the United Kingdom.
In their work, access to broadband internet infrastructure has no statistically significant
effect on firm performance. Similarly, Dutz, et al. (2017) contend that increased internet
access in Brazil had no statistically significant effect on aggregate employment, though the
authors argue strongly that employment shifted toward sectors of the economy with more
output expansion opportunities (and away from sectors with more limited expansion
opportunities). Similarly, in Chile, Almeida, Fernandes, and Viollaz (2017) do not find
evidence of a significant impact on overall employment in the medium run, following the
adoption of complex software for client, production, and business management. By contrast,
Iacovone and Pereira-Lopez (2017) find that information and communications technology
adoption increases the overall level of employment in Mexican firms. For Argentina and
Colombia, there is also evidence that digital technologies are associated at the firm level with
larger firms (Bambrilla (2017) and Ospino (2017)).


Skills	 The theory considering the implications of technical change on employment shares
across different skill groups is also theoretically ambiguous, depending on the degree to
which workers are substitutes or complements for technology. For instance, digital
technologies may replace more sophisticated, cognitively-oriented, skilled tasks, as
computers substitute for skilled workers, suggesting a relative increase in the demand for
unskilled workers. Alternatively, to the extent that higher-skilled workers complement the
new computer-based tasks associated with digital technologies, and computers perform
routine, codifiable tasks, substituting for lower-skilled workers, we may expect a relative
increase in the demand for skilled workers performing non-routine, cognitive tasks with
enhanced technologies.


While both effects may play a role, we hypothesize that the expansion of digital technologies
shifts labor demand away from routine, manual tasks toward more non-routine, cognitive


                                               7
tasks, as skill-biased technology substitutes for routine work, following the work presented
in Acemoglu and Autor (2011). The authors propose a two-factor model where high-skilled
and low-skilled jobs are imperfect substitutes and technology complements both types of
workers.6 In their framework, “routine-biased technological change,” also known as the
routinization hypothesis first introduced by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), is a main
driver of job polarization.7 The theory predicts that computers substitute for routine tasks
and complement non-routine tasks. Therefore, the process of automation reduces the
relative demand for routine tasks and raises the relative demand for non-routine tasks,
contributing to job polarization by reducing employment opportunities in occupations that
require routine tasks.


Therefore, though digital technologies can increase economic output, such technological
change may leave some workers worse off (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2011). Goos, Manning,
and Salomons (2009) find evidence for such a relative decrease in routine tasks across many
European Union countries. Böckerman, et al. (2016) also test the routinization hypothesis
using data from Finland and conclude that the adoption of computers in the workplace
changes the demand for tasks within the firm toward non-routine skills. Akerman, et al.
(2015) find suggestive evidence that broadband internet adoption in Norway complements
skilled workers in executing non-routine tasks and substitutes for unskilled workers
performing routine tasks, consistent with the routinization hypothesis.


Research related to the routinization hypothesis in the developing world is scarce. Messina,
et al. (2015) analyze the task content of jobs in Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, and




6 The authors argue that, in order to have a clear view about the effects of technical change on the labor market,
it is important to propose a continuum of tasks. For this reason, the authors make a distinction between tasks
and skills. Under this model, skill refers to the worker’s capability for performing various tasks. Workers with
a given skill level can change their set of tasks in order to respond to changes in labor market conditions and
technology.
7 Like our work that follows, the authors classify tasks into two main groups: routine tasks and non-routine

tasks. Routine tasks are rule-based activities that, once codifed, can be executed by a machine. Non-routine
tasks either require intuition and problem-solving skills for the more abstract, cognitive, non-routine tasks, or
situational adaptability and in-person interactions for the more manual, non-routine tasks.

                                                        8
Mexico. According to their analysis, only Chile shows possible job polarization.8 This runs
counter to evidence in Almeida, et al. (2017), which finds that the adoption of advanced
digital technology by Chilean employers shifts employment away from skilled workers,
expanding routine and manual tasks. Maloney and Molina (2016) also offer a descriptive
perspective of job polarization in the developing world, examining data from 21 countries in
Latin America, Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. Only for the cases of Brazil and Mexico did
they find a relative reduction of routine jobs, suggesting potential polarizing forces. Riva
(2015) tests the routinization hypothesis by using the 1991 market liberalization of
computers in Brazil as a natural experiment to generate exogenous variation in technological
change, in order to identify the effects of computerization on occupational composition. The
evidence shows that the availability of computers at a lower price displaced labor from
routine to non-routine tasks.


Hjort and Poulsen (2016) analyze the impact of fast internet arrival on labor market
outcomes for African countries. They point to a positive effect on employment, which is not
homogeneous across skill levels. They use information on occupations to define skill levels,
relying on standard aggregations that do not allow them to access the task content of a job,
thus obstructing any attempt to test the routinization hypothesis any further.


2.2.	   Responses	to	labor	market	policy	and	enforcement	


Employers weigh the costs and benefits of complying with labor regulation. They decide
whether to hire formally, informally, or formally but without fully complying with specific
features of the labor code (e.g., avoiding the provision of specific mandated benefits, such as
health and safety conditions or maximum working lengths, or avoiding payments to social
security). The expected cost of evading the law is a function of the monetary value of the
penalties (fines and loss of reputation) and of the probability of being caught. In turn, the
probability of being caught depends on the employer’s characteristics (such as size and legal


8 The authors recognize that data constraints limit their results. Moreover, they are only able to present a
snapshot of possible job polarization, because there was no information available in order to measure changes
in polarization.

                                                     9
status) and on the degree of enforcement of regulation in the city where the employer is
located.


To our knowledge, there are no theoretical or empirical papers assessing the impacts of
technology according to industries’ exposure to labor market regulatory enforcement. Here,
we concentrate our theoretical analysis on the impact of enforcement on labor market
outcomes and offer predictions for how the adjustment to a technology shock may be altered
by enforcement—first, for employment levels and second, for the relative demand for skill.


Employment Increased enforcement has two potentially confounding effects, leading to an
ambiguous prediction. Stricter enforcement raises the cost of formal workers, in the sense
that the higher the compliance with labor legislation, the higher the labor cost for firms.
Almeida and Carneiro (2009), Almeida and Carneiro (2012), and Almeida and Poole (2017)
document evidence compatible with this view. These higher labor costs tend to increase the
cost of adjustment for labor use. Hence, otherwise identical companies facing stricter
enforcement of the labor law have difficulties in adjusting labor to shocks. If technology is a
negative employment shock, tech-intensive industries in strict enforcement localities
decrease formal employment by more than similar companies located in weakly-enforced
municipalities. If technology expands output, leading to a positive employment shock,
strictly-enforced industries will increase formal employment by less than industries in
weakly-enforced areas.


However, because labor laws mandate worker protections, as well as restrictions on the
hours of work per worker, stricter enforcement of labor regulations increases job quality
(from the perspective of the worker) and the number of workers required to perform a
complete 24-hour shift (from the perspective of the employer). Therefore, stricter
enforcement could also imply that firms are more likely to register informal workers, an
effect that could partially offset the previous one. It is not clear which impact would
dominate, but our prior is that enforcement of labor regulation at the subnational level will
inhibit formal labor adjustment, following the adoption of digital technology.


                                              10
Skills	 We argue the main theoretical predictions related to the impact of enforcement on
skill composition depend on the relative cost to adjust labor across skill groups. It is plausible
that at least some of the labor adjustment cost is proportional to the cost of labor, and would
thus be higher for skilled (more experienced) workers than for unskilled workers. Hence, we
conjecture that, following a technological shock, stringent enforcement of labor market
regulations at the subnational level restrict needed labor adjustments relatively more for
skilled workers than for unskilled workers in the formal sector. This is consistent with
evidence presented in Montenegro and Pages (2004). The authors provide support for the
idea that labor market regulations reduce employment rates of the unskilled at the benefit of
the skilled workforce. If this effect dominates, in response to the same technology shock,
industries located in strongly-enforced municipalities should increase the relative demand
for skills by more than industries located in weakly-enforced municipalities.




3.	    Data	and	Descriptive	Statistics	


Our main data are administrative records from Brazil for formal-sector workers linked to
their employers. We characterize the tasks required in each worker’s occupation, based on
data describing the activities of similar occupations in the United States. We then aggregate
the information on employment and skill intensity by each industry-municipality-year cell.
We merge these outcomes of interest to city-by-time information on the provision of internet
services, to industry-specific information on the use of information and communications
technology, and city-by-sector-by-year information on the enforcement of labor market
regulations.


The sample period for analysis covers a significant expansion of digital technologies
throughout the country, between 1996 and 2006. The fact that Brazil’s internet rollout and
regulatory enforcement vary across municipalities and over time allows us to examine the




                                               11
impact of digital technologies on labor demand and on the demand for tasks depending on
the degree to which industries use information technology and face regulatory enforcement.


3.1.	   Matched	employer-employee	administrative	data	


We use data collected by the Brazilian Labor Ministry, which requires by law that all
registered establishments report on their formal workforce in each year. This information
has been collected in the administrative records Relação	Anual	de	Informações	Sociais (RAIS)
since 1986. For our analysis, we use data from RAIS for the years 1996 through 2006, when
we also have complementary information on regulatory enforcement and the provision of
internet services.


The main benefit of the RAIS database is that both establishments and workers are uniquely
identified. The data offer information on workers’ skill levels, as defined by occupation and
education, beyond many similar data sets, and also include the industry9 and municipality of
each establishment. We restrict observations as follows. First, we drop all data pertaining to
the public sector and to the agricultural sector, as the Ministry of Labor has recognized issues
of data quality pertaining to these two broad sectors of the economy. Moreover, labor
adjustment in the public sector is not likely to respond to the same forces as labor adjustment
in the private sector. Second, as is customary in the literature, we drop all establishments that
have fewer than five employees.


At the beginning of our sample in 1996, the main employer-employee data set includes over
14 million workers employed in 2,192 different occupations in approximately 440,000
establishments, producing in 544 4-digit CNAE industries and located in 4,229 municipalities
across Brazil. By the end of our sample period in 2006, Brazil’s formal labor force had grown
significantly to almost 22 million workers employed in 2,217 occupations across around
750,000 establishments, producing in 529 industries and located in 4,868 municipalities.



9 The industrial classification available in RAIS is the 4-digit National Classification of Economic Activities
(CNAE).

                                                     12
	
3.2.	   Occupation-specific	task	data	


The U.S. Department of Labor surveys workers in all occupations about the activities
performed in the occupation. These occupation-specific attributes are maintained in the
Department of Labor’s Occupational Information Network. Our paper utilizes this
information from the year 2000 for approximately 800 occupations in the U.S. Standard
Occupational Classification (SOC).


O*NET offers “importance scores” ranging between 1 and 5 for 41 different “activities”
associated with an occupation. A score of 1 means that a given activity is “Not Important” to
the occupation, while a score of 5 means that a given activity is “Extremely Important” to the
occupation.10 Our main assumption in using data from the United States is that the same
activities are required in similar occupations in Brazil. Even if the levels of such activities may
be different across the two countries, we argue that the ranking of the importance of such
tasks in similar occupations will not drastically differ. For this reason, we rely on O*NET’s
importance scores of different activities in U.S. occupations to characterize activities in
Brazilian occupations.11


In order to better interpret O*NET’s ordinal importance score ranking across occupations,
we standardize the scores into a normalized numerical index between 0 and 1, which relies
on each occupation’s share of employment in the pre-period year of 1995, following Peri and
Sparber (2009). Denote the importance score for activity a	in a 5-digit CBO occupation c by
Sc,a and the employment share of occupation c in 1995 by Ec,95. We begin with an ordered


10 For instance, chief executives score high for activities such as “analyzing data or information” and “making

decisions and solving problems” and score low for activities like “controlling machines and processes” and
“operating vehicles or equipment”, while jewelers score high for activities related to “handling and moving
objects” and “judging qualities of things…” and low for activities such as “assisting and caring for others” and
“interacting with computers”.
11  We rely on publicly-available concordances from the National Crosswalk Service Center
(http://xwalkcenter.org/) and Muendler, Poole, Ramey, and Wajnberg (2004) to convert occupational
characteristics from the 2000 SOC to the 1988 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) to
the Brazilian classification of occupations found in RAIS. We calculate the simple average of importance scores
in cases where there are multiple SOC codes matched to a single CBO code.

                                                      13
vector of scores for a particular activity. The first element corresponds to the score related to
the occupation with the highest score within a specific activity, while the last element
corresponds to the score related to the occupation with the lowest score within the same
activity, such that:


                       S’a = [argmax {   ,   ,…,   ,   }; … ; argmin {   ,   ,…,   ,   }].


The components of the vector are then normalized as follows:


              ′ = 1; ′ = 1 −         ,   ; ′ = ′ −           ,   ;…;         =         −     ,   .



We implement this procedure for each of the 41 activities. The normalization allows us to
speak to the relative importance of such a skill among Brazilian workers. For instance, a
score of 0.05 suggests that only 5% of employed workers supply this skill less intensively,
whereas a score of 0.95 suggests that few workers supply the skill more intensively.


Our interest in this paper is in how technology impacts routine, manual skills as compared
to non-routine, cognitive skills; that is, our interest is in broader skill groupings than those
described in the raw O*NET database. Therefore, we next aggregate across activities within
a “bundle” for each occupation. We consider the following activity bundles: routine versus
non-routine activities. Routine activities are further disaggregated into manual, routine
activities and cognitive, routine activities. Non-routine activities are also further
disaggregated into manual and cognitive activities. We then also distinguish between non-
routine, cognitive activities that are analytical versus non-routine, cognitive activities that
are interactive or communications-oriented. Table 3.1 displays our classification of the 41
O*NET activities into these six distinct bundles.


It is important to note that in contrast to some papers in the literature relying on O*NET data,
we classify and make use of all O*NET activities, rather than hand-picking a select one or few.
We believe this strengthens the value of our results. As evidence of a high-quality match,

                                                       14
Table 3.2 reports the five Brazilian occupations with the strongest requirements for each
broad activity bundle and the five Brazilian occupations with the weakest requirements for
each broad activity bundle. Car washers and window washers are among the most routine
occupations, while orchestral musicians and missionaries are among the least routine
occupations in Brazil. By contrast, psychiatrists are highly non-routine task intensive and
hand knitters are among the least non-routine task intensive occupations in Brazil.


Our main goal is to assess how intensively such activity bundles are used by Brazilian
establishments, firms, and industries, and whether the intensity changes over time in
response to the adoption of digital technologies. The final step in calculating the dependent
variables in our analysis aggregates over all workers (and their respective occupations) in an
industry-municipality in a given year. Since the occupation information from O*NET is
specific to the year 2000, the time variation in these dependent variables results as
employers shift the workforce composition over time. In the first column of Table 3.3, we
report average values across all establishments for the main dependent variable—the ratio
of non-routine to routine tasks. We note that the relative value of non-routine to routine tasks
is always less than one, signaling Brazil’s comparative advantage in lower-skilled tasks due
to an abundance of lower-skilled labor. However, over the 10-year time horizon, the relative
importance of non-routine tasks in the workforce has steadily increased, by about two
percentage points.


3.3.	   Digital	technologies	data	
	
Rollout	of	internet	services	         Beginning in 1999, the Brazilian Census Bureau (IBGE)
has conducted an annual survey of all Brazilian municipalities, the Pesquisa	 de	 Informações	
Básicas	 Municipais (known as MUNIC), on the structure and functions of municipal
institutions. In the years 1999, 2001, 2005, and 2006, the survey specifically asks questions
about the existence of various cultural activities. Among these is a question regarding
whether the city has a company that provides internet services. We assume that no Brazilian
city had access to internet services in 1996.


                                                15
Table 3.4 presents basic descriptive statistics for this variable. Only 15 percent of the over
5,000 Brazilian cities had local internet service in 1999. Access to digital technologies has
grown considerably since then. By 2006, over half of all municipalities had a local internet
service provider. Though not all cities have access to the internet, areas of the country with
internet services are larger population centers. In 1999, internet access had spread to
roughly 60 percent of the Brazilian population. By 2006, almost 90 percent of the population
had a local internet service provider.


The map in Figure 3.1 illustrates the spread of the internet across the country over time. The
darker areas of the map obtained internet services earlier than the lighter areas on the map.
The white municipalities in the center of the country and remote Amazon region are those
cities that by 2014 remain without internet service. A casual observation suggests no
substantial clustering of the rollout, but this can be difficult to view given the geographic
scope of the country. In Figure 3.2, we illustrate the rollout of the internet in the most
populous state, Sã o Paulo. Even in this state, we notice considerable over time and across
municipality variation. This is exactly the variation that we rely on in our paper.


Returning to Table 3.3, we report the average non-routine-to-routine relative task intensity,
conditioning on whether the city has internet service provision. Perhaps unsurprisingly,
industries located in cities with internet access consistently employ higher shares of workers
in non-routine tasks. All cities—those with and without internet—report shifts toward non-
routine tasks over time.


Industry-specific	information	technology	intensity	 We rely on data from the U.S.
Census Bureau’s Current	 Population	 Survey, which in an October 2003 supplement asked
households whether they use a computer at their current job. Aggregating across all workers
within their reported industry categories, we calculate the share of workers in U.S. industries
who report using a computer at work. This is our main measure of the industry’s
technological intensity following Oldenski (2014). We then rely on publicly-available


                                              16
concordances (Muendler 2002) to measure the intensity of technology use across over 100
Brazilian industries, based on the U.S. data. As with the O*NET data, our use of U.S. data
assumes that while the levels of technology-intensity may be different for a given industry
across the two countries, the ranking of industries by their information technology intensity
is not different. The data report that the “electronic computer manufacturing” and
“peripherals manufacturing for data processing equipment” rely most heavily on technology,
with over 85 percent of workers reporting using a computer at work. “Farm machinery and
equipment manufacturing,” “paper manufacturing,” and “paperboard containers and coated
paperboard manufacturing” measure the least technology intensive industries, with less than
30 percent of workers reporting use of a computer at work.


Returning again to Table 3.3, we report the average non-routine-to-routine relative task
intensity, conditioning on whether the industry is technologically-intensive (as defined by
the median value). Perhaps unsurprisingly, tech-intensive industries consistently employ
higher shares of workers in non-routine tasks. The difference is increasing over time—tech-
intensive industries employ relatively greater shares of non-routine skills over time as
compared to non-tech-intensive industries. Our empirical strategy exploits both this demand
side use of technology as well as the supply side access to technology to identify the
technology shock.
	
3.4.	   Enforcement	data	
	
Changes to the Brazilian Federal Constitution labor law in 1988 were very favorable to
workers.12 Following these changes in the labor code, the cost of labor to employers
increased. First, the employer’s payroll contribution increased from 18% to 20%. Second, the
penalty on the plant for dismissing the worker without cause increased from 10% to 40% of
the total contributions to the severance fund, Fundo	 de	 Garantia	 do	 Tempo	 de	 Serviço


12First, it reduced the maximum weekly working period from 48 to 44 hours. Second, it increased the overtime
wage premium from 20% to 50% of the regular wage. Third, the maximum number of hours for a continuous
work shift dropped from 8 to 6 hours. Fourth, maternity leave increased from 3 to 4 months. Finally, it increased
one month’s vacation time pay from 1 to 4/3 of a monthly wage.

                                                      17
(FGTS).13 Employers in Brazil must also give advanced notice to workers in order to
terminate employment. During this interim period, workers are granted up to two hours per
day (25% of a regular working day) to search for a new job.


These de	jure labor regulations are effective throughout the country. However, as the Ministry
of Labor is designated with enforcing compliance with labor regulations, there is significant
heterogeneity both within the country and over time in terms of how binding is the law.14 An
inspection can be triggered either by a random audit, or by a report (often anonymous) of
non-compliance with the law. Workers, unions, the public prosecutor’s office, or even the
police can make reports. In practice, almost all of the inspected establishments are formal
because it is difficult to visit a company that is not registered, since there are no records of
its activity. Most of the inspections and subsequent fines for infractions in Brazil are to ensure
compliance with workers’ formal registration in the Ministry of Labor, contributions to the
severance pay fund (FGTS), minimum wages, and maximum working lengths.


We explore administrative city-by-sector-level data on the enforcement of labor regulations,
collected by the Brazilian Ministry of Labor. Data for the number of inspector visits are
available by city and broad sectoral classification for the years 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004,
and 2006. For our analysis, we match the enforcement data to the RAIS data by the
employer’s municipal location and broad industrial classification. This information identifies
industries facing varying degrees of regulatory enforcement.


We proxy the degree of regulatory enforcement with the intensity of labor inspections at the
city-sector level. In particular, our main measure of enforcement, designed to capture the
probability of a visit by labor inspectors to employers within a city-sector, is the logarithm of
the number of labor inspections at the city-sector level (plus one) per establishment in the
city and broad sector (in a pre-shock time period, 1995) based on RAIS. This scaled measure


13 If the worker is dismissed without justification (with the exception of workers on a probationary period), the
plant is fined and has to pay the worker 40% of the FGTS contributions.
14 A comprehensive explanation of the enforcement of the labor regulation system and its importance in Brazil

is given in Cardoso and Lage (2007).

                                                      18
of inspections helps to control for important size differences across cities (i.e., that Sã o Paulo
has many inspections, but also many establishments to inspect). In addition, scaling by a pre-
reform, time-invariant measure of city-sector size ensures that changes in our main
enforcement measure are due to changes in inspections and not changes in the number of
formal establishments in the city-sector. Moreover, the impact of such a measure will reflect
the direct effect of inspections, as well as the perceived threat of inspections (even in the
absence of establishment-specific inspections) based on inspections at neighboring
companies.


Table 3.5 presents descriptive statistics on the enforcement data. Over time, as Brazilian
regulators attempt to reach a larger share of the labor force, the number of cities with at least
one inspection increased—from 46 percent in 1996 to 67 percent in 2006. As inspectors
reach more and more cities, the average number of inspections per city-sector decreased—
from 82 inspections per city-sector in 1996 to 73 inspections per city-sector in 2006. Our
main measure is designed to capture the probability of inspection. In the third column, we
scale the number of inspections by the size of the city-sector in 1995 (per 100 registered
establishments in the city-sector). The probability of being inspected more than doubled—
from 11 inspections per 100 registered establishments to 23 inspections per 100 registered
establishments—between 1996 and 2006.


Our identification relies on the across-city and over-time variation in labor market regulatory
enforcement. The standard deviation reported in the fourth column signals the significant
heterogeneity across city-sectors within each year. In Figure 3.3, we note the substantial
within-country variation in the intensity of enforcement across cities in Brazil. The top panel
illustrates the number of inspections per Brazilian city in 1996, with darker shades
portraying higher numbers. The bottom panel depicts the same statistic for the year 2012.
We remark on the variation across municipalities and over time. First, we observe the darkest
areas of the map in the high-income Southern and Southeastern regions of the country. We
also notice a darkening of the map over time as enforcement spreads to further parts of the




                                                19
country. Figure 3.4 offers a clearer picture of the across city and over time variation in
regulatory enforcement by focusing in on a single state, Sã o Paulo.




4.	     Empirical	Model	


Our goal in this paper is to uncover how technology affects employment across different skill-
groups. In addition, we consider the role of social protections in altering the effects of
technology on employment and the demand for skills.


4.1.	   Baseline	specification


We consider Brazil’s internet rollout across cities and over time as the main technology shock
and argue that a similar technology shock impacts industries differentially based on their
reliance on information and communications technology. We begin with the following
framework in mind:


        =   (      ∗       )+               +       +      +                                   (1)


where m indexes the municipal location,	 k indexes the (4-digit) industry, t indexes time, K
denotes Brazil’s 16 broad CNAE sectors, and s denotes the 37 states of the country. We relate
the industry-city employment levels and task-intensity (            ) to the city-by-time-varying
supply side technology shock, the provision of local internet services in a city and year as
reported by IBGE (denoted as           ).       reports the effects of the supply-side provision of
internet services interacted with a time-invariant measure of the industry’s technological-
intensity (     ), or the demand for digital technologies. In this sense, we argue that a similar
technology shock of new internet services impacts industries differently depending on
whether they require information and communications technology services.




                                                  20
Our baseline estimation also includes interactive city-industry fixed effects (     ) to capture
time-invariant factors, such as the industry’s unobserved underlying productivity or
technology, or the city’s unobserved level of development, which may influence both the
employment levels and workforce composition (and, hence, task intensity), as well as the
likelihood of adopting digital technologies. Because of this, the coefficient on a separately-
included industry-specific tech-intensity variable (       ) is unidentified, and the control is
absorbed into the fixed effects. The effect of technology is then identified using across-
municipality differences in internet services provision over time for industries that
differentially use information technology.


We also include state-sector-specific year dummies (       ) to control for the average effect of
Brazil’s many policy reforms over this time period which may vary by state and sector. The
fact that the internet rollout varied across municipalities and over time, and technology-
intensity varies across industries makes it possible to control for municipality-specific,
industry-specific, and time-specific effects in this manner to identify the technology shock.


Tech-intensive industries located in cities with early provision of the internet are more likely
to adopt digital technologies. Therefore, in interpreting our results, we concentrate on the
impact of digital technologies in tech-intensive industries (   +    ). As we discuss in Section
2, the expected sign on the sum of the coefficients is unclear when the outcome of interest is
total municipality-industry employment. In the case that technology is labor-saving, allowing
companies to produce the same amount with fewer workers than before, we expect a
negative combined coefficient (    +     < 0). On the contrary, positive employment effects of
technological change (    +     > 0) are expected, if increased efficiency enables companies
to expand production. Following Acemoglu and Autor (2011), as well as much of the evidence
from the developed world, we hypothesize that       +     > 0 when the dependent variable is
the non-routine-to-routine relative task intensity, as employers use technology to replace
routine tasks shifting the composition of the workforce toward non-routine tasks.




                                              21
4.2.	   Enhanced	specification	


Equation (1) only considers the main technology shock. The degree to which employers
adjust labor in response to such a shock depends on the stringency of labor market
regulatory enforcement they face. We hypothesize that two identical employers may respond
differently to such technology shocks depending on their exposure to labor market
inspections. For this reason, we next adapt our baseline specification to include city-by-broad
sector exposure to Ministry of Labor inspections as follows:


        =   (       ∗        ∗       )+    (          ∗         )+    (        ∗      )
        +          +    (        ∗        )+              +      +        +                 (2)


where all notation is as previously described.            represents time-varying, municipality-
by-broad sector-level enforcement of labor regulations, as captured by Ministry of Labor
inspections.


An important concern relates to the exogeneity of the variation in labor regulations across
cities. In particular, enforcement may be stricter in cities where violations of the labor laws
are more frequent or in cities where institutions are more developed. While it is true that
violations of labor laws and better institutions are likely also correlated with labor market
outcomes, we note that these are statements about the non-random cross-sectional variation
in enforcement. The fact that specification (2) includes city-industry fixed effects helps to
minimize any concerns regarding the endogeneity in the level of enforcement, as the main
identification is based on changes in the enforcement of labor market regulations (Almeida
and Poole 2017).


However, one could still question the exogeneity of changes in enforcement at the city-sector
level. To the extent that these changes correlate with changes in labor market outcomes, our
estimates may be biased. We note that our empirical methodology follows the program
evaluation literature and relates quasi-exogenous technology changes to labor market


                                                 22
outcomes over time, differentially for industries located in diverse policy environments—a
triple-interaction effect. Like with equation (1), we are interested in the impact of digital
technologies in tech-intensive industries (because tech-intensive industries located in areas
with internet services provision are the likely adopters of digital technologies). In equation
(2), we are also interested in how tech-intensive industries located in strictly-enforced labor
market regulatory environments may respond to technology shocks differently than
otherwise identical tech-intensive industries located in weakly-enforced labor market
regulatory environments.


In order to interpret the results from equation (2), we derive the following effects. First, the
impact of digital technologies in tech-intensive industries located in strictly-enforced cities
(at the 90th percentile of inspections) is calculated as follows:


         |            = 1,             = ,         = 1) −          |    = 0,         = ,       = 1)
                  =          +     +       +


where denotes the 90th percentile of inspections in the data.


Similarly, we calculate the impact of digital technologies in tech-intensive industries located
in weakly-enforced cities (at the 10th percentile of inspections) as:


         |         = 1,            =       ,       = 1) −          |    = 0,         =     ,   = 1)
                  =          +     +       +


where        denotes the 10th percentile of inspections in the data.


Finally, we calculate the difference in the impact of digital technologies in tech-intensive
industries located in strict versus weak enforcement areas as follows:


(    +        +       +      )−(       +       +     +        )=   ( − )+   ( − ).


                                                         23
We concentrate our interpretation of the differential impact of technology on labor market
outcomes in different regulatory environments on this difference ( ( − ) +          ( − )).


Recall from Section 2, there are two confounding effects of labor policy on levels of
employment: the higher labor costs associated with stricter enforcement that may limit
hiring and the impact on job quality improvements that induce formal work registrations (of
otherwise informal workers). If the first effect dominates, otherwise identical companies
facing stricter enforcement of the labor law have increased difficulties in adjusting labor to
shocks, decreasing (increasing) formal employment by more (by less) than companies
located in weakly-enforced municipalities. By contrast, when the latter effect dominates, in
response to the same technology shock, we would expect to see a smaller (larger) decrease
(increase) in employment in areas of the country exposed to stronger regulatory
enforcement.


Considering the relative demand for skill as the outcome of interest, again the theory offers
no solid projections. If labor policy intentions are confirmed, we expect that      ( − )+
  ( − ) < 0 when the dependent variable is the non-routine-to-routine relative task
intensity. If labor market regulations reduce employment opportunities for the unskilled at
the benefit of the skilled, following research by Montenegro and Pages (2004), we predict
that   ( − )+       ( − ) > 0 when the dependent variable is the non-routine-to-routine
relative task intensity. In the first case, the enforcement of labor market regulations stifles
employment reductions in response to technology by more for workers in routine tasks,
thereby shifting the composition of the workforce toward routine tasks in strict labor market
environments. In the second setting, the enforcement of labor market regulations stifles
employment reductions in response to technology by less for workers in routine tasks,
thereby shifting the composition of the workforce toward non-routine tasks even more in
strict labor market environments.




                                              24
5.	       Baseline	Results	on	the	Effects	of	Digital	Technology	


5.1.	     Employment	


First, we investigate the impact of internet technology on total employment levels in the city-
industry. Table 5.1 reports results of equation (1) estimated by ordinary least squares, with
standard errors clustered at the interactive city-industry level (the same level used to define
the fixed effects following Bertrand, et al. (2004)). The dependent variable is the logarithm
of total formal-sector employment in the city and industry. Our main parameter of interest is
the overall impact of the internet on tech-intensive industries (those industries poised to
adopt the new technology), or the sum of the coefficients (       +    ). This coefficient sum is
reported in the bottom portion of the table, along with the corresponding F-statistic and p-
value for the null hypothesis that the sum of the coefficients is equal to zero.


The results in column (1), pooling all broad sectors of the economy for an economy-wide
analysis, point to a negative impact of digital technology on employment in tech-intensive
industries, not only relative to non-tech-intensive industries ( ), but also in absolute terms
(     +    ). Digital technologies, like the internet, allow employers to save on labor resources,
reducing employment, presumably due to enhanced productivity. These results are
important as they confirm the idea that in the short run, technology adoption may lead to
substantive employment losses at the local level.


The remaining columns of Table 5.1 show that the employment reductions associated with
increased adoption of digital technologies are not driven by any particular broad sector of
the economy. Rather, technology decreases employment in all four major sectors of the
economy: manufacturing, services, construction, and wholesale and retail trade. The
negative employment effects are strongest in the more non-tradeable sectors of the economy.
This makes economic sense, relying on the argument that the potential for output expansion
opportunities (and hence offsetting employment expansion) are far less in non-tradeable




                                                25
sectors of the economy like construction and wholesale and retail trade, offering a plausible
explanation for the larger negative employment effects of technology in these sectors.15


5.2.	   Skills	


We next consider whether skilled and unskilled workers face similar employment
reductions. As we discuss earlier, the theoretical literature suggests that unskilled workers
may fare worse with the introduction of new technologies, as they face more severe
employment declines, because technology is complementary to high-skilled workers and
substitutes for low-skilled workers.16


Non-routine	versus	routine	skills	                 Table 5.2 reports results from the estimation of
equation (1) with dependent variables related to the skill-content of occupations as
described in Section 3.2. Notably, column (1) reports results for our main dependent variable,
the relative non-routine-to-routine task intensity, as we discuss in Section 4.1. The main
results confirm the routinization hypothesis for Brazil. The employment reduction in
response to technical change of skilled workers is much less than the employment reduction
of unskilled workers, shifting the composition of the workforce toward non-routine tasks.
This is evidenced in the statistically-significant and positive coefficient on the impact of
technology in tech-intensive industries at the bottom of the first column.


Cognitive	versus	manual	skills            The previous paragraph documented that increased
access to technology shifts the composition of employment toward non-routine tasks. We
now ask whether these findings hold for all types of non-routine and routine tasks. As we
discuss in Section 3.2, and outline in Table 3.1, we can decompose non-routine tasks and


15 The decreases in total city-industry employment in response to technology could result either from decreases

in the total number of establishments in the city and industry (the extensive margin) or from decreases in the
average establishment size in the city-industry (the intensive margin). In unreported results, available by
request, we find that technology reduces employment along both the extensive and intensive margin, though
reductions in the intensive margin account for over 60 percent of the total decline in employment in all broad
sectors of the economy except construction.
16 From here forward, we consider only the economy-wide effects of technology and leave the unreported

sector-by-sector results to be available by request.

                                                     26
routine tasks into those tasks requiring cognitive abilities and those tasks requiring manual
abilities. For instance, even among non-routine tasks, some require more problem-solving,
cognitive skills, such as activities associated with analyzing data or information, while others
are more manual in nature, like inspecting equipment, structures, or material. Controlling
machines and processes is a routine activity that is highly manual, while documenting and
recording information is a more cognitive, routine task.


In the second and third columns of Table 5.2, we report results from specification (1) with
the relative cognitive-to-manual skill intensity within non-routine and within routine tasks,
respectively. These results illustrate that the shift toward non-routine tasks is driven by the
relative decline in the intensity of the manual tasks for both non-routine and routine tasks.
Non-routine, manual task intensity declines by more than non-routine, cognitive task
intensity, shifting the composition of the non-routine workforce toward cognitive tasks.
Among routine tasks, routine, manual tasks also decline by more than routine, cognitive
tasks, leading to an increase in the share of cognitive tasks within routine tasks. This is
further support of the skill-biased nature of technological change.


Analytical	versus	interactive	skills        Technology favors non-routine, cognitive tasks.
Some non-routine, cognitive skills require little to no interaction with other people and are
highly analytical, activities similar to the ones this author is performing right now to write
this paper—analyzing data and information and interacting with computers. Meanwhile,
there are other non-routine, cognitive skills that require interaction and communication
with others—such as those professions requiring communicating with supervisors, peers, or
subordinates or teaching and training others. Despite the advances of computers, digital
technology still has not yet fully mastered human interaction, suggesting that non-routine,
cognitive, interactive skills may be some of the most important individual skill sets as digital
technologies advance.


Exactly which types of non-routine, cognitive tasks do digital technologies support? The final
column of Table 5.2 presents results for a regression of equation (1) when the dependent


                                              27
variable disaggregates non-routine, cognitive tasks into those tasks that are analytical
relative to those tasks that are interactive and communication-intensive among non-routine,
cognitive tasks. The results offer some statistical support for a small shift toward interactive,
communication based tasks (among the non-routine, cognitive tasks) in response to
technological change, as is evidenced by the negative coefficient sum in the bottom of the
table.




6.	      Heterogeneity	of	Impacts	with	Enforcement	of	Labor	Regulations	


In this section, we investigate the role of labor market regulatory enforcement, by discerning
the effects of technology by the location of the employer.


6.1.	    Employment	


Table 6.1 reports coefficients from the estimation of equation (2) by ordinary least squares
with standard errors clustered at the interactive city-by-industry level, across all broad
sectors of the economy. We report all coefficients of interest in the top half of the table. We
also report: a) the impact of the internet in tech-intensive industries in strictly-enforced
areas (90th percentile of inspections), b) the impact of the internet in tech-intensive
industries in weakly-enforced areas (10th percentile of inspections), and c) the differential
impact of the internet in strict versus weak enforcement environments (the difference
between (a) and (b)) in the bottom half of the table. Alongside, we report the corresponding
F-statistics and p-values for the null hypothesis that the total effect is significantly different
from zero.


Concentrating on the impact of the internet in tech-intensive industries in high- relative to
low-enforcement cities (highlighted in bold at the bottom of the table), across all broad
sectors of the economy (first column), we find that the decreases in employment in response
to technology in tech-intensive industries located in strictly-enforced municipalities are not


                                               28
statistically distinguishable from the decreases in employment in response to technology in
otherwise identical tech-intensive industries located in weakly-enforced municipalities.
Industries in all areas of the country experience decreases in employment in response to
presumably labor-saving technological change. Recall from Section 4 that there are two
potentially offsetting effects of enforcement on employment—it is likely that these
countervailing effects of enforcement largely balance out in the aggregate economy. This is
also the case in the services sector.


By contrast, in the manufacturing sector, the decreases in employment in tech-intensive
industries in response to digital technologies like the internet is wholly explained by
decreases in employment in tech-intensive industries in strictly-enforced areas. This is
consistent with work in Almeida and Carneiro (2009), Almeida and Carneiro (2012), and
Almeida and Poole (2017) which document lower employment in heavily-regulated areas, as
high labor costs induce firms to hire less. The employment responses to technology in
construction companies in heavily-inspected areas also face a strong differential decrease as
compared to equal construction companies in weakly-enforced areas. Interestingly,
employment differentially increases in response to the internet shock in tech-intensive
wholesale and retail trade industries faced with higher inspections, perhaps due to increased
formal work registration or shorter per-worker hours in that sector.


6.2.	   Skills	


Do labor policies matter to companies as they adjust the workforce toward non-routine tasks
in response to the technology shock?	
	
Non-routine	versus	routine	skills	        Table 6.2 reports results from the estimation of
equation (2), with the dependent variables as in Table 5.2. We focus in the first column on
the relative non-routine-to-routine task intensity in the city and industry. Once again, we
concentrate our analysis on the difference in the impact of the internet in tech-intensive
industries located in cities at the 90th percentile of enforcement relative to otherwise


                                             29
identical industries located in cities at the 10th percentile of enforcement (highlighted in bold
at the bottom of the table). We learned in Table 6.1 that the decrease in employment in
response to advances in technology occurred in both strictly-enforced and weakly-enforced
cities. Table 6.2 clearly demonstrates that the decrease in employment as a result of
increased access to the internet in heavy enforcement areas of the country is solely driven by
decreases in employment of unskilled workers performing routine tasks. This is consistent
with evidence as reported in Montenegro and Pages (2004).


Due to the enforcement bias in favor of skilled workers, we see that the shift in the
composition of the workforce toward non-routine tasks found in Table 5.2 in response to the
technology shock is wholly driven by changes in strong labor market regulatory
environments. Policy makers often position and propose labor market policies to protect
vulnerable workers. These results are in stark contrast to these ideas. Counter to the best
policy intentions, our evidence points to the idea that labor market regulations differentially
benefit the skilled workforce.


Cognitive	versus	manual	skills       The previous paragraphs documented that increased
access to technology shifts the composition of employment toward non-routine tasks, even
more so in strict regulatory environments. In the next columns of Table 6.2, we show this
result holds across all types of non-routine and routine skills. Within non-routine tasks and
within routine tasks, in all regulatory environments, technological change shifts the
composition of the workforce toward skilled (cognitive) tasks and away from unskilled
(manual) tasks.


Interestingly, the shift toward non-routine, cognitive tasks and away from non-routine,
manual tasks is larger in weakly-regulated municipalities as compared to otherwise identical
tech-intensive industries in strongly-regulated municipalities. Despite the strong evidence
in favor of skill-biased regulations in the previous section, these results offer some evidence
that employment protections are helping middle-skilled workers—those workers who
perform non-routine, but manual tasks. By contrast, there is no statistical skill bias in labor


                                               30
policy when comparing routine, cognitive tasks and routine, manual tasks. The results
suggest that regulatory enforcement does not differentially impact the routine cognitive
versus manual skill composition of tech-intensive industries.


Analytical	versus	interactive	skills        Labor market regulations tend to favor workers
employed in the middle of the skill distribution—those workers employed in non-routine,
manual tasks. Even still, in the final column of Table 5.2, we consider whether labor market
regulations promote certain non-routine, cognitive tasks over others. The answer is a clear
no.
	
	
7.	    Conclusions	and	Policy	Implications	


There is a strong concern around the globe that technology is increasingly replacing routine
tasks, displacing lower-skilled workers. Labor market institutions exist to protect workers
from shocks but, by increasing costs, labor policy may also constrain firms from adjusting
the workforce to fully benefit from technology adoption. We assess the link between access
to digital technologies and the demand for skills in the largest Latin American country, Brazil.
Between 1996 and 2006, Brazil underwent a period of strong growth in internet service
provision, as well as increased enforcement of labor market regulations at the subnational
level. Our empirical strategy exploits administrative data to assess the extent to which the
adoption of digital technology affects employment and the skill content of jobs at the local
level. In addition, we investigate whether the stringency of labor regulations influences this
adjustment, by comparing the effect across industries subject to different degrees of labor
market regulatory enforcement.


Exploiting the fact that industries vary in the degree of reliance on digital technologies, our
estimates suggest that digital technology adoption leads, in the short-run, to a reduction in
employment in local labor markets. Tech-intensive industries reduce their reliance on both
non-routine and routine tasks in the aftermath of the technology shock, but the decrease in


                                              31
employment is larger for routine tasks, thereby shifting the composition of the workforce
toward non-routine, cognitive skills. In contrast with labor policy intentions, our evidence
points to the idea that labor market regulations differentially benefit the skilled workforce,
particularly those workers employed in non-routine, cognitive tasks.




                                             32
References

Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D. (2011), “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and
         Earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 4.
Ahsan, A., Pages, C. (2009). “Are all labor regulations equal? Evidence from Indian manufacturing”. J.
         Comp. Econ. 37 (1), 62–75.
Akerman, A., Gaarder, I. and Mogstad, M. (2015). “The Skill Complementarity of Broadband Internet”.
         The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4), pp.1781-1824.
Almeida, R., & Poole, J. P. (2017). “Trade and labor reallocation with heterogeneous enforcement of
         labor regulations”. Journal of Development Economics, 126, 154–166.
Almeida, R., Carneiro, P. (2009). “Enforcement of labor regulation and firm size”. J. Comp. Econ. 37,
         28–46.
Almeida, R., Carneiro, P.. (2012). “Enforcement of labor regulation and informality”. Am. Econ. J.: Appl.
         Econ. 4 (3), 64–89.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and Murnane, R.J.. (2003): “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change:
         An Empirical Exploration,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118(4), pp. 1279—1333.
Autor, David, William, R. Kerr, Kugler, Adriana. (2007). “Does employment protection reduce
         productivity? Evidence from US States”. Econ. J. 117, 189–217.
Bertola, Giuseppe, Boeri, Tito, Cazes, Sandrine. (2000). “Employment protection in industrialized
         countries: the case for new indicators”. Int. Labour Rev. 139 (1), 57–72.
Bertrand, Marianne, Duflo, Esther, Mullainathan, Sendhil. (2004). “How much should we trust
         difference-in-differences estimates?”. Q. J. Econ. 119 (1), 249–275.
Besley, Timothy, Burgess, Robin. (2004). “Can labor regulation hinder economic performance? Evidence
         from India”. Q. J. Econ. CXIX, 91–134.
Böckerman, P., Cawley, J., Viinikainen, J., Lehtimäki, T., Rovio, S., Seppälä, I., … Raitakari, O. (2016).
         “The Effect of Weight on Labor Market Outcomes: an Application of Genetic Instrumental
         Variables” (No. w22200). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee. (2011). “Race against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution is
         Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and
         the Economy. Digital Frontier Press Lexington.
Cardoso, A., Lage, T., (2007). As Normas e os Fatos. Editora FGV, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.
De Stefano T., R. Kneller, J. Timmis. (2014). “The (Fuzzy) Digital Divide: The Effect of Broadband
         Internet Use on UK Firm Performance”. Discussion papers, University of Nottingham, School of
         Economics.
Deming, D. (2015). “The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market” (No. w21473).
         Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dutz, et al. (2017). “Economywide and Secoral Impacts on Workers of Brazil’s Internet Rollout”.
Goos, M., Manning, A., & Salomons, A. (2009). “Job Polarization in Europe”. American Economic
         Review, 99(2), 58–63.
Heckman, J. J., Pages, C., (2004). “Law and Employment: lessons from Latin America and the
         Caribbean”. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Hjort, J., and Jonas P. (2016). "The Arrival of Fast Internet and Skilled Job Creation in Africa." Columbia
         Business School.
Kugler, A. (1999). “The impact of firing costs on turnover and unemployment: evidence from the
         Colombian labor market reform”. Int. Tax. Public Financ. J. 6, 3.
Kugler, A., Kugler, M.. (2009). “Labor market effects of payroll taxes in developing countries: evidence
         from Colombia”. Econ. Dev. Cult. Change 57 (2), 335–358.
Maloney, W. and C. Molina. (2016). “Are Automation and Trade Polarizing Developing Country Labor
         Markets, Too?”. Policy Research Working Paper 7922. The World Bank.
Messina, J., A.M. Oviedo, and G. Pica. (2016). “Job Polarization in Latin America”. Mimeo The World
         Bank.

                                                    33
Montenegro, C. & Pagés, C. (2003). "Who Benefits from Labor Market Regulations?: Chile 1960-
         1998," IDB Publications (Working Papers) 4126, Inter-American Development Bank.
Muendler, M-A, Poole, J., Ramey, G. and Wajnberg, T. (2004). “Job concordances for Brazil: Mapping
         the Classificação Brasileira de Ocupações (CBO) to the International Standard Classification of
         Occupations (ISCO-88)”. Unpublished manuscript. University of California, San Diego.
Oldenski, L.. (2012). “The Task Composition of Off shoring by US Multinationals”. International
         Economics (131).
Peri, G., & Sparber, C. (2009). “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages”. American Economic
         Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3), 135–69.
Petrin, Amil, Sivadasan, Jagadeesh, (2013). “Estimating lost output from allocative inefficiency, with an
         application to chile and firing costs”. Rev. Econ. Stat. 95 (1), 286–301.
Riva, F. L. R. (2016). “Computerization, Occupational Tasks and the Labor Market: Evidence from a
         Natural Experiment in Brazil”. Dissertation. Escola de Economia de São Paulo.
	




                                                    34
    Figure	3.1:	Internet	Service	Provision,	by	Municipality	




	             	




                              35
    Figure	3.2:	Internet	Service	Provision,	by	Municipality	for	São	Paulo	State	




                                                                                   	
	

	                       	




                                        36
    Figure	3.3:	Labor	Market	Enforcement	Intensity,	by	Municipality	




                                                               	




                                                               	
	                  	




                                  37
    Figure	3.4:	Labor	Market	Enforcement	Intensity,	by	Municipality,	São	Paulo	State	




                                                                             	




                                                                             	

	
	
	
	
	
	


                                           38
                               Table	3.1:	O*NET	Activities	Classification	
              ROUTINE	TASKS	                                              NON-ROUTINE	TASKS	
      Manual	             Cognitive	                 Manual	                            Cognitive	
                                                                                           Interactive/Communicatio
          		                      		                    		                 Analytical	                    n	
                                                                      Evaluating
                                               Inspecting             Information to
                                               Equipment,             Determine
Performing General      Documenting/Recordin   Structures, or         Compliance with     Establishing and Maintaining
Physical Activities     g Information          Material               Standards           Interpersonal Relationships
Handling and Moving                            Assisting and Caring   Analyzing Data or
Objects                                        for Others             Information         Selling or Influencing Others
                                               Operating Vehicles,
Controlling Machines                           Mechanized Devices,    Interacting With          Resolving Conflicts and
and Processes                                  or Equipment           Computers                 Negotiating with Others
                                               Repairing and          Drafting, Laying Out,
Monitor Processes,                             Maintaining            and Specifying
Materials, or                                  Mechanical             Technical Devices,        Coordinating the Work and
Surroundings                                   Equipment              Parts, and Equipment      Activities of Others
                                               Repairing and
Monitoring and                                 Maintaining            Scheduling Work and       Performing Administrative
Controlling Resources                          Electronic Equipment   Activities                Activities
                                                                      Getting Information       Staffing Organizational Units
                                                                                                Communicating with
                                                                      Making Decisions and      Supervisors, Peers, or
                                                                      Solving Problems          Subordinates
                                                                                                Communicating with Persons
                                                                      Thinking Creatively       Outside Organization
                                                                      Updating and Using        Performing for or Working
                                                                      Relevant Knowledge        Directly with the Public
                                                                      Developing
                                                                      Objectives and            Developing and Building
                                                                      Strategies                Teams
                                                                      Organizing, Planning,
                                                                      and Prioritizing Work     Training and Teaching Others
                                                                      Identifying Objects,      Guiding, Directing, and
                                                                      Actions, and Events       Motivating Subordinates
                                                                      Estimating the
                                                                      Quantifiable
                                                                      Characteristics of
                                                                      Products, Events, or      Coaching and Developing
                                                                      Information               Others
                                                                      Judging the Qualities
                                                                      of Things, Services, or   Provide Consultation and
                                                                      People                    Advice to Others
                                                                      Processing
                                                                      Information
                                                                      Interpreting the
                                                                      Meaning of
                                                                      Information for
                                                                      Others
Source: O*NET (U.S. Department of Labor)




                                                         39
               Table	3.2:	Major	Brazilian	Occupations,	by	Broad	O*NET	Bundle	

                 ROUTINE	TASKS	                                 NON-ROUTINE	TASKS	
                                             Top	5	
LAVADOR DE VEICULOS                              ENFERMEIRO PSIQUIATRICO
LIMPADOR DE JANELAS                              ENFERMEIRO EM GERAL
ENFERMEIRO DE TERAPIA INTENSIVA                  ENFERMEIRO DE TERAPIA INTENSIVA
ENFERMEIRO EM GERAL                              ENFERMEIRO DE CENTRO CIRURGICO
OUTROS ENFERMEIROS                               ENFERMEIRO DO TRABALHO
                                            Bottom	5	
TEOLOGO                                          TECELAO (TEAR MANUAL)
OUTROS MEMBROS DE CULTO RELIGIOSO E
TRAB ASSEMELHADOS                                 OUTROS TECELOES
MINISTRO DE CULTO RELIGIOSO                       CROCHETEIRO , A MAO
MISSIONARIO                                       TRICOTEIRO , A MAO
ORQUESTRADOR                                      PICOTADOR DE CARTOES JACQUARD
Source: O*NET (U.S. Department of Labor)




                 Table	3.3:	Non-Routine/Routine	Task	Intensity,	1996-2006	
		       		                       City-Level Internet Service       Industry-Level Internet Use

                Average
              Non-Routine/
                                  With              Without            High            Low
              Routine Task
                Intensity

1996              0.92                                                 1.01            0.85
1999              0.93            0.96                0.86             1.02            0.85
2001              0.93            0.96                0.86             1.02            0.85
2005              0.94            0.97                0.88             1.10            0.85
2006              0.94            0.98                0.90             1.10            0.85
Sources: O*NET (U.S. Department of Labor) and MUNIC (IBGE, 1999-2014)




                                             40
       Table	3.4:		Internet	Service	Provision,	1999-2006	

           Share of        Share of           Number of        Share of
          Cities with     Population          New Cities      Cities with
           Internet      with Internet       with Internet   New Internet
           Services        Services            Services        Services

1999         0.15              0.61                -                 -
2001         0.26              0.71               599              0.11
2005         0.51              0.84              1390              0.25
2006         0.61              0.88              555               0.10
Source: MUNIC (IBGE, 1999-2014)




         Table	3.5:		Enforcement	Data,	1996-2006	
                                                           Standard
                                         Average
                                                          Deviation of
                                        Number of
        Share of      Average                             Number of
                                      Inspections Per
         Cities      Number of                          Inspections Per
                                      100 Registered
       Inspected    Inspections                         100 Registered
                                      Establishments
                                                        Establishments
                                          in 1995
                                                            in 1995

1996      0.46          82.0                11                32
1998      0.55          68.5                12                32
2000      0.62          81.5                18                44
2002      0.61          69.4                18                58
2004      0.62          64.2                20               113
2006      0.67          72.5                23                83
Source: Brazil Ministry of Labor administrative data on
inspections (1996-2006).




                                                 41
           Table	5.1:	Digital	Technologies	and	Employment,	by	Broad	Sector	
                                                                                                 Wholesale
 Dep Variable:                                                                                   and Retail
 Log (Employment)mkt               All     Manufacturing             Services       Construction   Trade
 PROmt*USEk                    -0.135***     -0.093***              -0.103***         -0.268**   -0.305***
                                (0.014)       (0.030)                (0.023)           (0.118)    (0.030)
 PROmt                         0.050***        0.027*               0.048***            0.072     0.112***
                                (0.009)       (0.016)                (0.017)           (0.051)    (0.016)
 Number of Obs.                 402,834       128,740                144,052           14,850     103,713
 Impact of Internet in
  Tech-Intensive
 Industries                -0.085***	           -0.066***	         -0.055***	         -0.196**	     -0.193***	
  F-statistic                122.6	                12.8	              31.9	              5.0	         124.0	
  p-value                    0.000	               0.000	             0.000	            0.025	         0.000	
 Sector-State-Year
 Dummies                         YES              YES                   YES              YES           YES
 City-Industry Fixed
 Effects                         YES              YES                   YES              YES           YES
 Sources: RAIS (Brazilian Labor Ministry, 1996-2006), MUNIC (IBGE, 1999-2014, O*NET
 (U.S. Department of Labor), and CPS (U.S. Census Bureau).




                         Table	5.2:	Digital	Technologies	and	Skills	
                                                                                                      Non-
                                                               Non-                                  routine,
                                                              routine          Routine              Cognitive
                 		                    		                      Tasks            Tasks                 Tasks
                                    Non-
                                  Routine/                   Cognitive/        Cognitive/          Analytical/
                                   Routine                    Manual            Manual             Interactive
                                     Task                       Task              Task                 Task
 Dep Variable:                   Intensitymkt               Intensitymkt      Intensitymkt         Intensitymkt
 PROmt*USEk                       0.045***                    0.077***          0.074***            -0.011***
                                   (0.004)                    (0.005)           (0.006)              (0.003)
 PROmt                            -0.023***                  -0.047***         -0.037***            0.007***
                                   (0.002)                    (0.003)           (0.003)              (0.002)
 Number of Obs.                    402,834                    402,834           402,834              402,834
 Impact of Internet in
  Tech-Intensive Industries       0.023***	        	         0.030***	         0.037***	       	    -0.004**	
  F-statistic                      126.7	          	          116.4	            100.2	         	       4.9	
  p-value                          0.000	          	          0.000	            0.000	         	     0.026	
 Sector-State-Year Dummies           YES                        YES               YES                  YES
 City-Industry Fixed Effects         YES                        YES               YES                  YES
Source: RAIS (Brazilian Labor Ministry, 1996-2006), MUNIC (IBGE, 1999-2014, O*NET (U.S.
Department of Labor), CPS (U.S. Census Bureau), and O*NET (U.S. Department of Labor).

                                                       42
   Table	6.1:	Digital	Technologies,	Enforcement,	and	Employment,	by	Broad	Sector	
                                                                                               Wholesal
                                                                                                e and
 Dep Variable:                                       Manufacturin                Constructio    Retail
 Log (Employment)mkt                         All          g           Services       n          Trade
                                               -                           -
 PROmt*USEk                               0.133**        -0.119***    0.144**     -0.482**     -0.228***
                                              *                           *
                                          (0.021)         (0.046)     (0.034)     (0.206)      (0.049)
                                          0.046**                     0.074**
 PROmt                                                     0.017                   0.124*      0.086***
                                              *                           *
                                          (0.013)         (0.023)     (0.024)      (0.075)       (0.025)
 ENFmKt*PROmt*USEk                          0.004         -0.057*      -0.022     -0.354***    0.058***
                                          (0.011)         (0.031)     (0.018)      (0.137)       (0.021)
 ENFmKt*PROmt                              -0.005          0.003        0.013      0.093*       -0.023**
                                          (0.006)         (0.015)     (0.012)      (0.049)       (0.010)
 ENFmKt*USEk                              -0.017*         0.051**      -0.010      0.169*      -0.049***
                                          (0.010)         (0.024)     (0.016)      (0.100)       (0.016)
                                          0.038**                     0.032**
 ENFmKt                                                  0.033***                  0.038       0.033***
                                              *                           *
                                          (0.005)         (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.039)      (0.008)
 Number of Obs.                           402,833        128,740      144,052      14,850      103,713
 Impact of Internet in Tech-Intensive
 Industries
                                              -                           -
   Located in Cities at the 90th
                                          0.087**                     0.066**
 Percentile of Inspections
                                             *           -0.094***       *        -0.431***    -0.160***
   F-statistic                              69.1            13.3        26.7         6.9          45.1
   p-value                                 0.000           0.000       0.000        0.009        0.000
                                              -                           -
   Located in Cities at the 10th
                                          0.082**                     0.042**
 Percentile of Inspections
                                             *             0.029         *         0.350*      -0.272***
   F-statistic                              40.2            0.8         6.7          3.0          85.2
   p-value                                 0.000           0.376       0.010       0.083         0.000
 Difference in Impact of Internet in
 Tech-Intensive Industries
   90th Percentile - 10th Percentile of
 Inspections                              -0.004	        -0.123***	   -0.024	    -0.781***	    0.113***	
   F-statistic                              0.1	            8.6	        1.3	        7.8	          8.8	
   p-value                                0.798	           0.003	     0.251	       0.005	       0.003	
 Sector-State-Year Dummies                  YES             YES         YES         YES           YES
 City-Industry Fixed Effects                YES             YES         YES         YES           YES
Source: RAIS (Brazilian Labor Ministry, 1996-2006), MUNIC (IBGE, 1999-2014, O*NET (U.S.
Department of Labor), CPS (U.S. Census Bureau), and O*NET (U.S. Department of Labor),
and Brazil Ministry of Labor administrative data on inspections (1996-2006).




                                                    43
                      Table	6.2:	Digital	Technologies,	Enforcement,	and	Skills	
                                                                                                         Non-
                                                                         Non-                           routine,
                                                                        routine       Routine          Cognitive
                          		                             		              Tasks         Tasks             Tasks
                                                       Non-
                                                     Routine/          Cognitive/    Cognitive/        Analytical/
                                                      Routine            Manual        Manual          Interactive
                                                       Task               Task          Task              Task
                                                    Intensitymk        Intensitymk   Intensitymk       Intensitymk
    Dep Variable:                                        t                  t             t                 t

    PROmt*USEk                                       0.072***     		    0.045***      0.083***          -0.012**
                                                     (0.005)            (0.007)       (0.009)            (0.005)
    PROmt                                           -0.030***          -0.031***     -0.039***          0.010***
                                                     (0.003)            (0.004)       (0.005)            (0.003)
    ENFmKt*PROmt*USEk                                0.018***          -0.025***       0.003              -0.000
                                                     (0.003)            (0.004)       (0.005)            (0.002)
    ENFmKt*PROmt                                    -0.005***           0.012***       0.000               0.001
                                                     (0.002)            (0.002)       (0.002)            (0.001)
    ENFmKt*USEk                                       -0.002            0.013***      0.009**             -0.002
                                                     (0.002)            (0.003)       (0.004)            (0.002)
    ENFmKt                                           -0.002*           -0.007***     -0.007***             0.001
                                                     (0.001)            (0.002)       (0.002)            (0.001)
    Number of Obs.                                   402,833            402,833       402,833           402,833
    Impact of Internet in Tech-Intensive
    Industries
      Located in Cities at the 90th Percentile of
    Inspections                                      0.039***           0.017***      0.043***           -0.003
      F-statistic                                     206.9               19.3          71.7               1.8
      p-value                                         0.000              0.000         0.000              0.178
      Located in Cities at the 10th Percentile of
    Inspections                                       0.003             0.051***      0.034***          -0.005**
      F-statistic                                      1.1               131.2          34.7               5.3
      p-value                                         0.305              0.000         0.000             0.022
    Difference in Impact of Internet in Tech-
    Intensive Industries
      90th Percentile - 10th Percentile of
    Inspections                                     0.036***	     	    -0.034***	      0.009	      	     0.003	
      F-statistic                                     68.9	       	       34.0	         1.2	       	      0.6	
      p-value                                        0.000	              0.000	        0.271	            0.424	
    Sector-State-Year Dummies                          YES                YES           YES               YES
    City-Industry Fixed Effects                        YES                YES           YES               YES
Source: RAIS (Brazilian Labor Ministry, 1996-2006), MUNIC (IBGE, 1999-2014, O*NET (U.S.
Department of Labor), CPS (U.S. Census Bureau), and O*NET (U.S. Department of Labor),
and Brazil Ministry of Labor administrative data on inspections (1996-2006).
	




                                                             44
